{"id": "1235", "revid": "44558302", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1235", "title": "Alexander Mackenzie (politician)", "text": "Prime minister of Canada from 1873 to 1878\nAlexander Mackenzie (January 28, 1822\u00a0\u2013 April 17, 1892) was a Canadian politician who served as the second prime minister of Canada, in office from 1873 to 1878.\nMackenzie was born in Logierait, Perthshire, Scotland. He left school at the age of 13, following his father's death to help his widowed mother, and trained as a stonemason. Mackenzie immigrated to Canada when he was 19, settling in what became Ontario. His masonry business prospered, allowing him to pursue other interests \u2013 such as the editorship of a pro-Reformist newspaper called the\" Lambton Shield\". Mackenzie was elected to the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada in 1862, as a supporter of George Brown.\nIn 1867, Mackenzie was elected to the new House of Commons of Canada for the Liberal Party. He became leader of the party (thus Leader of the Opposition) in mid-1873, and a few months later succeeded John A. Macdonald as prime minister, following Macdonald's resignation in the aftermath of the Pacific Scandal. Mackenzie and the Liberals won a clear majority at the 1874 election. He was popular among the general public for his humble background and apparent democratic tendencies.\nAs prime minister, Mackenzie continued the nation-building programme that had been begun by his predecessor. His government established the Supreme Court of Canada and Royal Military College of Canada, and created the District of Keewatin to better administer Canada's newly acquired western territories. However, it made little progress on the transcontinental railway, and struggled to deal with the aftermath of the Panic of 1873. At the 1878 election, Mackenzie's government suffered a landslide defeat. He remained leader of the Liberal Party for another two years, and continued on as a Member of Parliament (MP) until his death, due to a stroke.\nEarly life.\nMackenzie was born on January 28, 1822, in Logierait, Perthshire, Scotland, the son of Mary Stewart (Fleming) and Alexander Mackenzie Sr. (born 1784) who were married in 1817. The site of his birthplace is known as Clais-'n-deoir (the Hollow of the Weeping), where families said their goodbyes as the convicted were led to nearby Gallows Hill. The house in which he was born was built by his father. He was the third of 10 boys, seven of whom survived infancy. Alexander Mackenzie Sr. was a carpenter and ship's joiner who had to move around frequently for work after the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. Mackenzie's father died on March 7, 1836, and at the age of 13, Alexander Mackenzie Jr. was thus forced to end his formal education to help support his family. He apprenticed as a stonemason and met his future wife, Helen Neil, in Irvine, where her father was also a stonemason. The Neils were Baptist and shortly thereafter, Mackenzie converted from Presbyterianism to Baptist beliefs. Together with the Neils, he immigrated to Canada in 1842 to seek a better life. Mackenzie's faith was to link him to the increasingly influential temperance cause, particularly strong in Canada West where he lived, a constituency of which he was to represent in the Parliament of Canada.\nThe Neils and Mackenzie settled in Kingston, Ontario. The limestone in the area proved too hard for his stonemason tools, and not having money to buy new tools, Mackenzie took a job as a labourer constructing a building on Princess Street. The contractor on the job claimed financial difficulty, so Mackenzie accepted a promissory note for summer wages. The note later proved to be worthless. Subsequently, Mackenzie won a contract building a bomb-proof arch at Fort Henry. He later became a foreman on the construction of Kingston's four Martello Towers \u2013 Murney Tower, Fort Frederick, Cathcart Tower, and Shoal Tower. He was also a foreman on the construction of the Welland Canal and the Lachine Canal. While working on the Beauharnois Canal, a one-ton stone fell and crushed one of his legs. He recovered, but never regained the strength in that leg. While in Kingston, Mackenzie became a vocal opponent of religious and political entitlement and corruption in government.\nMackenzie married Helen Neil (1826\u201352) in 1845 and with her had three children, with only one girl, Mary, surviving infancy. Helen and he moved to Sarnia, Ontario (known as Canada West) in 1847 and Mary was born in 1848. They were soon joined from Scotland by the rest of Mackenzie's brothers and his mother. He began working as a general contractor, earning a reputation for being a hard-working, honest man, as well as having a working man's view on fiscal policy. Mackenzie helped construct many courthouses and jails across southern Ontario. A number of these still stand today, including the Sandwich Courthouse and Jail now known as the Mackenzie Hall Cultural Centre in Windsor, Ontario, and the Kent County Courthouse and Jail in Chatham, Ontario. He even bid, unsuccessfully, on the construction of the Parliament buildings in Ottawa in 1859. Helen died in 1852, finally succumbing to the effects of excessive doses of mercury-based calomel used to treat a fever while in Kingston. In 1853, he married Jane Sym (1825\u201393).\nEarly political involvement.\nMackenzie involved himself in politics almost from the moment he arrived in Canada. He fought passionately for equality and the elimination of all forms of class distinction. In 1851, he became the secretary for the Reform Party for Lambton. After convincing him to run in Kent/Lambton, Mackenzie campaigned relentlessly for George Brown, owner of the Reformist paper \"The Globe\" in the 1851 election, helping Brown to win his first seat in the Legislative Assembly. Mackenzie and Brown remained the closest of friends and colleagues for the rest of their lives. In 1852, Mackenzie became editor of another reformist paper, the \"Lambton Shield\". As an editor, Mackenzie was perhaps a little too vocal, leading the paper to a lawsuit for libel against the local conservative candidate. Because a key witness claimed Cabinet Confidence and would not testify, the paper lost the suit and was forced to fold due to financial hardship. After his brother, Hope Mackenzie, declined to run, Alexander was petitioned to run and won his first seat in the Legislative Assembly as a supporter of George Brown in 1861. When Brown resigned from the Great Coalition in 1865 over reciprocity negotiations with the United States, Mackenzie was invited to replace him as the president of the council. Wary of Macdonald's motivations and true to his principles, Mackenzie declined.\nHe entered the House of Commons of Canada in 1867, representing the Lambton, Ontario, riding. No cohesive national Liberal Party of Canada existed at the time and with Brown not winning his seat, no official leader emerged. Mackenzie did not believe he was the best qualified for the position, and although he resisted offers of the position, he nevertheless sat as the \"de facto\" leader of the Official Opposition.\nMackenzie served as a Major in the 27th Lambton Battalion of Infantry from 1866 to 1874, serving on active duty during the Fenian Raids in 1870.\nPrime Minister (1873\u20131878).\nWhen the Macdonald government fell due to the Pacific Scandal in 1873, the Governor General, Lord Dufferin, called upon Mackenzie, who had been chosen as the leader of the Liberal Party a few months earlier, to form a new government. Mackenzie formed a government and asked the Governor General to call an election for January 1874. The Liberals won a majority of the seats in the House of Commons having garnered 40% of the popular vote.\nMackenzie remained prime minister until the 1878 election when Macdonald's Conservatives returned to power with a majority government.\nFor a man of Mackenzie's humble origins to attain such a position was unusual in an age which generally offered such opportunity only to the privileged. Lord Dufferin expressed early misgivings about a stonemason taking over government, but on meeting Mackenzie, Dufferin revised his opinions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;However narrow and inexperienced Mackenzie may be, I imagine he is a thoroughly upright, well-principled, and well-meaning man.\nMackenzie served concurrently as Minister of Public Works and oversaw the completion of the Parliament buildings. While drawing up the plans for the West Block, he included a circular staircase leading directly from his office to the outside of the building, which allowed him to escape the patronage-seekers waiting for him in his ante-chamber. Proving Dufferin's reflections on his character to be true, Mackenzie disliked intensely the patronage inherent in politics. Nevertheless, he found it a necessary evil to maintain party unity and ensure the loyalty of his fellow Liberals.\nIn keeping with his democratic ideals, Mackenzie refused the offer of a knighthood three times, and was thus the only one of Canada's first eight Prime Ministers not to be knighted. He also declined appointment to the UK Privy Council and hence does not bear the title \"Right Honourable\". His pride in his working class origins never left him. Once, while touring Fort Henry as prime minister, he asked the soldier accompanying him if he knew the thickness of the wall beside them. The embarrassed escort confessed that he didn't and Mackenzie replied, \"I do. It is five feet, ten inches. I know, because I built it myself!\"\nAs Prime Minister, Alexander Mackenzie strove to reform and simplify the machinery of government, achieving a remarkable record of reform legislation. He introduced the secret ballot; advised the creation of the Supreme Court of Canada; the establishment of the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston in 1874; and the creation of the Office of the Auditor General in 1878. He completed the Intercolonial Railway, but struggled to progress on the national railway due to a worldwide economic depression, almost coming to blows with the then Governor General Lord Dufferin over imperial interference. Mackenzie stood up for the rights of Canada as a nation and fought for the supremacy of Parliament and honesty in government. Above all else, he was known and loved for his honesty and integrity.\nHowever, his term was marked by economic depression that had grown out of the Panic of 1873, which Mackenzie's government was unable to alleviate. In 1874, Mackenzie negotiated a new free trade agreement with the United States, eliminating the high protective tariffs on Canadian goods in US markets. However, this action did not bolster the economy, and construction of the CPR slowed drastically due to lack of funding. In 1876, the Conservative opposition announced a National Policy of protective tariffs, which resonated with voters. When an election was held at the conclusion of Mackenzie's five-year term, the Conservatives were swept back into office in a landslide victory.\nSupreme Court appointments.\nMackenzie chose the following jurists to be appointed as justices of the Supreme Court of Canada by the Governor General:\nLater life.\nAfter his government's defeat, Mackenzie remained Leader of the Opposition for another two years, until 1880. In 1881, he became the first president of The North American Life Assurance Company. He was soon struck with a mysterious ailment that sapped his strength and all but took his voice. Sitting in silence, he nevertheless remained an undefeated MP until his death in 1892 from a stroke that resulted from hitting his head during a fall. He died in Toronto and was buried in Lakeview Cemetery in Sarnia, Ontario.\nCharacter.\nMackenzie's first biography in 1892 referred to him as Canada's Stainless Statesman. He was a devout Baptist and teetotaller who found refuge in, and drew strength from, his family, friends, and faith. He was also a loyal friend and an incorrigible prankster (stuffed chimney on young in-laws; rolled boulder down Thunder Cape towards friend A. McKellar; burned Tory campaign placards in hotel woodstove early in morning). Unpretentious and down to earth, his public official austerity was in striking contrast to private compassion and giving nature. He was the soul of honour and integrity, a proud man who sought no recognition or personal enrichment and accepted gifts reluctantly. He preferred to follow than lead (unreferenced \u2013 many times he refused leadership offers) and often found duty outweighed heavy burden of office. He was uncompromising on his principles, perhaps too much so. An historian at the time said, \"He was, and ever will remain, the Sir Galahad of Canadian politics.\"\nVery proud of his Scottish heritage, he was forever a Scot: \"Nemo me impune lacessit\" (no one attacks me with impunity). The Upper Canada rebellion leader W.L. Mackenzie referred to him, \"He is every whit a self-made, self-educated man. Has large mental capacity and indomitable energy.\" Canada's Governor General, Lord Dufferin, said of him, he is \"as pure as crystal, and as true as steel, with lots of common sense.\" A close friend, Chief Justice Sir Louis Davies, said he was \"the best debater the House of Commons has ever known.\" A friend and colleague in Cabinet who went on to become prime minister of Canada, Sir Wilfrid Laurier, said he was \"one of the truest and strongest characters to be met within Canadian history. He was endowed with a warm heart and a copious and rich fancy, though veiled by a somewhat reticent exterior, and he was of friends the most tender and true.\" Another friend and colleague, who went on to become premier of Ontario, Sir George Ross, said, \"Mackenzie was \"sui generis\" a debater. His humorous sallies blistered like a blast from a flaming smelter. His sterling honesty is a great heritage, and will keep his memory green to all future generations.\" At his eulogy, Rev. Dr. Thomas compared him to the Duke of Wellington, who \"stood four square, to all the winds that blow.\"\nNewspaper around the world and in Canada had this to say about him. \"The London Times\" \u2013 the untiring energy, the business-like accuracy, the keen perception and reliable judgment, and above all the inflexible integrity, which marked his private life, he carried without abatement of one jot into his public career. \"The Westminster Review\" \u2013 a man, who although, through failing health and failing voice, he had virtually passed out of public life, yet retained to the last the affectionate veneration of the Canadian people as no other man of the time can be said to have done. The \"Charlottetown Patriot\" \u2013 in all that constitutes the real man, the honest statesman, the true patriot, the warm friend, and sincere Christian, he had few equals. Possessed of a clear intellect, a retentive memory, and a ready command of appropriate words, he was one of the most logical and powerful speakers we have ever heard. The \"St. John Telegraph\" \u2013 he was loved by the people and his political opponents were compelled to respect him even above their own chosen leader. As a statesman, he has had few equals. The \"Montreal Star\" \u2013 it is one of the very foremost architects of the Canadian nationality that we mourn. In the dark days of \u201973, Canadians were in a state of panic, distrusting the stability of their newly-built Dominion; no one can tell what would have happened had not the stalwart form of Alexander Mackenzie lifted itself above the screaming, vociferating and denying mass of politicians, and all Canada felt at once, there was a man who could be trusted. The \"Toronto Globe\" \u2013 he was a man who loved the people and fought for their rights against privilege and monopoly in every form. The \"Philadelphia Record\" \u2013 Like Caesar, who twice refused a knightly crown, Alexander Mackenzie refused knighthood three times. Unlike Caesar, he owed his political overthrow to his incorruptible honesty and unswerving integrity.\nLegacy.\nIn their 1999 study of the Prime Ministers of Canada, which included the results of a survey of Canadian historians, J. L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer found that Mackenzie was in 11th place just after John Sparrow David Thompson.\nNamesakes.\nThe following are named in honour of Alexander Mackenzie:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1238", "revid": "42476002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1238", "title": "Atomic bomb", "text": ""}
{"id": "1239", "revid": "4894531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1239", "title": "Ashoka", "text": "3rd-century BCE Indian emperor and patron of Buddhism\nAshoka (, IAST: '; also \"Asoka\"; c.\u2009304\u00a0\u2013 232\u00a0BCE), popularly known as Ashoka the Great, and also referred to as Chakraravartin Samrat Ashoka, was the third Mauryan Emperor of Magadha in the Indian subcontinent during c.\u2009268 to 232 BCE. His empire covered a large part of the Indian subcontinent, stretching from present-day Afghanistan in the west to present-day Bangladesh in the east, with its capital at Pataliputra. A patron of Buddhism, he is credited with playing an important role in the spread of Buddhism across ancient Asia.\nAshoka's edicts state that during his eighth regnal year (c.\u2009260 BCE), he conquered Kalinga after a brutal war. Ashoka subsequently devoted himself to the propagation of \"dhamma\" or righteous conduct, the major theme of the edicts. Ashoka's edicts suggest that a few years after the Kalinga War, he was gradually drawn towards Buddhism. The Buddhist legends credit Ashoka with establishing a large number of stupas, patronising the Third Buddhist council, supporting Buddhist missionaries, making generous donations to the sangha, and even persecuting non-Buddhists. \nAshoka's existence as a historical emperor had almost been forgotten, but since the decipherment of sources written in Brahmi script in the 19th century, Ashoka holds a reputation as one of the greatest Indian emperors. The emblem of the modern Republic of India is an adaptation of the Lion Capital of Ashoka. Ashoka's wheel, the Ashoka Chakra is adopted at the centre of the National Flag of India.\nSources of information.\nInformation about Ashoka comes from his inscriptions; other inscriptions that mention him or are possibly from his reign; and ancient literature, especially Buddhist texts. These sources often contradict each other, although various historians have attempted to correlate their testimony. So, for example, while Ashoka is often attributed with building many hospitals during his time, there is no clear evidence that any hospitals existed in ancient India during the 3rd century BC or that Ashoka was responsible for commissioning the construction of any.\nInscriptions\nAshoka's inscriptions are the earliest self-representations of imperial power in the Indian subcontinent. However, these inscriptions are focused mainly on the topic of \"dhamma\", and provide little information regarding other aspects of the Maurya state or society. Even on the topic of \"dhamma\", the content of these inscriptions cannot be taken at face value. In the words of American academic John S. Strong, it is sometimes helpful to think of Ashoka's messages as propaganda by a politician whose aim is to present a favourable image of himself and his administration, rather than record historical facts. \nA small number of other inscriptions also provide some information about Ashoka. For example, he finds a mention in the 2nd century Junagadh rock inscription of Rudradaman. An inscription discovered at Sirkap mentions a lost word beginning with \"Priy\", which is theorised to be Ashoka's title \"Priyadarshi\", although this is not certain. Some other inscriptions, such as the Sohgaura copper plate inscription, have been tentatively dated to Ashoka's period by some scholars, although others contest this. \nBuddhist legends\nMuch of the information about Ashoka comes from Buddhist legends, which present him as a great, ideal king. These legends appear in texts that are not contemporary to Ashoka and were composed by Buddhist authors, who used various stories to illustrate the impact of their faith on Ashoka. This makes it necessary to exercise caution while relying on them for historical information. Among modern scholars, opinions range from downright dismissal of these legends as mythological to acceptance of all historical portions that seem plausible.\nThe Buddhist legends about Ashoka exist in several languages, including Sanskrit, Pali, Tibetan, Chinese, Burmese, Sinhala, Thai, Lao, and Khotanese. All these legends can be traced to two primary traditions:\nThere are several significant differences between the two traditions. For example, the Sri Lankan tradition emphasizes Ashoka's role in convening the Third Buddhist council, and his dispatch of several missionaries to distant regions, including his son Mahinda to Sri Lanka. However, the North Indian tradition makes no mention of these events. It describes other events not found in the Sri Lankan tradition, such as a story about another son named Kunala. \nEven while narrating the common stories, the two traditions diverge in several ways. For example, both \"Ashokavadana\" and \"Mahavamsa\" mention that Ashoka's queen Tishyarakshita had the Bodhi Tree destroyed. In \"Ashokavadana\", the queen manages to have the tree healed after she realises her mistake. In the \"Mahavamsa\", she permanently destroys the tree, but only after a branch of the tree has been transplanted in Sri Lanka. In another story, both the texts describe Ashoka's unsuccessful attempts to collect a relic of Gautama Buddha from Ramagrama. In \"Ashokavadana\", he fails to do so because he cannot match the devotion of the Nagas who hold the relic; however, in the \"Mahavamsa\", he fails to do so because the Buddha had destined the relic to be enshrined by King Dutthagamani of Sri Lanka. Using such stories, the \"Mahavamsa\" glorifies Sri Lanka as the new preserve of Buddhism. \nOther sources\nNumismatic, sculptural, and archaeological evidence supplements research on Ashoka. Ashoka's name appears in the lists of Mauryan kings in the various Puranas. However, these texts do not provide further details about him, as their Brahmanical authors were not patronised by the Mauryans. Other texts, such as the \"Arthashastra\" and \"Indica of Megasthenes\", which provide general information about the Maurya period, can also be used to make inferences about Ashoka's reign. However, the \"Arthashastra\" is a normative text that focuses on an ideal rather than a historical state, and its dating to the Mauryan period is a subject of debate. The \"Indica\" is a lost work, and only parts of it survive in the form of paraphrases in later writings.\nThe 12th-century text \"Rajatarangini\" mentions a Kashmiri king Ashoka of Gonandiya dynasty who built several stupas: some scholars, such as Aurel Stein, have identified this king with the Maurya king Ashoka; others, such as Ananda W. P. Guruge dismiss this identification as inaccurate.\nAlternative interpretation of the epigraphic evidence\nFor some scholars, such as Christopher I. Beckwith, Ashoka, whose name only appears in the Minor Rock Edicts, is not the same as king Piyadasi, or \"Devanampiya\" Piyadasi (i.e. \"Beloved of the Gods Piyadasi\", \"Beloved of the Gods\" being a fairly widespread title for \"King\"), who is named as the author of the Major Pillar Edicts and the Major Rock Edicts.\nBeckwith suggests that Piyadasi was living in the 3rd century BCE, was probably the son of Chandragupta Maurya known to the Greeks as Amitrochates, and only advocated for piety (\"Dharma\") in his Major Pillar Edicts and Major Rock Edicts, without ever mentioning Buddhism, the Buddha, or the Samgha (the single notable exception is the 7th Edict of the Major Pillar Edicts which does mention the Samgha, but is a considered a later fake by Beckwith). Also, the geographical spread of his inscription shows that Piyadasi ruled a vast Empire, contiguous with the Seleucid Empire in the West.\nOn the contrary, for Beckwith, Ashoka was a later king of the 1st\u20132nd century CE, whose name only appears explicitly in the Minor Rock Edicts and allusively in the Minor Pillar Edicts, and who does mention the Buddha and the Samgha, explicitly promoting Buddhism. The name \"Priyadarsi\" does occur in two of the minor edicts (Gujarra and Bairat), but Beckwith again considers them as later fabrications. The minor inscriptions cover a very different and much smaller geographical area, clustering in Central India. According to Beckwith, the inscriptions of this later Ashoka were typical of the later forms of \"normative Buddhism\", which are well attested from inscriptions and Gandhari manuscripts dated to the turn of the millennium, and around the time of the Kushan Empire. The quality of the inscriptions of this Ashoka is significantly lower than the quality of the inscriptions of the earlier Piyadasi.\nNames and titles.\nThe name \"A-shoka\" literally means \"without sorrow\". According to an \"Ashokavadana\" legend, his mother gave him this name because his birth removed her sorrows.\nThe name Priyadasi is associated with Ashoka in the 3rd\u20134th century CE \"Dipavamsa\". The term literally means \"he who regards amiably\", or \"of gracious mien\" (Sanskrit: Priya-darshi). It may have been a regnal name adopted by Ashoka. A version of this name is used for Ashoka in Greek-language inscriptions: \u03b2\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bb\u03b5\u1f7a\u03c2 \u03a0\u03b9\u03bf\u03b4\u03b1\u03c3\u03c3\u03b7\u03c2 (\"Basileus Piodass\u0113s\").\nAshoka's inscriptions mention his title \"Devanampiya\" (Sanskrit: \"Devanampriya\", \"Beloved of the Gods\"). The identification of Devanampiya and Ashoka as the same person is established by the Maski and Gujarra inscriptions, which use both these terms for the king. The title was adopted by other kings, including the contemporary king Devanampiya Tissa of Anuradhapura and Ashoka's descendant Dasharatha Maurya.\nThe title 'Mahasammat' is received in the context of directing the Mahamatras in the Buddhist text Nikaya. Also the other two other titles are 'Murdhabhishikta' and 'Janapadasthamaviryaprapt' which are often used titles for Ashoka.\nDate.\nThe exact date of Ashoka's birth is not certain, as the extant contemporary Indian texts did not record such details. It is known that he lived in the 3rd century BCE, as his inscriptions mention several contemporary rulers whose dates are known with more certainty, such as Antiochus II Theos, Ptolemy II Philadelphus, Antigonus II Gonatas, Magas of Cyrene, and Alexander (of Epirus or Corinth). Thus, Ashoka must have been born sometime in the late 4th century BCE or early 3rd century BCE (c.\u2009304 BCE),\nAncestry.\nAshoka's own inscriptions are fairly detailed but make no mention of his ancestors. Other sources, such as the Puranas and the \"Mahavamsa\" state that his father was the Mauryan emperor Bindusara, and his grandfather was Chandragupta \u2013 the founder of the Empire. The \"Ashokavadana\" also names his father as Bindusara, but traces his ancestry to Buddha's contemporary king Bimbisara, through Ajatashatru, Udayin, Munda, Kakavarnin, Sahalin, Tulakuchi, Mahamandala, Prasenajit, and Nanda. The 16th century Tibetan monk Taranatha, whose account is a distorted version of the earlier traditions, describes Ashoka as the illegitimate son of king Nemita of Champarana from the daughter of a merchant.\n\"Ashokavadana\" states that Ashoka's mother was the daughter of a Brahmin from Champa, and was prophesied to marry a king. Accordingly, her father took her to Pataliputra, where she was inducted into Bindusara's harem, and ultimately, became his chief queen. The \"Ashokavadana\" does not mention her by name, although other legends provide different names for her. For example, the \"Asokavadanamala\" calls her Subhadrangi. The \"Vamsatthapakasini\" or \"Mahavamsa-tika\", a commentary on \"Mahavamsa\", calls her \"Dharma\" (\"Dhamma\" in Pali), and states that she belonged to the Moriya Kshatriya clan. A \"Divyavadana\" legend calls her Janapada-kalyani; according to scholar Ananda W. P. Guruge, this is not a name, but an epithet.\nAccording to the 2nd-century historian Appian, Chandragupta entered into a marital alliance with the Greek ruler Seleucus I Nicator, which has led to speculation that either Chandragupta or his son Bindusara married a Greek princess. However, there is no evidence that Ashoka's mother or grandmother was Greek, and most historians have dismissed the idea.\nAs a prince.\nAshoka's own inscriptions do not describe his early life, and much of the information on this topic comes from apocryphal legends written hundreds of years after him. While these legends include obviously fictitious details such as narratives of Ashoka's past lives, they have some plausible historical information about Ashoka's period.\nAccording to the \"Ashokavadana\", Bindusara disliked Ashoka because of his rough skin. One day, Bindusara asked the ascetic Pingala-vatsajiva to determine which of his sons was worthy of being his successor. He asked all the princes to assemble at the Garden of the Golden Pavilion on the ascetic's advice. Ashoka was reluctant to go because his father disliked him, but his mother convinced him to do so. When minister Radhagupta saw Ashoka leaving the capital for the Garden, he offered to provide the prince with a royal elephant for the travel. At the Garden, Pingala-vatsajiva examined the princes and realised that Ashoka would be the next king. To avoid annoying Bindusara, the ascetic refused to name the successor. Instead, he said that one who had the best mount, seat, drink, vessel and food would be the next king; each time, Ashoka declared that he met the criterion. Later, he told Ashoka's mother that her son would be the next king, and on her advice, left the kingdom to avoid Bindusara's wrath.\nWhile legends suggest that Bindusara disliked Ashoka's ugly appearance, they also state that Bindusara gave him important responsibilities, such as suppressing a revolt in Takshashila (according to north Indian tradition) and governing Ujjain (according to Sri Lankan tradition). This suggests that Bindusara was impressed by the other qualities of the prince. Another possibility is that he sent Ashoka to distant regions to keep him away from the imperial capital.\nRebellion at Taxila.\nAccording to the \"Ashokavadana\", Bindusara dispatched prince Ashoka to suppress a rebellion in the city of Takshashila (present-day Bhir Mound in Pakistan). This episode is not mentioned in the Sri Lankan tradition, which instead states that Bindusara sent Ashoka to govern Ujjain. Two other Buddhist texts \u2013 \"Ashoka-sutra\" and \"Kunala-sutra\" \u2013 state that Bindusara appointed Ashoka as a viceroy in Gandhara (where Takshashila was located), not Ujjain. \nThe \"Ashokavadana\" states that Bindusara provided Ashoka with a fourfold-army (comprising cavalry, elephants, chariots and infantry) but refused to provide any weapons for this army. Ashoka declared that weapons would appear before him if he was worthy of being a king, and then, the deities emerged from the earth and provided weapons to the army. When Ashoka reached Takshashila, the citizens welcomed him and told him that their rebellion was only against the evil ministers, not the king. Sometime later, Ashoka was similarly welcomed in the Khasa territory and the gods declared that he would go on to conquer the whole earth.\nTakshashila was a prosperous and geopolitically influential city, and historical evidence proves that by Ashoka's time, it was well-connected to the Mauryan capital Pataliputra by the \"Uttarapatha\" trade route. However, no extant contemporary source mentions the Takshashila rebellion, and none of Ashoka's records states that he ever visited the city. That said, the historicity of the legend about Ashoka's involvement in the Takshashila rebellion may be corroborated by an Aramaic-language inscription discovered at Sirkap near Taxila. The inscription includes a name that begins with the letters \"prydr\", and most scholars restore it as \"Priyadarshi\", which was the title of Ashoka. Another evidence of Ashoka's connection to the city may be the name of the Dharmarajika Stupa near Taxila; the name suggests that it was built by Ashoka (\"Dharma-raja\"). \nThe story about the deities miraculously bringing weapons to Ashoka may be the text's way of deifying Ashoka; or indicating that Bindusara \u2013 who disliked Ashoka \u2013 wanted him to fail in Takshashila. \nGovernor of Ujjain.\nAccording to the \"Mahavamsa\", Bindusara appointed Ashoka as the viceroy of present-day Ujjain (Ujjeni), which was an important administrative and commercial centre in the Avanti province of central India. This tradition is corroborated by the Saru Maru inscription discovered in central India; this inscription states that he visited the place as a prince. Ashoka's own rock edict mentions the presence of a prince viceroy at Ujjain during his reign, which further supports the tradition that he himself served as a viceroy at Ujjain.\nPataliputra was connected to Ujjain by multiple routes in Ashoka's time, and on the way, Ashoka entourage may have encamped at Rupnath, where his inscription has been found.\nAccording to the Sri Lankan tradition, Ashoka visited Vidisha, where he fell in love with a beautiful woman on his way to Ujjain. According to the \"Dipamvamsa\" and \"Mahamvamsa\", the woman was Devi \u2013 the daughter of a merchant. According to the \"Mahabodhi-vamsa\", she was Vidisha-Mahadevi and belonged to the Shakya clan of Gautama Buddha. The Buddhist chroniclers may have fabricated the Shakya connection to connect Ashoka's family to Buddha. The Buddhist texts allude to her being a Buddhist in her later years but do not describe her conversion to Buddhism. Therefore, it is likely that she was already a Buddhist when she met Ashoka.\nThe \"Mahavamsa\" states that Devi gave birth to Ashoka's son Mahinda in Ujjain, and two years later, to a daughter named Sanghamitta. According to the \"Mahavamsa\", Ashoka's son Mahinda was ordained at the age of 20 years, during the sixth year of Ashoka's reign. That means Mahinda must have been 14 years old when Ashoka ascended the throne. Even if Mahinda was born when Ashoka was as young as 20 years old, Ashoka must have ascended the throne at 34 years, which means he must have served as a viceroy for several years.\nAscension to the throne.\nLegends suggest that Ashoka was not the crown prince, and his ascension on the throne was disputed. \n\"Ashokavadana\" states that Bindusara's eldest son Susima once slapped a bald minister on his head in jest. The minister worried that after ascending the throne, Susima may jokingly hurt him with a sword. Therefore, he instigated five hundred ministers to support Ashoka's claim to the throne when the time came, noting that Ashoka was predicted to become a \"chakravartin\" (universal ruler). Sometime later, Takshashila rebelled again, and Bindusara dispatched Susima to curb the rebellion. Shortly after, Bindusara fell ill and was expected to die soon. Susima was still in Takshashila, having been unsuccessful in suppressing the rebellion. Bindusara recalled him to the capital and asked Ashoka to march to Takshashila. However, the ministers told him that Ashoka was ill and suggested that he temporarily install Ashoka on the throne until Susmia's return from Takshashila. When Bindusara refused to do so, Ashoka declared that if the throne were rightfully his, the gods would crown him as the next king. At that instance, the gods did so, Bindusara died, and Ashoka's authority extended to the entire world, including the Yaksha territory located above the earth and the Naga territory located below the earth. When Susima returned to the capital, Ashoka's newly appointed prime minister Radhagupta tricked him into a pit of charcoal. Susima died a painful death, and his general Bhadrayudha became a Buddhist monk.\nThe \"Mahavamsa\" states that when Bindusara fell sick, Ashoka returned to Pataliputra from Ujjain and gained control of the capital. After his father's death, Ashoka had his eldest brother killed and ascended the throne. The text also states that Ashoka killed ninety-nine of his half-brothers, including Sumana. The \"Dipavamsa\" states that he killed a hundred of his brothers and was crowned four years later. The \"Vamsatthapakasini\" adds that an Ajivika ascetic had predicted this massacre based on the interpretation of a dream of Ashoka's mother. According to these accounts, only Ashoka's uterine brother Tissa was spared. Other sources name the surviving brother Vitashoka, Vigatashoka, Sudatta (So-ta-to in \"A-yi-uang-chuan\"), or Sugatra (Siu-ka-tu-lu in \"Fen-pie-kung-te-hun\").\nThe figures such as 99 and 100 are exaggerated and seem to be a way of stating that Ashoka killed several of his brothers. Taranatha states that Ashoka, who was an illegitimate son of his predecessor, killed six legitimate princes to ascend the throne. It is possible that Ashoka was not the rightful heir to the throne and killed a brother (or brothers) to acquire the throne. However, the Buddhist sources have exaggerated the story, which attempts to portray him as evil before his conversion to Buddhism. Ashoka's Rock Edict No. 5 mentions officers whose duties include supervising the welfare of \"the families of his brothers, sisters, and other relatives\". This suggests that more than one of his brothers survived his ascension. However, some scholars oppose this suggestion, arguing that the inscription talks only about the \"families\" of his brothers, not the brothers themselves.\nDate of ascension.\nAccording to the Sri Lankan texts \"Mahavamsa\" and the \"Dipavamsa\", Ashoka ascended the throne 218 years after the death of Gautama Buddha and ruled for 37 years. The date of the Buddha's death is itself a matter of debate, and the North Indian tradition states that Ashoka ruled a hundred years after the Buddha's death, which has led to further debates about the date.\nAssuming that the Sri Lankan tradition is correct, and assuming that the Buddha died in 483 BCE \u2013 a date proposed by several scholars \u2013 Ashoka must have ascended the throne in 265 BCE. The Puranas state that Ashoka's father Bindusara reigned for 25 years, not 28 years as specified in the Sri Lankan tradition. If this is true, Ashoka's ascension can be dated three years earlier, to 268 BCE. Alternatively, if the Sri Lankan tradition is correct, but if we assume that the Buddha died in 486 BCE (a date supported by the Cantonese Dotted Record), Ashoka's ascension can be dated to 268 BCE. The \"Mahavamsa\" states that Ashoka consecrated himself as the king four years after becoming a sovereign. This interregnum can be explained assuming that he fought a war of succession with other sons of Bindusara during these four years.\nThe \"Ashokavadana\" contains a story about Ashoka's minister Yashas hiding the sun with his hand. Professor P. H. L. Eggermont theorised that this story was a reference to a partial solar eclipse that was seen in northern India on 4 May 249 BCE. According to the \"Ashokavadana\", Ashoka went on a pilgrimage to various Buddhist sites sometime after this eclipse. Ashoka's Rummindei pillar inscription states that he visited Lumbini during his 21st regnal year. Assuming this visit was a part of the pilgrimage described in the text, and assuming that Ashoka visited Lumbini around 1\u20132 years after the solar eclipse, the ascension date of 268\u2013269 BCE seems more likely. However, this theory is not universally accepted. For example, according to John S. Strong, the event described in the \"Ashokavadana\" has nothing to do with chronology, and Eggermont's interpretation grossly ignores the literary and religious context of the legend.\nReign before Buddhist influence.\nBoth Sri Lankan and North Indian traditions assert that Ashoka was a violent person before Buddhism. Taranatha also states that Ashoka was initially called \"Kamashoka\" because he spent many years in pleasurable pursuits (\"kama\"); he was then called \"Chandashoka\" (\"Ashoka the fierce\") because he spent some years performing evil deeds; and finally, he came to be known as Dhammashoka (\"Ashoka the righteous\") after his conversion to Buddhism.\nThe \"Ashokavadana\" also calls him \"Chandashoka\", and describes several of his cruel acts:\nThe 5th-century Chinese traveller Faxian states that Ashoka personally visited the underworld to study torture methods there and then invented his methods. The 7th-century traveller Xuanzang claims to have seen a pillar marking the site of Ashoka's \"Hell\".\nThe \"Mahavamsa\" also briefly alludes to Ashoka's cruelty, stating that Ashoka was earlier called Chandashoka because of his evil deeds but came to be called Dharmashoka because of his pious acts after his conversion to Buddhism. However, unlike the north Indian tradition, the Sri Lankan texts do not mention any specific evil deeds performed by Ashoka, except his killing of 99 of his brothers.\nSuch descriptions of Ashoka as an evil person before his conversion to Buddhism appear to be a fabrication of the Buddhist authors, who attempted to present the change that Buddhism brought to him as a miracle. In an attempt to dramatise this change, such legends exaggerate Ashoka's past wickedness and his piousness after the conversion.\nKalinga war and conversion to Buddhism.\nAshoka's inscriptions mention that he conquered the Kalinga region during his 8th regnal year: the destruction caused during the war made him repent violence, and in the subsequent years, he was drawn towards Buddhism. Edict 13 of the Edicts of Ashoka Rock Inscriptions expresses the great remorse the king felt after observing the destruction of Kalinga:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Directly, after the Kalingas had been annexed, began His Sacred Majesty's zealous protection of the Law of Piety, his love of that Law, and his inculcation of that Law. Thence arises the remorse of His Sacred Majesty for having conquered the Kalingas because the conquest of a country previously unconquered involves the slaughter, death, and carrying away captive of the people. That is a matter of profound sorrow and regret to His Sacred Majesty.\nOn the other hand, the Sri Lankan tradition suggests that Ashoka was already a devoted Buddhist by his 8th regnal year, converted to Buddhism during his 4th regnal year, and constructed 84,000 viharas during his 5th\u20137th regnal years. The Buddhist legends make no mention of the Kalinga campaign.\nBased on Sri Lankan tradition, some scholars, such as Eggermont, believe Ashoka converted to Buddhism \"before\" the Kalinga war. Critics of this theory argue that if Ashoka were already a Buddhist, he would not have waged the violent Kalinga War. Eggermont explains this anomaly by theorising that Ashoka had his own interpretation of the \"Middle Way\".\nSome earlier writers believed that Ashoka \"dramatically\" converted to Buddhism after seeing the suffering caused by the war since his Major Rock Edict 13 states that he became closer to the dhamma after the annexation of Kalinga. However, even if Ashoka converted to Buddhism \"after\" the war, epigraphic evidence suggests that his conversion was a \"gradual\" process rather than a dramatic event. For example, in a Minor Rock Edict issued during his 13th regnal year (five years after the Kalinga campaign), he states that he had been an \"upasaka\" (lay Buddhist) for more than two and a half years, but did not make much progress; in the past year, he was drawn closer to the sangha and became a more ardent follower.\nThe Kalinga War.\nAccording to Ashoka's Major Rock Edict 13, he conquered Kalinga 8 years after ascending to the throne. The edict states that during his conquest of Kalinga, 100,000 men and animals were killed in action; many times that number \"perished\"; and 150,000 men and animals were carried away from Kalinga as captives. Ashoka states that the repentance of these sufferings caused him to devote himself to the practice and propagation of dharma. He proclaims that he now considered the slaughter, death and deportation caused during the conquest of a country painful and deplorable; and that he considered the suffering caused to the religious people and householders even more deplorable.\nThis edict has been inscribed at several places, including Erragudi, Girnar, Kalsi, Maneshra, Shahbazgarhi and Kandahar. However, it is omitted in Ashoka's inscriptions found in the Kalinga region, where the Rock Edicts 13 and 14 have been replaced by two separate edicts that make no mention of Ashoka's remorse. It is possible that Ashoka did not consider it politically appropriate to make such a confession to the people of Kalinga. Another possibility is the Kalinga war and its consequences, as described in Ashoka's rock edicts, are \"more imaginary than real\". This description is meant to impress those far removed from the scene, thus unable to verify its accuracy.\nAncient sources do not mention any other military activity of Ashoka, although the 16th-century writer Taranatha claims that Ashoka conquered the entire Jambudvipa.\nFirst contact with Buddhism.\nDifferent sources give different accounts of Ashoka's conversion to Buddhism. \nAccording to Sri Lankan tradition, Ashoka's father, Bindusara, was a devotee of Brahmanism, and his mother Dharma was a devotee of Ajivikas. The \"Samantapasadika\" states that Ashoka followed non-Buddhist sects during the first three years of his reign. The Sri Lankan texts add that Ashoka was not happy with the behaviour of the Brahmins who received his alms daily. His courtiers produced some Ajivika and Nigantha teachers before him, but these also failed to impress him. \nThe \"Dipavamsa\" states that Ashoka invited several non-Buddhist religious leaders to his palace and bestowed great gifts upon them in the hope that they would answer a question posed by the king. The text does not state what the question was but mentions that none of the invitees were able to answer it. One day, Ashoka saw a young Buddhist monk called Nigrodha (or Nyagrodha), who was looking for alms on a road in Pataliputra. He was the king's nephew, although the king was not aware of this: he was a posthumous son of Ashoka's eldest brother Sumana, whom Ashoka had killed during the conflict for the throne. Ashoka was impressed by Nigrodha's tranquil and fearless appearance, and asked him to teach him his faith. In response, Nigrodha offered him a sermon on appamada (earnestness). Impressed by the sermon, Ashoka offered Nigrodha 400,000 silver coins and 8 daily portions of rice. The king became a Buddhist upasaka, and started visiting the Kukkutarama shrine at Pataliputra. At the temple, he met the Buddhist monk Moggaliputta Tissa, and became more devoted to the Buddhist faith. The veracity of this story is not certain. This legend about Ashoka's search for a worthy teacher may be aimed at explaining why Ashoka did not adopt Jainism, another major contemporary faith that advocates non-violence and compassion. The legend suggests that Ashoka was not attracted to Buddhism because he was looking for such a faith, rather, for a competent spiritual teacher. The Sri Lankan tradition adds that during his sixth regnal year, Ashoka's son Mahinda became a Buddhist monk, and his daughter became a Buddhist nun.\nA story in \"Divyavadana\" attributes Ashoka's conversion to the Buddhist monk Samudra, who was an ex-merchant from Shravasti. According to this account, Samudra was imprisoned in Ashoka's \"Hell\", but saved himself using his miraculous powers. When Ashoka heard about this, he visited the monk, and was further impressed by a series of miracles performed by the monk. He then became a Buddhist. A story in the \"Ashokavadana\" states that Samudra was a merchant's son, and was a 12-year-old boy when he met Ashoka; this account seems to be influenced by the Nigrodha story.\nThe A-yu-wang-chuan states that a 7-year-old Buddhist converted Ashoka. Another story claims that the young boy ate 500 Brahmanas who were harassing Ashoka for being interested in Buddhism; these Brahmanas later miraculously turned into Buddhist bhikkus at the Kukkutarama monastery, which Ashoka visited.\nSeveral Buddhist establishments existed in various parts of India by the time of Ashoka's ascension. It is not clear which branch of the Buddhist sangha influenced him, but the one at his capital Pataliputra is a good candidate. Another good candidate is the one at Mahabodhi: the Major Rock Edict 8 records his visit to the Bodhi Tree \u2013 the place of Buddha's enlightenment at Mahabodhi \u2013 after his tenth regnal year, and the minor rock edict issued during his 13th regnal year suggests that he had become a Buddhist around the same time.\nReign after Buddhist influence.\nConstruction of Stupas and Temples.\nBoth \"Mahavamsa\" and \"Ashokavadana\" state that Ashoka constructed 84,000 stupas or viharas. According to the \"Mahavamsa\", this activity took place during his fifth\u2013seventh regnal years.\nThe \"Ashokavadana\" states that Ashoka collected seven out of the eight relics of Gautama Buddha, and had their portions kept in 84,000 boxes made of gold, silver, cat's eye, and crystal. He ordered the construction of 84,000 stupas throughout the earth, in towns that had a population of 100,000 or more. He told Elder Yashas, a monk at the Kukkutarama monastery, that he wanted these stupas to be completed on the same day. Yashas stated that he would signal the completion time by eclipsing the sun with his hand. When he did so, the 84,000 stupas were completed at once.\nThe \"Mahavamsa\" states that Ashoka ordered construction of 84,000 viharas (monasteries) rather than the stupas to house the relics. Like \"Ashokavadana\", the \"Mahavamsa\" describes Ashoka's collection of the relics, but does not mention this episode in the context of the construction activities. It states that Ashoka decided to construct the 84,000 viharas when Moggaliputta Tissa told him that there were 84,000 sections of the Buddha's Dhamma. Ashoka himself began the construction of the Ashokarama vihara, and ordered subordinate kings to build the other viharas. Ashokarama was completed by the miraculous power of Thera Indagutta, and the news about the completion of the 84,000 viharas arrived from various cities on the same day.\nThe construction of following stupas and viharas is credited to Ashoka:\nPropagation of Dhamma.\nAshoka's rock edicts suggest that during his eighth\u2013ninth regnal years, he made a pilgrimage to the Bodhi Tree, started propagating dhamma, and performed social welfare activities. The welfare activities included establishment of medical treatment facilities for humans and animals; plantation of medicinal herbs; and digging of wells and plantation of trees along the roads. These activities were conducted in the neighbouring kingdoms, including those of the Cholas, the Pandyas, the Satiyaputras, Tamraparni, the Greek kingdom of Antiyoka.\nThe edicts also state that during his tenth\u2013eleventh regnal years, Ashoka became closer to the Buddhist sangha, and went on a tour of the empire that lasted for at least 256 days.\nBy his 12th regnal year, Ashoka had started inscribing edicts to propagate dhamma, having ordered his officers (\"rajjukas\" and \"pradesikas\") to tour their jurisdictions every five years for inspection and for preaching \"dhamma\". By the next year, he had set up the post of the \"dharma-mahamatra\".\nDuring his 14th regnal year, he commissioned the enlargement of the stupa of Buddha Kanakamuni.\nThird Buddhist Council.\nThe Sri Lankan tradition presents a greater role for Ashoka in the Buddhist community. In this tradition, Ashoka starts feeding monks on a large scale. His lavish patronage to the state patronage leads to many fake monks joining the sangha. The true Buddhist monks refuse to co-operate with these fake monks, and therefore, no uposatha ceremony is held for seven years. The king attempts to eradicate the fake monks, but during this attempt, an over-zealous minister ends up killing some real monks. The king then invites the elder monk Moggaliputta-Tissa, to help him expel non-Buddhists from the monastery founded by him at Pataliputra. 60,000 monks (bhikkhus) convicted of being heretical are de-frocked in the ensuing process. The uposatha ceremony is then held, and Tissa subsequently organises the Third Buddhist council, during the 17th regnal year of Ashoka. Tissa compiles \"Kathavatthu\", a text that reaffirms Theravadin orthodoxy on several points.\nThe North Indian tradition makes no mention of these events, which has led to doubts about the historicity of the Third Buddhist council.\nRichard Gombrich argues that the non-corroboration of this story by inscriptional evidence cannot be used to dismiss it as completely unhistorical, as several of Ashoka's inscriptions may have been lost. Gombrich also argues that Asohka's inscriptions prove that he was interested in maintaining the \"unanimity and purity\" of the Sangha. For example, in his Minor Rock Edict 3, Ashoka recommends the members of the Sangha to study certain texts (most of which remain unidentified). Similarly, in an inscription found at Sanchi, Sarnath, and Kosam, Ashoka mandates that the dissident members of the sangha should be expelled, and expresses his desire to the Sangha remain united and flourish.\nThe 8th century Buddhist pilgrim Yijing records another story about Ashoka's involvement in the Buddhist sangha. According to this story, the earlier king Bimbisara, who was a contemporary of the Gautama Buddha, once saw 18 fragments of a cloth and a stick in a dream. The Buddha interpreted the dream to mean that his philosophy would be divided into 18 schools after his death, and predicted that a king called Ashoka would unite these schools over a hundred years later.\nBuddhist missions.\nIn the Sri Lankan tradition, Moggaliputta-Tissa \u2013 who is patronised by Ashoka \u2013 sends out nine Buddhist missions to spread Buddhism in the \"border areas\" in c.\u2009250 BCE. This tradition does not credit Ashoka directly with sending these missions. Each mission comprises five monks, and is headed by an elder. To Sri Lanka, he sent his own son Mahinda, accompanied by four other Theras \u2013 Itthiya, Uttiya, Sambala and Bhaddasala. Next, with Moggaliputta-Tissa's help, Ashoka sent Buddhist missionaries to distant regions such as Kashmir, Gandhara, Himalayas, the land of the Yonas (Greeks), Maharashtra, Suvannabhumi, and Sri Lanka.\nThe Sri Lankan tradition dates these missions to Ashoka's 18th regnal year, naming the following missionaries:\nThe tradition adds that during his 19th regnal year, Ashoka's daughter Sanghamitta went to Sri Lanka to establish an order of nuns, taking a sapling of the sacred Bodhi Tree with her.\nThe North Indian tradition makes no mention of these events. Ashoka's own inscriptions also appear to omit any mention of these events, recording only one of his activities during this period: in his 19th regnal year, he donated the Khalatika Cave to ascetics to provide them a shelter during the rainy season. Ashoka's Pillar Edicts suggest that during the next year, he made pilgrimage to Lumbini \u2013 the place of Buddha's birth, and to the stupa of the Buddha Kanakamuni.\nThe Rock Edict XIII states that Ashoka's won a \"dhamma victory\" by sending messengers to five kings and several other kingdoms. Whether these missions correspond to the Buddhist missions recorded in the Buddhist chronicles is debated. Indologist Etienne Lamotte argues that the \"dhamma\" missionaries mentioned in Ashoka's inscriptions were probably not Buddhist monks, as this \"dhamma\" was not same as \"Buddhism\". Moreover, the lists of destinations of the missions and the dates of the missions mentioned in the inscriptions do not tally the ones mentioned in the Buddhist legends.\nOther scholars, such as Erich Frauwallner and Richard Gombrich, believe that the missions mentioned in the Sri Lankan tradition are historical. According to these scholars, a part of this story is corroborated by archaeological evidence: the \"Vinaya Nidana\" mentions names of five monks, who are said to have gone to the Himalayan region; three of these names have been found inscribed on relic caskets found at Bhilsa (near Vidisha). These caskets have been dated to the early 2nd century BCE, and the inscription states that the monks are of the Himalayan school. The missions may have set out from Vidisha in central India, as the caskets were discovered there, and as Mahinda is said to have stayed there for a month before setting out for Sri Lanka.\nAccording to Gombrich, the mission may have included representatives of other religions, and thus, Lamotte's objection about \"dhamma\" is not valid. The Buddhist chroniclers may have decided not to mention these non-Buddhists, so as not to sideline Buddhism. Frauwallner and Gombrich also believe that Ashoka was directly responsible for the missions, since only a resourceful ruler could have sponsored such activities. The Sri Lankan chronicles, which belong to the Theravada school, exaggerate the role of the Theravadin monk Moggaliputta-Tissa in order to glorify their sect.\nSome historians argue that Buddhism became a major religion because of Ashoka's royal patronage. However, epigraphic evidence suggests that the spread of Buddhism in north-western India and Deccan region was less because of Ashoka's missions, and more because of merchants, traders, landowners and the artisan guilds who supported Buddhist establishments.\nViolence after conversion.\nAccording to the \"Ashokavadana\", Ashoka resorted to violence even after converting to Buddhism. For example:\nAccording to the \"Ashokavadana\", a non-Buddhist in Pundravardhana drew a picture showing the Buddha bowing at the feet of the Nirgrantha leader Jnatiputra. The term nirgrantha (\"free from bonds\") was originally used for a pre-Jaina ascetic order, but later came to be used for Jaina monks. \"Jnatiputra\" is identified with Mahavira, 24th Tirthankara of Jainism. The legend states that on complaint from a Buddhist devotee, Ashoka issued an order to arrest the non-Buddhist artist, and subsequently, another order to kill all the Ajivikas in Pundravardhana. Around 18,000 followers of the Ajivika sect were executed as a result of this order. Sometime later, another Nirgrantha follower in Pataliputra drew a similar picture. Ashoka burnt him and his entire family alive in their house. He also announced an award of one dinara (gold coin) to anyone who brought him the head of a Nirgrantha heretic. According to \"Ashokavadana\", as a result of this order, his own brother was mistaken for a heretic and killed by a cowherd. Ashoka realised his mistake, and withdrew the order.\nFor several reasons, scholars say, these stories of persecutions of rival sects by Ashoka appear to be clear fabrications arising out of sectarian propaganda.\nFamily.\nQueens.\nVarious sources mention five consorts of Ashoka: Devi (or Vedisa-Mahadevi-Shakyakumari), Karuvaki, Asandhimitra (Pali: Asandhimitta), Padmavati, and Tishyarakshita (Pali: Tissarakkha).\nKaruvaki is the only queen of Ashoka known from his own inscriptions: she is mentioned in an edict inscribed on a pillar at Allahabad. The inscription names her as the mother of prince Tivara, and orders the royal officers (mahamattas) to record her religious and charitable donations. According to one theory, Tishyarakshita was the regnal name of Kaurvaki.\nAccording to the \"Mahavamsa\", Ashoka's chief queen was Asandhimitta, who died four years before him. It states that she was born as Ashoka's queen because in a previous life, she directed a pratyekabuddha to a honey merchant (who was later reborn as Ashoka). Some later texts also state that she additionally gave the pratyekabuddha a piece of cloth made by her. These texts include the \"Dasavatthuppakarana\", the so-called Cambodian or Extended \"Mahavamsa\" (possibly from 9th\u201310th centuries), and the \"Trai Bhumi Katha\" (15th century). These texts narrate another story: one day, Ashoka mocked Asandhamitta was enjoying a tasty piece of sugarcane without having earned it through her karma. Asandhamitta replied that all her enjoyments resulted from merit resulting from her own karma. Ashoka then challenged her to prove this by procuring 60,000 robes as an offering for monks. At night, the guardian gods informed her about her past gift to the pratyekabuddha, and next day, she was able to miraculously procure the 60,000 robes. An impressed Ashoka makes her his favourite queen, and even offers to make her a sovereign ruler. Asandhamitta refuses the offer, but still invokes the jealousy of Ashoka's 16,000 other women. Ashoka proves her superiority by having 16,000 identical cakes baked with his royal seal hidden in only one of them. Each wife is asked to choose a cake, and only Asandhamitta gets the one with the royal seal. The \"Trai Bhumi Katha\" claims that it was Asandhamitta who encouraged her husband to become a Buddhist, and to construct 84,000 stupas and 84,000 viharas.\nAccording to \"Mahavamsa\", after Asandhamitta's death, Tissarakkha became the chief queen. The Ashokavadana does not mention Asandhamitta at all, but does mention Tissarakkha as Tishyarakshita. The \"Divyavadana\" mentions another queen called Padmavati, who was the mother of the crown-prince Kunala.\nAs mentioned above, according to the Sri Lankan tradition, Ashoka fell in love with Devi (or Vidisha-Mahadevi), as a prince in central India. After Ashoka's ascension to the throne, Devi chose to remain at Vidisha than move to the royal capital Pataliputra. According to the \"Mahavmsa\", Ashoka's chief queen was Asandhamitta, not Devi: the text does not talk of any connection between the two women, so it is unlikely that Asandhamitta was another name for Devi. The Sri Lankan tradition uses the word \"samvasa\" to describe the relationship between Ashoka and Devi, which modern scholars variously interpret as sexual relations outside marriage, or co-habitation as a married couple. Those who argue that Ashoka did not marry Devi argue that their theory is corroborated by the fact that Devi did not become Ashoka's chief queen in Pataliputra after his ascension. The \"Dipavamsa\" refers to two children of Ashoka and Devi \u2013 Mahinda and Sanghamitta.\nSons.\nTivara, the son of Ashoka and Karuvaki, is the only of Ashoka's sons to be mentioned by name in the inscriptions.\nAccording to North Indian tradition, Ashoka had a son named Kunala. Kunala had a son named Samprati.\nThe Sri Lankan tradition mentions a son called Mahinda, who was sent to Sri Lanka as a Buddhist missionary; this son is not mentioned at all in the North Indian tradition. The Chinese pilgrim Xuanzang states that Mahinda was Ashoka's younger brother (Vitashoka or Vigatashoka) rather than his illegitimate son.\nThe \"Divyavadana\" mentions the crown-prince Kunala alias Dharmavivardhana, who was a son of queen Padmavati. According to Faxian, Dharmavivardhana was appointed as the governor of Gandhara.\nThe \"Rajatarangini\" mentions Jalauka as a son of Ashoka.\nDaughters.\nAccording to Sri Lankan tradition, Ashoka had a daughter named Sanghamitta, who became a Buddhist nun. A section of historians, such as Romila Thapar, doubt the historicity of Sanghamitta, based on the following points:\nAnother source mentions that Ashoka had a daughter named Charumati, who married a kshatriya named Devapala.\nBrothers.\nAccording to the \"Ashokavadana\", Ashoka had an elder half-brother named Susima. \nImperial extent.\nThe extent of the territory controlled by Ashoka's predecessors is not certain, but it is possible that the empire of his grandfather Chandragupta extended across northern India from the western coast (Arabian Sea) to the eastern coast (Bay of Bengal), covering nearly two-thirds of the Indian subcontinent. Bindusara and Ashoka seem to have extended the empire southwards. The distribution of Ashoka's inscriptions suggests that his empire included almost the entire Indian subcontinent, except its southernmost parts. The Rock Edicts 2 and 13 suggest that these southernmost parts were controlled by the Cholas, the Pandyas, the Keralaputras, and the Satiyaputras. In the north-west, Ashoka's kingdom extended up to Kandahar, to the east of the Seleucid Empire ruled by Antiochus II. The capital of Ashoka's empire was Pataliputra in the Magadha region.\nReligion and philosophy.\nRelationship with Buddhism.\nThe Buddhist legends state that Ashoka converted to Buddhism, although this has been debated by a section of scholars. The Minor Rock Edict 1 leaves no doubt that Ashoka was a follower of Buddhism. In this edict, he calls himself an upasaka (a lay follower of Buddhism) and a \"sakya\" (i.e. Buddhist, after Gautama Buddha's title \"Shakya-Muni\"). This and several other edicts are evidence of his Buddhist affiliation:\nOther religions.\nA legend in the Buddhist text \"Vamsatthapakasini\" states that an Ajivika ascetic invited to interpret a dream of Ashoka's mother had predicted that he would patronise Buddhism and destroy 96 heretical sects. However, such assertions are directly contradicted by Ashoka's own inscriptions. Ashoka's edicts, such as the Rock Edicts 6, 7, and 12, emphasise tolerance of all sects. Similarly, in his Rock Edict 12, Ashoka honours people of all faiths. In his inscriptions, Ashoka dedicates caves to non-Buddhist ascetics, and repeatedly states that both Brahmins and shramanas deserved respect. He also tells people \"not to denigrate other sects, but to inform themselves about them\".\nIn fact, there is no evidence that Buddhism was a state religion under Ashoka. None of Ashoka's extant edicts record his direct donations to the Buddhists. One inscription records donations by his queen Karuvaki, while the emperor is known to have donated the Barabar Caves to the Ajivikas. There are some indirect references to his donations to Buddhists. For example, the Nigalisagar Pillar inscription records his enlargement of the Konakamana stupa. Similarly, the Lumbini (Rumminidei) inscription states that he exempted the village of Buddha's birth from the land tax, and reduced the revenue tax to one-eighth.\nAshoka appointed the \"dhamma-mahamatta\" officers, whose duties included the welfare of various religious sects, including the Buddhist sangha, Brahmins, Ajivikas, and Nirgranthas. The Rock Edicts 8 and 12, and the Pillar Edict 7, mandate donations to all religious sects.\nAshoka's Minor Rock Edict 1 contains the phrase \"\"amiss\u0101 dev\u0101\". According to one interpretation, the term \"amiss\u0101\" derives from the word \"am\u1e5b\u1e63a\"\" (\"false\"), and thus, the phrase is a reference to Ashoka's belief in \"true\" and \"false\" gods. However, it is more likely that the term derives from the word \"ami\u015bra\" (\"not mingled\"), and the phrase refers to celestial beings who did not mingle with humans. The inscription claims that the righteousness generated by adoption of dhamma by the humans attracted even the celestial gods who did not mingle with humans.\nDharma.\nAshoka's various inscriptions suggest that he devoted himself to the propagation of \"Dharma\" (Pali: Dhamma), a term that refers to the teachings of Gautama Buddha in the Buddhist circles. However, Ashoka's own inscriptions do not mention Buddhist doctrines such as the Four Noble Truths or Nirvana. The word \"Dharma\" has various connotations in the Indian religions, and can be generally translated as \"law, duty, or righteousness\". In the Kandahar inscriptions of Ashoka, the word \"Dharma\" has been translated as eusebeia (Greek) and qsyt (Aramaic), which further suggests that his \"Dharma\" meant something more generic than Buddhism.\nThe inscriptions suggest that for Ashoka, Dharma meant \"a moral polity of active social concern, religious tolerance, ecological awareness, the observance of common ethical precepts, and the renunciation of war.\" For example:\nModern scholars have variously understood this \"dhamma\" as a Buddhist lay ethic, a set of politico-moral ideas, a \"sort of universal religion\", or as an Ashokan innovation. On the other hand, it has also been interpreted as an \"essentially political\" ideology that sought to knit together a vast and diverse empire.\nAshoka instituted a new category of officers called the \"dhamma-mahamattas\", who were tasked with the welfare of the aged, the infirm, the women and children, and various religious sects. They were also sent on diplomatic missions to the Hellenistic kingdoms of west Asia, in order to propagate the dhamma.\nHistorically, the image of Ashoka in the global Buddhist circles was based on legends (such as those mentioned in the \"Ashokavadana\") rather than his rock edicts. This was because the Brahmi script in which these edicts were written was forgotten soon and remained undeciphered until its study by James Prinsep in the 19th century. The writings of the Chinese Buddhist pilgrims such as Faxian and Xuanzang suggest that Ashoka's inscriptions mark the important sites associated with Gautama Buddha. These writers attribute Buddhism-related content to Ashoka's edicts, but this content does not match with the actual text of the inscriptions as determined by modern scholars after the decipherment of the Brahmi script. It is likely that the script was forgotten by the time of Faxian, who probably relied on local guides; these guides may have made up some Buddhism-related interpretations to gratify him, or may have themselves relied on faulty translations based on oral traditions. Xuanzang may have encountered a similar situation, or may have taken the supposed content of the inscriptions from Faxian's writings. This theory is corroborated by the fact that some Brahmin scholars are known to have similarly come up with a fanciful interpretation of Ashoka pillar inscriptions, when requested to decipher them by the 14th century Muslim king Firuz Shah Tughlaq. According to Shams-i Siraj's \"Tarikh-i Firoz Shahi\", after the king had these pillar transported from Topra and Mirat to Delhi as war trophies, these Brahmins told him that the inscriptions prophesied that nobody would be able to remove the pillars except a king named Firuz. Moreover, by this time, there were local traditions that attributed the erection of these pillars to the legendary hero Bhima.\nAccording to scholars such as Richard Gombrich, Ashoka's dharma shows Buddhist influence. For example, the Kalinga Separate Edict I seems to be inspired by Buddha's \"Advice to Sigala\" and his other sermons.\nAnimal welfare.\nAshoka's rock edicts declare that injuring living things is not good, and no animal should be slaughtered for sacrifice. However, he did not prohibit common cattle slaughter or beef eating.\nHe imposed a ban on killing of \"all four-footed creatures that are neither useful nor edible\", and of specific animal species including several birds, certain types of fish and bulls among others. He also banned killing of female goats, sheep and pigs that were nursing their young; as well as their young up to the age of six months. He also banned killing of all fish and castration of animals during certain periods such as Chaturmasa and Uposatha.\nAshoka also abolished the royal hunting of animals and restricted the slaying of animals for food in the royal residence. Because he banned hunting, created many veterinary clinics and eliminated meat eating on many holidays, the Mauryan Empire under Ashoka has been described as \"one of the very few instances in world history of a government treating its animals as citizens who are as deserving of its protection as the human residents\".\nForeign relations.\nIt is well known that Ashoka sent \"d\u00fctas\" or emissaries to convey messages or letters, written or oral (rather both), to various people. The VIth Rock Edict about \"oral orders\" reveals this. It was later confirmed that it was not unusual to add oral messages to written ones, and the content of Ashoka's messages can be inferred likewise from the XIIIth Rock Edict: They were meant to spread his \"dhammavijaya,\" which he considered the highest victory and which he wished to propagate everywhere (including far beyond India). There is obvious and undeniable trace of cultural contact through the adoption of the Kharosthi script, and the idea of installing inscriptions might have travelled with this script, as Achaemenid influence is seen in some of the formulations used by Ashoka in his inscriptions. This indicates to us that Ashoka was indeed in contact with other cultures, and was an active part in mingling and spreading new cultural ideas beyond his own immediate walls.\nHellenistic world.\nIn his rock edicts, Ashoka states that he had encouraged the transmission of Buddhism to the Hellenistic kingdoms to the west and that the Greeks in his dominion were converts to Buddhism and recipients of his envoys:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now it is conquest by Dhamma that Beloved-of-the-Gods considers to be the best conquest. And it (conquest by Dhamma) has been won here, on the borders, even six hundred yojanas away, where the Greek king Antiochos rules, beyond there where the four kings named Ptolemy, Antigonos, Magas and Alexander rule, likewise in the south among the Cholas, the Pandyas, and as far as Tamraparni.\nHere in the king's domain among the Greeks, the Kambojas, the Nabhakas, the Nabhapamktis, the Bhojas, the Pitinikas, the Andhras and the Palidas, everywhere people are following Beloved-of-the-Gods' instructions in Dhamma. Even where Beloved-of-the-Gods' envoys have not been, these people too, having heard of the practice of Dhamma and the ordinances and instructions in Dhamma given by Beloved-of-the-Gods, are following it and will continue to do so. \nIt is possible, but not certain, that Ashoka received letters from Greek rulers and was acquainted with the Hellenistic royal orders in the same way as he perhaps knew of the inscriptions of the Achaemenid kings, given the presence of ambassadors of Hellenistic kings in India (as well as the \"d\u00fctas\" sent by Ashoka himself). Dionysius is reported to have been such a Greek ambassador at the court of Ashoka, sent by Ptolemy II Philadelphus, who himself is mentioned in the Edicts of Ashoka as a recipient of the Buddhist proselytism of Ashoka. Some Hellenistic philosophers, such as Hegesias of Cyrene, who probably lived under the rule of King Magas, one of the supposed recipients of Buddhist emissaries from Asoka, are sometimes thought to have been influenced by Buddhist teachings.\nThe Greeks in India even seem to have played an active role in the propagation of Buddhism, as some of the emissaries of Ashoka, such as Dharmaraksita, are described in Pali sources as leading Greek (Yona) Buddhist monks, active in spreading Buddhism (the \"Mahavamsa\", XII).\nSome Greeks (Yavana) may have played an administrative role in the territories ruled by Ashoka. The Girnar inscription of Rudradaman records that during the rule of Ashoka, a Yavana Governor was in charge in the area of Girnar, Gujarat, mentioning his role in the construction of a water reservoir.\nIt is thought that Ashoka's palace at Patna was modelled after the Achaemenid palace of Persepolis.\nLegends about past lives.\nBuddhist legends mention stories about Ashoka's past lives. According to a \"Mahavamsa\" story, Ashoka, Nigrodha and Devnampiya Tissa were brothers in a previous life. In that life, a pratyekabuddha was looking for honey to cure another, sick pratyekabuddha. A woman directed him to a honey shop owned by the three brothers. Ashoka generously donated honey to the pratyekabuddha, and wished to become the sovereign ruler of Jambudvipa for this act of merit. The woman wished to become his queen, and was reborn as Ashoka's wife Asandhamitta. Later Pali texts credit her with an additional act of merit: she gifted the pratyekabuddha a piece of cloth made by her. These texts include the \"Dasavatthuppakarana\", the so-called Cambodian or Extended \"Mahavamsa\" (possibly from 9th\u201310th centuries), and the \"Trai Bhumi Katha\" (15th century).\nAccording to an \"Ashokavadana\" story, Ashoka was born as Jaya in a prominent family of Rajagriha. When he was a little boy, he gave the Gautama Buddha dirt imagining it to be food. The Buddha approved of the donation, and Jaya declared that he would become a king by this act of merit. The text also state that Jaya's companion Vijaya was reborn as Ashoka's prime-minister Radhagupta. In the later life, the Buddhist monk Upagupta tells Ashoka that his rough skin was caused by the impure gift of dirt in the previous life. Some later texts repeat this story, without mentioning the negative implications of gifting dirt; these texts include Kumaralata's \"Kalpana-manditika\", Aryashura's \"Jataka-mala\", and the \"Maha-karma-vibhaga\". The Chinese writer Pao Ch'eng's \"Shih chia ju lai ying hua lu\" asserts that an insignificant act like gifting dirt could not have been meritorious enough to cause Ashoka's future greatness. Instead, the text claims that in another past life, Ashoka commissioned a large number of Buddha statues as a king, and this act of merit caused him to become a great emperor in the next life.\nThe 14th century Pali-language fairy tale \"Dasavatthuppakarana\" (possibly from c.\u200914th century) combines the stories about the merchant's gift of honey, and the boy's gift of dirt. It narrates a slightly different version of the \"Mahavamsa\" story, stating that it took place before the birth of the Gautama Buddha. It then states that the merchant was reborn as the boy who gifted dirt to the Buddha; however, in this case, the Buddha his attendant to \u0100nanda to create plaster from the dirt, which is used repair cracks in the monastery walls.\nLast years.\nTissarakkha as the queen.\nAshoka's last dated inscription - the Pillar Edict 4 is from his 26th regnal year. The only source of information about Ashoka's later years are the Buddhist legends. The Sri Lankan tradition states that Ashoka's queen Asandhamitta died during his 29th regnal year, and in his 32nd regnal year, his wife Tissarakkha was given the title of queen.\nBoth \"Mahavamsa\" and \"Ashokavadana\" state that Ashoka extended favours and attention to the Bodhi Tree, and a jealous Tissarakkha mistook \"Bodhi\" to be a mistress of Ashoka. She then used black magic to make the tree wither. According to the \"Ashokavadana\", she hired a sorceress to do the job, and when Ashoka explained that \"Bodhi\" was the name of a tree, she had the sorceress heal the tree. According to the \"Mahavamsa\", she completely destroyed the tree, during Ashoka's 34th regnal year.\nThe \"Ashokavadana\" states that Tissarakkha (called \"Tishyarakshita\" here) made sexual advances towards Ashoka's son Kunala, but Kunala rejected her. Subsequently, Ashoka granted Tissarakkha kingship for seven days, and during this period, she tortured and blinded Kunala. Ashoka then threatened to \"tear out her eyes, rip open her body with sharp rakes, impale her alive on a spit, cut off her nose with a saw, cut out her tongue with a razor.\" Kunala regained his eyesight miraculously, and pleaded for mercy for the queen, but Ashoka had her executed anyway. Kshemendra's \"Avadana-kalpa-lata\" also narrates this legend, but seeks to improve Ashoka's image by stating that he forgave the queen after Kunala regained his eyesight.\nDeath.\nAccording to the Sri Lankan tradition, Ashoka died during his 37th regnal year, which suggests that he died around 232 BCE.\nAccording to the \"Ashokavadana\", the emperor fell severely ill during his last days. He started using state funds to make donations to the Buddhist sangha, prompting his ministers to deny him access to the state treasury. Ashoka then started donating his personal possessions, but was similarly restricted from doing so. On his deathbed, his only possession was the half of a myrobalan fruit, which he offered to the sangha as his final donation. Such legends encourage generous donations to the \"sangha\" and highlight the role of the kingship in supporting the Buddhist faith.\nLegend states that during his cremation, his body burned for seven days and nights.\nLegacy.\nIn \"The Outline of History\" (1920), H. G. Wells wrote, \"Amidst the tens of thousands of names of monarchs that crowd the columns of history, their majesties and graciousnesses and serenities and royal highnesses and the like, the name of Ashoka shines, and shines, almost alone, a star.\"\nArchitecture.\nBesides the various stupas attributed to Ashoka, the pillars erected by him survive at various places in the Indian subcontinent.\nAshoka is often credited with the beginning of stone architecture in India, possibly following the introduction of stone-building techniques by the Greeks after Alexander the Great. Before Ashoka's time, buildings were probably built in non-permanent material, such as wood, bamboo or thatch. Ashoka may have rebuilt his palace in Pataliputra by replacing wooden material by stone, and may also have used the help of foreign craftmen. Ashoka also innovated by using the permanent qualities of stone for his written edicts, as well as his pillars with Buddhist symbolism.\nSymbols.\nAshokan capitals were highly realistic and used a characteristic polished finish, Mauryan polish, giving a shiny appearance to the stone surface. Lion Capital of Ashoka, the capital of one of the pillars erected by Ashoka features a carving of a spoked wheel, known as the Ashoka Chakra. This wheel represents the wheel of Dhamma set in motion by the Gautama Buddha, and appears on the flag of modern India. This capital also features sculptures of lions, which appear on the seal of India.\nInscriptions.\nThe edicts of Ashoka are a collection of 33 inscriptions on the Pillars of Ashoka, as well as boulders and cave walls, issued during his reign. These inscriptions are dispersed throughout modern-day Pakistan and India, and represent the first tangible evidence of Buddhism. The edicts describe in detail the first wide expansion of Buddhism through the sponsorship of one of the most powerful kings of Indian history, offering more information about Ashoka's proselytism, moral precepts, religious precepts, and his notions of social and animal welfare.\nBefore Ashoka, the royal communications appear to have been written on perishable materials such as palm leaves, birch barks, cotton cloth, and possibly wooden boards. While Ashoka's administration would have continued to use these materials, Ashoka also had his messages inscribed on rock edicts. Ashoka probably got the idea of putting up these inscriptions from the neighbouring Achaemenid empire. It is likely that Ashoka's messages were also inscribed on more perishable materials, such as wood, and sent to various parts of the empire. None of these records survive now.\nScholars are still attempting to analyse both the expressed and implied political ideas of the Edicts (particularly in regard to imperial vision), and make inferences pertaining to how that vision was grappling with problems and political realities of a \"virtually subcontinental, and culturally and economically highly variegated, 3rd century BCE Indian empire. Nonetheless, it remains clear that Ashoka's Inscriptions represent the earliest corpus of royal inscriptions in the Indian subcontinent, and therefore prove to be a very important innovation in royal practices.\"\nMost of Ashoka's inscriptions are written in a mixture of various Prakrit dialects, in the Brahmi script.\nSeveral of Ashoka's inscriptions appear to have been set up near towns, on important routes, and at places of religious significance. Many of the inscriptions have been discovered in hills, rock shelters, and places of local significance. Various theories have been put forward about why Ashoka or his officials chose such places, including that they were centres of megalithic cultures, were regarded as sacred spots in Ashoka's time, or that their physical grandeur may be symbolic of spiritual dominance. Ashoka's inscriptions have not been found at major cities of the Maurya empire, such as Pataliputra, Vidisha, Ujjayini, and Taxila.\n It is possible that many of these inscriptions are lost; the 7th century Chinese pilgrim Xuanzang refers to some of Ashoka's pillar edicts, which have not been discovered by modern researchers.\nIt appears that Ashoka dispatched every message to his provincial governors, who in turn, relayed it to various officials in their territory. For example, the Minor Rock Edict 1 appears in several versions at multiple places: all the versions state that Ashoka issued the proclamation while on a tour, having spent 256 days on tour. The number 256 indicates that the message was dispatched simultaneously to various places. Three versions of a message, found at edicts in the neighbouring places in Karnataka (Brahmagiri, Siddapura, and Jatinga-Rameshwara), were sent from the southern province's capital Suvarnagiri to various places. All three versions contain the same message, preceded by an initial greeting from the \"arya-putra\" (presumably Ashoka's son and the provincial governor) and the \"mahamatras\" (officials) in Suvarnagiri.\nCoinage.\nThe caduceus appears as a symbol of the punch-marked coins of the Maurya Empire in India, in the 3rd\u20132nd century BCE. Numismatic research suggests that this symbol was the symbol of king Ashoka, his personal \"Mudra\". This symbol was not used on the pre-Mauryan punch-marked coins, but only on coins of the Maurya period, together with the three arched-hill symbol, the \"peacock on the hill\", the triskelis and the Taxila mark.\nModern scholarship.\nRediscovery.\nAshoka had almost been forgotten, but in the 19th century James Prinsep contributed in the revelation of historical sources. After deciphering the Brahmi script, Prinsep had originally identified the \"Priyadasi\" of the inscriptions he found with the King of Ceylon Devanampiya Tissa. However, in 1837, George Turnour discovered an important Sri Lankan manuscript (Dipavamsa, or \"Island Chronicle\" ) associating Piyadasi with Ashoka:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Two hundred and eighteen years after the beatitude of the Buddha, was the inauguration of Piyadassi, ... who, the grandson of Chandragupta, and the son of Bindusara, was at the time Governor of Ujjayani.\"\nSince then, the association of \"Devanampriya Priyadarsin\" with Ashoka was confirmed through various inscriptions, and especially confirmed in the Minor Rock Edict inscription discovered in Maski, directly associating Ashoka with his regnal title Devanampriya (\"Beloved-of-the-Gods\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[A proclamation] of Devanampriya Asoka.\nTwo and a half years [and somewhat more] (have passed) since I am a Buddha-Sakya.\n[A year and] somewhat more (has passed) [since] I have visited the Samgha and have shown zeal.\nThose gods who formerly had been unmingled (with men) in Jambudvipa, have how become mingled (with them).\nThis object can be reached even by a lowly (person) who is devoted to morality.\nOne must not think thus, \u2013 (viz.) that only an exalted (person) may reach this.\nBoth the lowly and the exalted must be told : \"If you act thus, this matter (will be) prosperous and of long duration, and will thus progress to one and a half.\nAnother important historian was British archaeologist John Hubert Marshall, who was director-General of the Archaeological Survey of India. His main interests were Sanchi and Sarnath, in addition to Harappa and Mohenjodaro. Sir Alexander Cunningham, a British archaeologist and army engineer, and often known as the father of the Archaeological Survey of India, unveiled heritage sites like the Bharhut Stupa, Sarnath, Sanchi, and the Mahabodhi Temple. Mortimer Wheeler, a British archaeologist, also exposed Ashokan historical sources, especially the Taxila.\nPerceptions and historiography.\nThe use of Buddhist sources in reconstructing the life of Ashoka has had a strong influence on perceptions of Ashoka, as well as the interpretations of his Edicts. Building on traditional accounts, early scholars regarded Ashoka as a primarily Buddhist monarch who underwent a conversion from the Vedic religion to Buddhism and was actively engaged in sponsoring and supporting the Buddhist monastic institution. Some scholars have tended to question this assessment. Romila Thappar writes about Ashoka that \"We need to see him both as a statesman in the context of inheriting and sustaining an empire in a particular historical period, and as a person with a strong commitment to changing society through what might be called the propagation of social ethics.\" The only source of information not attributable to Buddhist sources are the Ashokan Edicts, and these do not explicitly state that Ashoka was a Buddhist. In his edicts, Ashoka expresses support for all the major religions of his time: Buddhism, Brahmanism, Jainism, and Ajivikaism, and his edicts addressed to the population at large (there are some addressed specifically to Buddhists; this is not the case for the other religions) generally focus on moral themes members of all the religions would accept. For example, Amartya Sen writes, \"The Indian Emperor Ashoka in the third century BCE presented many political inscriptions in favor of tolerance and individual freedom, both as a part of state policy and in the relation of different people to each other\".\nHowever, the edicts alone strongly \"indicate\" that he was a Buddhist. In one edict he belittles rituals, and he banned Vedic animal sacrifices; these strongly suggest that he at least did not look to the Vedic tradition for guidance. Furthermore, many edicts are expressed to Buddhists alone; in one, Ashoka declares himself to be an \"upasaka\", and in another he demonstrates a close familiarity with Buddhist texts. He erected rock pillars at Buddhist holy sites, but did not do so for the sites of other religions. He also used the word \"dhamma\" to refer to qualities of the heart that underlie moral action; this was an exclusively Buddhist use of the word. However, he used the word more in the spirit than as a strict code of conduct. Romila Thappar writes, \"His dhamma did not derive from divine inspiration, even if its observance promised heaven. It was more in keeping with the ethic conditioned by the logic of given situations. His logic of Dhamma was intended to influence the conduct of categories of people, in relation to each other. Especially where they involved unequal relationships.\" Finally, he promotes ideals that correspond to the first three steps of the Buddha's graduated discourse.\nMuch of the knowledge about Ashoka comes from the several inscriptions that he had carved on pillars and rocks throughout the empire. All his inscriptions present him as compassionate and loving. In the Kalinga rock edits, he addresses his people as his \"children\" and mentions that as a father he desires their good.\nImpact of pacifism.\nAfter Ashoka's death, the Maurya dynasty declined rapidly. The various Puranas provide different details about Ashoka's successors, but all agree that they had relatively short reigns. The empire seems to have weakened, fragmented, and suffered an invasion from the Bactrian Greeks.\nSome historians, such as H. C. Raychaudhuri, have argued that Ashoka's pacifism undermined the \"military backbone\" of the Maurya empire. Others, such as Romila Thapar, have suggested that the extent and impact of his pacifism have been \"grossly exaggerated\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "1241", "revid": "829949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1241", "title": "American (word)", "text": "Demonym for the Americas\nThe meaning of the word American in the English language varies according to the historical, geographical, and political context in which it is used. \"American\" is derived from \"America\", a term originally denoting all of the Americas (also called the Western Hemisphere). In some expressions, it retains this Pan-American sense, but its usage has evolved over time and, for various historical reasons, the word came to denote people or things specifically from the United States.\nIn modern English, \"American\" generally refers to persons or things related to the United States of America; among native English speakers this usage is almost universal, with any other use of the term requiring specification. However, some linguists in the past have argued that \"American\" should be widened to also include people or things from anywhere in the American continents.\nThe word can be used as either an adjective or a noun (viz. a demonym). In adjectival use, it means \"of or relating to the United States\"; for example, \"Elvis Presley was an American singer\" or \"the man prefers American English\". In its noun form, the word generally means a resident or citizen of the U.S., but is also used for someone whose ethnic identity is simply \"American\". The noun is rarely used in English to refer to people not connected to the United States when intending a geographical meaning. When used with a grammatical qualifier, the adjective \"American\" can mean \"of or relating to the Americas\", as in Latin American or Indigenous American. Less frequently, the adjective can take this meaning without a qualifier, as in \"American Spanish dialects and pronunciation differ by country\" or the names of the Organization of American States and the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN). A third use of the term pertains specifically to the indigenous peoples of the Americas, for instance, \"In the 16th century, many Americans died from imported diseases during the European conquest\", though this usage is rare, as \"indigenous\", \"First Nations\" or \"Amerindian\" are considered less confusing and generally more appropriate.\nCompound constructions which indicate a minority ethnic group, such as \"African-Americans\" likewise refer exclusively to people in or from the United States of America, as does the prefix \"Americo-\". For instance, the Americo-Liberians and their language Merico derive their name from the fact that they are descended from African-American settlers, i.e. Blacks who were formerly enslaved in the United States of America.\nOther languages.\nFrench, German, Italian, Japanese, Hebrew, Arabic, and Russian speakers may use cognates of \"American\" to refer to inhabitants of the Americas or to U.S. nationals. They generally have other terms specific to U.S. nationals, such as the German , French , Japanese , and Italian . These specific terms may be less common than the term \"American\".\nIn French, , or , from (\"United States of America\"), is a rarely used word that distinguishes U.S. things and persons from the adjective , which denotes persons and things from the United States, but may also refer to \"the Americas\".\nLikewise, German's use of and observe this cultural distinction, solely denoting U.S. things and people. Note that in normal parlance, the adjective \"American\" and its direct cognates are usually used if the context renders the nationality of the person clear.\nThis differentiation is prevalent in German-speaking countries, as indicated by the style manual of the \"Neue Z\u00fcrcher Zeitung\" (one of the leading German-language newspapers in Switzerland) which dismisses the term as both 'unnecessary' and 'artificial' and recommends replacing it with \"amerikanisch\". The respective guidelines of the foreign ministries of Austria, Germany and Switzerland all prescribe \"Amerikaner\" and \"amerikanisch\" in reference to the United States for official usage, making no mention of or .\nPortuguese has , denoting both a person or thing from the Americas and a U.S. national. For referring specifically to a U.S. national and things, some words used are (also spelled , \"United States person\"), from , and (\"Yankee\")\u2014both usages exist in Brazil, but are uncommon in Portugal\u2014but the term most often used, and the only one in Portugal, is , even though it could, as with its Spanish equivalent, apply to Canadians and Mexicans as well.\nIn Spanish, denotes geographic and cultural origin in the New World, as well as (infrequently) a U.S. citizen; the more common term is (\"United States person\"), which derives from (\"United States of America\"). The Spanish term (\"North American\") is frequently used to refer things and persons from the United States, but this term can also denote people and things from Canada and Mexico. Among Spanish-speakers, North America generally doesn't include Central America or the Caribbean.\nIn other languages, however, there is no possibility for confusion. For example, the Chinese word for \"U.S. national\" is () is derived from a word for the United States, , where is an abbreviation for \"Y\u00e0m\u011bil\u00ecji\u0101\" (\"America\") and is \"country\". The name for the American continents is , from plus (\"continent\"). Thus, a is an American in the continent sense, and a is an American in the U.S. sense.\nConversely, in Czech, there is no possibility for disambiguation. \"Ameri\u010dan\" (m.) and \"ameri\u010danka\" (f.) can refer to persons from the United States or from the continents of the Americas, and there is no specific word capable of distinguishing the two meanings. For this reason, the latter meaning is very rarely used, and word is used almost exclusively to refer to persons from the United States. The usage is exactly parallel to the English word.\nKorean and Vietnamese also use unambiguous terms, with Korean having () for the country versus () for the continents, and Vietnamese having for the country versus for the continents. Japanese has such terms as well ( [ versus []), but they are found more in newspaper headlines than in speech, where predominates.\nIn Swahili, means specifically the United States, and is a U.S. national, whereas the international form refers to the continents, and would be an inhabitant thereof. Likewise, the Esperanto word refers to the continents. For the country there is the term . Thus, a citizen of the United States is an , whereas an is an inhabitant of the Americas.\nHistory.\nThe name \"America\" was coined by Martin Waldseem\u00fcller from \"Americus Vespucius\", the Latinized version of the name of Amerigo Vespucci (1454\u20131512), the Italian explorer who mapped South America's east coast and the Caribbean Sea in the early 16th century. Later, Vespucci's published letters were the basis of Waldseem\u00fcller's 1507 map, which is the first usage of \"America\". The adjective \"American\" subsequently denoted the New World.\nIn the 16th century, European usage of \"American\" denoted the native inhabitants of the New World. The earliest recorded use of this term in English is in Thomas Hacket's 1568 translation of Andr\u00e9 Th\u00e9vet's book \"France Antarctique\"; Th\u00e9vet himself had referred to the natives as \"Ameriques\". In the following century, the term was extended to European settlers and their descendants in the Americas. The earliest recorded use of \"English-American\" dates to 1648, in Thomas Gage's \"The English-American his travail by sea and land: or, a new survey of the West India's\".\nIn English, \"American\" was used especially for people in British America. Samuel Johnson, the leading English lexicographer, wrote in 1775, before the United States declared independence: \"That the Americans are able to bear taxation is indubitable.\" The Declaration of Independence of July 1776 refers to \"[the] unanimous Declaration of the thirteen United States of America\" adopted by the \"Representatives of the United States of America\" on July 4, 1776. The official name of the country was reaffirmed on November 15, 1777, when the Second Continental Congress adopted the Articles of Confederation, the first of which says, \"The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States of America'\". The Articles further state:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands in Congress. Done at Philadelphia in the State of Pennsylvania the ninth day of July in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy-Eight, and in the Third Year of the independence of America.\nThomas Jefferson, newly elected president in May 1801 wrote, \"I am sure the measures I mean to pursue are such as would in their nature be approved by every American who can emerge from preconceived prejudices; as for those who cannot, we must take care of them as of the sick in our hospitals. The medicine of time and fact may cure some of them.\"\nIn \"The Federalist Papers\" (1787\u201388), Alexander Hamilton and James Madison used the adjective \"American\" with two different meanings: one political and one geographic; \"the American republic\" in Federalist No. 51 and in Federalist No. 70, and, in Federalist No. 24, Hamilton used \"American\" to denote the lands beyond the U.S.'s political borders.\nEarly official U.S. documents show inconsistent usage; the 1778 Treaty of Alliance with France used \"the United States of North America\" in the first sentence, then \"the said United States\" afterwards; \"the United States of America\" and \"the United States of North America\" derive from \"the United Colonies of America\" and \"the United Colonies of North America\". The Treaty of Peace and Amity of September 5, 1795, between the United States and the Barbary States contains the usages \"the United States of North America\", \"citizens of the United States\", and \"American Citizens\".\nU.S. President George Washington, in his 1796 \"Farewell Address\", declaimed that \"The name of American, which belongs to you in your national capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism more than any appellation.\" Political scientist Virginia L. Arbery notes that, in his \"Farewell Address\": \"...Washington invites his fellow citizens to view themselves now as Americans who, out of their love for the truth of liberty, have replaced their maiden names (Virginians, South Carolinians, New Yorkers, etc.) with that of \u201cAmerican\u201d. Get rid of, he urges, \u201cany appellation derived from local discriminations.\u201d By defining himself as an American rather than as a Virginian, Washington set the national standard for all citizens. \"Over and over, Washington said that America must be something set apart. As he put it to Patrick Henry, 'In a word, I want an \"American\" character, that the powers of Europe may be convinced we act for \"ourselves\" and not for \"others\".'\" As the historian Garry Wills has noted: \"This was a theme dear to Washington. He wrote to Timothy Pickering that the nation 'must never forget that we are Americans; the remembrance of which will convince us we ought not to be French or English'.\" Washington's countrymen subsequently embraced his exhortation with notable enthusiasm.\nThis semantic divergence among North American anglophones, however, remained largely unknown in the Spanish-American colonies. In 1801, the document titled \"Letter to American Spaniards\"\u2014published in French (1799), in Spanish (1801), and in English (1808)\u2014might have influenced Venezuela's Act of Independence and its 1811 constitution.\nThe Latter-day Saints' Articles of Faith refer to the American continents as where they are to build Zion.\nCommon short forms and abbreviations are the \"United States\", the \"U.S.\", the \"U.S.A.\", and \"America\"; colloquial versions include the \"U.S. of A.\" and \"the States\". The term \"Columbia\" (from the Columbus surname) was a popular name for the U.S. and for the entire geographic Americas; its usage is present today in the District of Columbia's name. Moreover, the womanly personification of Columbia appears in some official documents, including editions of the U.S. dollar.\nUsage at the United Nations.\nUse of the term \"American\" for U.S. nationals is common at the United Nations, and financial markets in the United States are referred to as \"American financial markets\".\nAmerican Samoa, an unincorporated territory of the United States, is a recognized territorial name at the United Nations.\nCultural views.\nSpain and Hispanic America.\nThe use of \"American\" as a national demonym for U.S. nationals is challenged, primarily by Hispanic Americans. Spanish speakers in Spain and Latin America use the term to refer to people and things from the United States (from ), while refers to the continents as a whole. The term is also accepted in many parts of Latin America to refer to a person or something from the United States; however, this term may be ambiguous in certain parts. Up to and including the 1992 edition, the , published by the Real Academia Espa\u00f1ola, did not include the United States definition in the entry for ; this was added in the 2001 edition. The Real Academia Espa\u00f1ola advised against using exclusively for U.S. nationals:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Translated] It is common, and thus acceptable, to use as a synonym of , even though strictly speaking, the term \"norteamericano\" can equally be used to refer to the inhabitants of any country in North America, it normally applies to the inhabitants of the United States. But \"americano\" should not be used to refer exclusively to the inhabitants of the United States, an abusive usage which can be explained by the fact that in the United States, they frequently abbreviate the name of the country to \"America\" (in English, with no accent).\nCanada.\nModern Canadians typically refer to people from the United States as \"Americans\", though they seldom refer to the United States as \"America\"; they use the terms \"the United States\", \"the U.S.\", or (informally) \"the States\" instead. Because of anti-American sentiment or simply national pride, Canadians never apply the term \"American\" to themselves. Not being an \"American\" is a part of Canadian identity, with many Canadians resenting being referred to as Americans or mistaken for U.S. citizens. This is often due to others' inability, particularly overseas, to distinguish Canadians from Americans, by their accent or other cultural attributes. Some Canadians have protested the use of \"American\" as a national demonym. People of U.S. ethnic origin in Canada are categorized as \"Other North American origins\" by Statistics Canada for purposes of census counts.\nPortugal and Brazil.\nGenerally, denotes \"U.S. citizen\" in Portugal. Usage of to exclusively denote people and things of the U.S. is discouraged by the Lisbon Academy of Sciences, because the specific word (also ) clearly denotes a person from the United States. The term currently used by the Portuguese press is .\nIn Brazil, the term is used to address both that which pertains to the Americas and that which pertains to the U.S.; the particular meaning is deduced from context. Alternatively, the term (\"North American\") is also used in more informal contexts, while (of the U.S.) is the preferred form in academia. Use of the three terms is common in schools, government, and media. The term is used exclusively for the whole continent, and the U.S. is called (\"United States\") or (\"United States of America\"), often abbreviated .\nIn other contexts.\n\"American\" in the 1994 \"Associated Press Stylebook\" was defined as, \"An acceptable description for a resident of the United States. It also may be applied to any resident or citizen of nations in North or South America.\" Elsewhere, the \"AP Stylebook\" indicates that \"United States\" must \"be spelled out when used as a noun. Use U.S. (no space) only as an adjective.\"\nThe entry for \"America\" in \"The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage\" from 1999 reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[the] terms \"America\", \"American(s)\" and \"Americas\" refer not only to the United States, but to all of North America and South America. They may be used in any of their senses, including references to just the United States, if the context is clear. The countries of the Western Hemisphere are collectively 'the Americas'.\nMedia releases from the Pope and Holy See frequently use \"America\" to refer to the United States, and \"American\" to denote something or someone from the United States.\nInternational law.\nAt least one international law uses \"U.S. citizen\" in defining a citizen of the United States rather than \"American citizen\"; for example, the English version of the North American Free Trade Agreement includes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Only air carriers that are \"citizens of the United States\" may operate aircraft in domestic air service (cabotage) and may provide international scheduled and non-scheduled air service as U.S. air carriers...\nUnder the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, a \"citizen of the United States\" means:\n(a) an individual who is a U.S. citizen;\n(b) a partnership in which each member is a U.S. citizen; or\n(c) a U.S. corporation of which the president and at least two-thirds of the board of directors and other managing officers are U.S. citizens, and at least 75 percent of the voting interest in the corporation is owned or controlled by U.S. citizens.\nMany international treaties use the terms \"American\" and \"American citizen\":\nU.S. commercial regulation.\nProducts that are labeled, advertised, and marketed in the U.S. as \"Made in the USA\" must be, as set by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), \"all or virtually all made in the U.S.\" The FTC, to prevent deception of customers and unfair competition, considers an unqualified claim of \"American Made\" to expressly claim exclusive manufacture in the U.S: \"The FTC Act gives the Commission the power to bring law enforcement actions against false or misleading claims that a product is of U.S. origin.\"\nAlternatives.\nThere are a number of alternatives to the demonym \"American\" as a citizen of the United States that do not simultaneously mean any inhabitant of the Americas. One uncommon alternative is \"Usonian\", which usually describes a certain style of residential architecture designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. Other alternatives have also surfaced, but most have fallen into disuse and obscurity. \"Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage\" says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The list contains (in approximate historical order from 1789 to 1939) such terms as Columbian, Columbard, Fredonian, Frede, Unisian, United Statesian, Colonican, Appalacian, Usian, Washingtonian, Usonian, Uessian, U-S-ian, Uesican, United Stater.\nNevertheless, no alternative to \"American\" is common.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1242", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1242", "title": "Ada (programming language)", "text": "High-level programming language first released in 1980\nAda is a structured, statically typed, imperative, and object-oriented high-level programming language, inspired by Pascal and other languages. It has built-in language support for \"design by contract\" (DbC), extremely strong typing, explicit concurrency, tasks, synchronous message passing, protected objects, and non-determinism. Ada improves code safety and maintainability by using the compiler to find errors in favor of runtime errors. Ada is an international technical standard, jointly defined by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). As of 2020[ [update]], the standard, called Ada 2012 informally, is ISO/IEC 8652:2012.\nAda was originally designed by a team led by French computer scientist Jean Ichbiah of Honeywell under contract to the United States Department of Defense (DoD) from 1977 to 1983 to supersede over 450 programming languages used by the DoD at that time. Ada was named after Ada Lovelace (1815\u20131852), who has been credited as the first computer programmer.\nFeatures.\nAda was originally designed for embedded and real-time systems. The Ada\u00a095 revision, designed by S. Tucker Taft of Intermetrics between 1992 and 1995, improved support for systems, numerical, financial, and object-oriented programming (OOP).\nFeatures of Ada include: strong typing, modular programming mechanisms (packages), run-time checking, parallel processing (tasks, synchronous message passing, protected objects, and nondeterministic select statements), exception handling, and generics. Ada\u00a095 added support for object-oriented programming, including dynamic dispatch.\nThe syntax of Ada minimizes choices of ways to perform basic operations, and prefers English keywords (such as \"or else\" and \"and then\") to symbols (such as \"||\" and \"&amp;&amp;\"). Ada uses the basic arithmetical operators \"+\", \"-\", \"*\", and \"/\", but avoids using other symbols. Code blocks are delimited by words such as \"declare\", \"begin\", and \"end\", where the \"end\" (in most cases) is followed by the identifier of the block it closes (e.g., \"if ... end if\", \"loop ... end loop\"). In the case of conditional blocks this avoids a \"dangling else\" that could pair with the wrong nested if-expression in other languages like C or Java.\nAda is designed for developing very large software systems. Ada packages can be compiled separately. Ada package specifications (the package interface) can also be compiled separately without the implementation to check for consistency. This makes it possible to detect problems early during the design phase, before implementation starts.\nA large number of compile-time checks are supported to help avoid bugs that would not be detectable until run-time in some other languages or would require explicit checks to be added to the source code. For example, the syntax requires explicitly named closing of blocks to prevent errors due to mismatched end tokens. The adherence to strong typing allows detecting many common software errors (wrong parameters, range violations, invalid references, mismatched types, etc.) either during compile-time, or otherwise during run-time. As concurrency is part of the language specification, the compiler can in some cases detect potential deadlocks. Compilers also commonly check for misspelled identifiers, visibility of packages, redundant declarations, etc. and can provide warnings and useful suggestions on how to fix the error.\nAda also supports run-time checks to protect against access to unallocated memory, buffer overflow errors, range violations, off-by-one errors, array access errors, and other detectable bugs. These checks can be disabled in the interest of runtime efficiency, but can often be compiled efficiently. It also includes facilities to help program verification. For these reasons, Ada is widely used in critical systems, where any anomaly might lead to very serious consequences, e.g., accidental death, injury or severe financial loss. Examples of systems where Ada is used include avionics, air traffic control, railways, banking, military and space technology.\nAda's dynamic memory management is high-level and type-safe. Ada has no generic or untyped pointers; nor does it implicitly declare any pointer type. Instead, all dynamic memory allocation and deallocation must occur via explicitly declared \"access types\". Each access type has an associated \"storage pool\" that handles the low-level details of memory management; the programmer can either use the default storage pool or define new ones (this is particularly relevant for Non-Uniform Memory Access). It is even possible to declare several different access types that all designate the same type but use different storage pools. Also, the language provides for \"accessibility checks\", both at compile time and at run time, that ensures that an \"access value\" cannot outlive the type of the object it points to.\nThough the semantics of the language allow automatic garbage collection of inaccessible objects, most implementations do not support it by default, as it would cause unpredictable behaviour in real-time systems. Ada does support a limited form of region-based memory management; also, creative use of storage pools can provide for a limited form of automatic garbage collection, since destroying a storage pool also destroys all the objects in the pool.\nA double-dash (\"--\"), resembling an em dash, denotes comment text. Comments stop at end of line, to prevent unclosed comments from accidentally voiding whole sections of source code. Disabling a whole block of code now requires the prefixing of each line (or column) individually with \"--\". While clearly denoting disabled code with a column of repeated \"--\" down the page this renders the experimental dis/re-enablement of large blocks a more drawn out process.\nThe semicolon (\";\") is a statement terminator, and the null or no-operation statement is codice_1. A single codice_2 without a statement to terminate is not allowed.\nUnlike most ISO standards, the Ada language definition (known as the \"Ada Reference Manual\" or \"ARM\", or sometimes the \"Language Reference Manual\" or \"LRM\") is free content. Thus, it is a common reference for Ada programmers, not only programmers implementing Ada compilers. Apart from the reference manual, there is also an extensive rationale document which explains the language design and the use of various language constructs. This document is also widely used by programmers. When the language was revised, a new rationale document was written.\nOne notable free software tool that is used by many Ada programmers to aid them in writing Ada source code is the GNAT Programming Studio, and GNAT which is part of the GNU Compiler Collection.\nHistory.\nIn the 1970s the US Department of Defense (DoD) became concerned by the number of different programming languages being used for its embedded computer system projects, many of which were obsolete or hardware-dependent, and none of which supported safe modular programming. In 1975, a working group, the High Order Language Working Group (HOLWG), was formed with the intent to reduce this number by finding or creating a programming language generally suitable for the department's and the UK Ministry of Defence's requirements. After many iterations beginning with an original straw man proposal the eventual programming language was named Ada. The total number of high-level programming languages in use for such projects fell from over 450 in 1983 to 37 by 1996.\nHOLWG crafted the Steelman language requirements, a series of documents stating the requirements they felt a programming language should satisfy. Many existing languages were formally reviewed, but the team concluded in 1977 that no existing language met the specifications.\nRequests for proposals for a new programming language were issued and four contractors were hired to develop their proposals under the names of Red (Intermetrics led by Benjamin Brosgol), Green (Honeywell, led by Jean Ichbiah), Blue (SofTech, led by John Goodenough) and Yellow (SRI International, led by Jay Spitzen). In April 1978, after public scrutiny, the Red and Green proposals passed to the next phase. In May 1979, the Green proposal, designed by Jean Ichbiah at Honeywell, was chosen and given the name Ada\u2014after Augusta Ada, Countess of Lovelace. This proposal was influenced by the language LIS that Ichbiah and his group had developed in the 1970s. The preliminary Ada reference manual was published in ACM SIGPLAN Notices in June 1979. The Military Standard reference manual was approved on December 10, 1980 (Ada Lovelace's birthday), and given the number MIL-STD-1815 in honor of Ada Lovelace's birth year. In 1981, C. A. R. Hoare took advantage of his Turing Award speech to criticize Ada for being overly complex and hence unreliable, but subsequently seemed to recant in the foreword he wrote for an Ada textbook.\nAda attracted much attention from the programming community as a whole during its early days. Its backers and others predicted that it might become a dominant language for general purpose programming and not only defense-related work. Ichbiah publicly stated that within ten years, only two programming languages would remain: Ada and Lisp. Early Ada compilers struggled to implement the large, complex language, and both compile-time and run-time performance tended to be slow and tools primitive. Compiler vendors expended most of their efforts in passing the massive, language-conformance-testing, government-required Ada Compiler Validation Capability (ACVC) validation suite that was required in another novel feature of the Ada language effort. The Jargon File, a dictionary of computer hacker slang originating in 1975\u20131983, notes in an entry on Ada that \"it is precisely what one might expect given that kind of endorsement by fiat; designed by committee...difficult to use, and overall a disastrous, multi-billion-dollar boondoggle...Ada Lovelace...would almost certainly blanch at the use her name has been latterly put to; the kindest thing that has been said about it is that there is probably a good small language screaming to get out from inside its vast, elephantine bulk.\"\nThe first validated Ada implementation was the NYU Ada/Ed translator, certified on April 11, 1983. NYU Ada/Ed is implemented in the high-level set language SETL. Several commercial companies began offering Ada compilers and associated development tools, including Alsys, TeleSoft, DDC-I, Advanced Computer Techniques, Tartan Laboratories, Irvine Compiler, TLD Systems, and Verdix. Computer manufacturers who had a significant business in the defense, aerospace, or related industries, also offered Ada compilers and tools on their platforms; these included Concurrent Computer Corporation, Cray Research, Inc., Harris Computer Systems, and Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG.\nIn 1991, the US Department of Defense began to require the use of Ada (the \"Ada mandate\") for all software, though exceptions to this rule were often granted. The Department of Defense Ada mandate was effectively removed in 1997, as the DoD began to embrace commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) technology. Similar requirements existed in other NATO countries: Ada was required for NATO systems involving command and control and other functions, and Ada was the mandated or preferred language for defense-related applications in countries such as Sweden, Germany, and Canada.\nBy the late 1980s and early 1990s, Ada compilers had improved in performance, but there were still barriers to fully exploiting Ada's abilities, including a tasking model that was different from what most real-time programmers were used to.\nBecause of Ada's safety-critical support features, it is now used not only for military applications, but also in commercial projects where a software bug can have severe consequences, e.g., avionics and air traffic control, commercial rockets such as the Ariane 4 and 5, satellites and other space systems, railway transport and banking.\nFor example, the Airplane Information Management System, the fly-by-wire system software in the Boeing 777, was written in Ada. Developed by Honeywell Air Transport Systems in collaboration with consultants from DDC-I, it became arguably the best-known of any Ada project, civilian or military. The Canadian Automated Air Traffic System was written in 1 million lines of Ada (SLOC count). It featured advanced distributed processing, a distributed Ada database, and object-oriented design. Ada is also used in other air traffic systems, e.g., the UK's next-generation Interim Future Area Control Tools Support (iFACTS) air traffic control system is designed and implemented using SPARK Ada.\nIt is also used in the French TVM in-cab signalling system on the TGV high-speed rail system, and the metro suburban trains in Paris, London, Hong Kong and New York City.\nStandardization.\nPreliminary Ada can be found in ACM Sigplan Notices Vol 14, No 6, June 1979.\nAda was first published in 1980 as an ANSI standard ANSI/MIL-STD 1815. As this very first version held many errors and inconsistencies (see Summary of Ada Language Changes), the revised edition was published in 1983 as ANSI/MIL-STD 1815A. Without any further changes, it became an ISO standard in 1987, ISO 8652:1987. This version of the language is commonly known as Ada\u00a083, from the date of its adoption by ANSI, but is sometimes referred to also as Ada\u00a087, from the date of its adoption by ISO. This is the Ada 83 Reference Manual. There is also a French translation; DIN translated it into German as DIN 66268 in 1988.\nAda\u00a095, the joint ISO/IEC/ANSI standard ISO/IEC 8652:1995 (see Ada 95 RM) was published in February 1995, making it the first ISO standard object-oriented programming language. To help with the standard revision and future acceptance, the US Air Force funded the development of the GNAT Compiler. Presently, the GNAT Compiler is part of the GNU Compiler Collection.\nWork has continued on improving and updating the technical content of the Ada language. A Technical Corrigendum to Ada\u00a095 was published in October 2001, ISO/IEC 8652:1995/Corr 1:2001 (see Ada 95 RM with TC 1), and a major Amendment, ISO/IEC 8652:1995/Amd 1:2007 (see Ada 2005 RM) was published on March 9, 2007, commonly known as Ada\u00a02005 because work on the new standard was finished that year. \nAt the Ada-Europe 2012 conference in Stockholm, the Ada Resource Association (ARA) and Ada-Europe announced the completion of the design of the latest version of the Ada language and the submission of the reference manual to the ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 22/WG 9 of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) for approval. ISO/IEC 8652:2012 (see Ada 2012 RM) was published in December 2012, known as Ada\u00a02012. A technical corrigendum was published ISO/IEC 8652:2012/COR 1:2016 (see RM 2012 with TC 1).\nDespite the names Ada 83, 95 etc., legally there is only one Ada standard, the one of the last ISO/IEC standard: with the acceptance of a new standard version, the previous one becomes withdrawn. The other names are just informal ones referencing a certain edition.\nOther related standards include ISO/IEC 8651-3:1988 \"Information processing systems\u2014Computer graphics\u2014Graphical Kernel System (GKS) language bindings\u2014Part 3: Ada\".\nLanguage constructs.\nAda is an ALGOL-like programming language featuring control structures with reserved words such as \"if\", \"then\", \"else\", \"while\", \"for\", and so on. However, Ada also has many data structuring facilities and other abstractions which were not included in the original ALGOL 60, such as type definitions, records, pointers, enumerations. Such constructs were in part inherited from or inspired by Pascal.\n\"Hello, world!\" in Ada.\nA common example of a language's syntax is the Hello world program:\nwith Ada.Text_IO;\nprocedure Hello is\nbegin\n Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (\"Hello, world!\");\nend Hello;\nThis program can be compiled by using the freely available open source compiler GNAT, by executing\ngnatmake hello.adb\nData types.\nAda's type system is not based on a set of predefined primitive types but allows users to declare their own types. This declaration in turn is not based on the internal representation of the type but on describing the goal which should be achieved. This allows the compiler to determine a suitable memory size for the type, and to check for violations of the type definition at compile time and run time (i.e., range violations, buffer overruns, type consistency, etc.). Ada supports numerical types defined by a range, modulo types, aggregate types (records and arrays), and enumeration types. Access types define a reference to an instance of a specified type; untyped pointers are not permitted.\nSpecial types provided by the language are task types and protected types.\nFor example, a date might be represented as:\ntype Day_type is range 1 .. 31;\ntype Month_type is range 1 .. 12;\ntype Year_type is range 1800 .. 2100;\ntype Hours is mod 24;\ntype Weekday is (Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday);\ntype Date is\n record\n Day : Day_type;\n Month : Month_type;\n Year : Year_type;\n end record;\nImportant to note: Day_type, Month_type, Year_type, Hours are incompatible types, meaning that for instance the following expression is illegal:\nToday: Day_type := 4;\nCurrent_Month: Month_type := 10;\n... Today + Current_Month ... -- illegal\nThe predefined plus-operator can only add values of the same type, so the expression is illegal. \nTypes can be refined by declaring subtypes:\nsubtype Working_Hours is Hours range 0 .. 12; -- at most 12 Hours to work a day\nsubtype Working_Day is Weekday range Monday .. Friday; -- Days to work\nWork_Load: constant array(Working_Day) of Working_Hours -- implicit type declaration\n := (Friday =&gt; 6, Monday =&gt; 4, others =&gt; 10); -- lookup table for working hours with initialization\nTypes can have modifiers such as \"limited, abstract, private\" etc. Private types do not show their inner structure; objects of limited types cannot be copied. Ada 95 adds further features for object-oriented extension of types.\nControl structures.\nAda is a structured programming language, meaning that the flow of control is structured into standard statements. All standard constructs and deep-level early exit are supported, so the use of the also supported \"go to\" commands is seldom needed.\n-- while a is not equal to b, loop.\nwhile a /= b loop\n Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (\"Waiting\");\nend loop;\nif a &gt; b then\n Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (\"Condition met\");\nelse\n Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (\"Condition not met\");\nend if;\nfor i in 1 .. 10 loop\n Ada.Text_IO.Put (\"Iteration: \");\n Ada.Text_IO.Put (i);\n Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line;\nend loop;\nloop\n a := a + 1;\n exit when a = 10;\nend loop;\ncase i is\n when 0 =&gt; Ada.Text_IO.Put (\"zero\");\n when 1 =&gt; Ada.Text_IO.Put (\"one\");\n when 2 =&gt; Ada.Text_IO.Put (\"two\");\n -- case statements have to cover all possible cases:\n when others =&gt; Ada.Text_IO.Put (\"none of the above\");\nend case;\nfor aWeekday in Weekday'Range loop -- loop over an enumeration\n Put_Line ( Weekday'Image(aWeekday) ); -- output string representation of an enumeration\n if aWeekday in Working_Day then -- check of a subtype of an enumeration\n Put_Line ( \" to work for \" &amp;\n Working_Hours'Image (Work_Load(aWeekday)) ); -- access into a lookup table\n end if;\nend loop;\nPackages, procedures and functions.\nAmong the parts of an Ada program are packages, procedures and functions.\nExample:\nPackage specification (example.ads)\npackage Example is\n type Number is range 1 .. 11;\n procedure Print_and_Increment (j: in out Number);\nend Example;\nPackage body (example.adb)\nwith Ada.Text_IO;\npackage body Example is\n i : Number := Number'First;\n procedure Print_and_Increment (j: in out Number) is\n function Next (k: in Number) return Number is\n begin\n return k + 1;\n end Next;\n begin\n Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line ( \"The total is: \" &amp; Number'Image(j) );\n j := Next (j);\n end Print_and_Increment;\n-- package initialization executed when the package is elaborated\nbegin\n while i &lt; Number'Last loop\n Print_and_Increment (i);\n end loop;\nend Example;\nThis program can be compiled, e.g., by using the freely available open-source compiler GNAT, by executing\ngnatmake -z example.adb\nPackages, procedures and functions can nest to any depth, and each can also be the logical outermost block.\nEach package, procedure or function can have its own declarations of constants, types, variables, and other procedures, functions and packages, which can be declared in any order.\nConcurrency.\nAda has language support for task-based concurrency. The fundamental concurrent unit in Ada is a \"task\", which is a built-in limited type. Tasks are specified in two parts \u2013 the task declaration defines the task interface (similar to a type declaration), the task body specifies the implementation of the task. Depending on the implementation, Ada tasks are either mapped to operating system threads or processes, or are scheduled internally by the Ada runtime.\nTasks can have entries for synchronisation (a form of synchronous message passing). Task entries are declared in the task specification. Each task entry can have one or more \"accept\" statements within the task body. If the control flow of the task reaches an accept statement, the task is blocked until the corresponding entry is called by another task (similarly, a calling task is blocked until the called task reaches the corresponding accept statement). Task entries can have parameters similar to procedures, allowing tasks to synchronously exchange data. In conjunction with \"select\" statements it is possible to define \"guards\" on accept statements (similar to Dijkstra's guarded commands).\nAda also offers \"protected objects\" for mutual exclusion. Protected objects are a monitor-like construct, but use guards instead of conditional variables for signaling (similar to conditional critical regions). Protected objects combine the data encapsulation and safe mutual exclusion from monitors, and entry guards from conditional critical regions. The main advantage over classical monitors is that conditional variables are not required for signaling, avoiding potential deadlocks due to incorrect locking semantics. Like tasks, the protected object is a built-in limited type, and it also has a declaration part and a body.\nA protected object consists of encapsulated private data (which can only be accessed from within the protected object), and procedures, functions and entries which are guaranteed to be mutually exclusive (with the only exception of functions, which are required to be side effect free and can therefore run concurrently with other functions). A task calling a protected object is blocked if another task is currently executing inside the same protected object, and released when this other task leaves the protected object. Blocked tasks are queued on the protected object ordered by time of arrival.\nProtected object entries are similar to procedures, but additionally have \"guards\". If a guard evaluates to false, a calling task is blocked and added to the queue of that entry; now another task can be admitted to the protected object, as no task is currently executing inside the protected object. Guards are re-evaluated whenever a task leaves the protected object, as this is the only time when the evaluation of guards can have changed.\nCalls to entries can be \"requeued\" to other entries with the same signature. A task that is requeued is blocked and added to the queue of the target entry; this means that the protected object is released and allows admission of another task.\nThe \"select\" statement in Ada can be used to implement non-blocking entry calls and accepts, non-deterministic selection of entries (also with guards), time-outs and aborts.\nThe following example illustrates some concepts of concurrent programming in Ada.\nwith Ada.Text_IO; use Ada.Text_IO;\nprocedure Traffic is\n type Airplane_ID is range 1..10; -- 10 airplanes\n task type Airplane (ID: Airplane_ID); -- task representing airplanes, with ID as initialisation parameter\n type Airplane_Access is access Airplane; -- reference type to Airplane\n protected type Runway is -- the shared runway (protected to allow concurrent access)\n entry Assign_Aircraft (ID: Airplane_ID); -- all entries are guaranteed mutually exclusive\n entry Cleared_Runway (ID: Airplane_ID);\n entry Wait_For_Clear;\n private\n Clear: Boolean := True; -- protected private data - generally more than only a flag...\n end Runway;\n type Runway_Access is access all Runway;\n -- the air traffic controller task takes requests for takeoff and landing\n task type Controller (My_Runway: Runway_Access) is\n -- task entries for synchronous message passing\n entry Request_Takeoff (ID: in Airplane_ID; Takeoff: out Runway_Access);\n entry Request_Approach(ID: in Airplane_ID; Approach: out Runway_Access);\n end Controller;\n -- allocation of instances\n Runway1 : aliased Runway; -- instantiate a runway\n Controller1: Controller (Runway1'Access); -- and a controller to manage it\n ------ the implementations of the above types ------\n protected body Runway is\n entry Assign_Aircraft (ID: Airplane_ID)\n when Clear is -- the entry guard - calling tasks are blocked until the condition is true\n begin\n Clear := False;\n Put_Line (Airplane_ID'Image (ID) &amp; \" on runway \");\n end;\n entry Cleared_Runway (ID: Airplane_ID)\n when not Clear is\n begin\n Clear := True;\n Put_Line (Airplane_ID'Image (ID) &amp; \" cleared runway \");\n end;\n entry Wait_For_Clear\n when Clear is\n begin\n null; -- no need to do anything here - a task can only enter if \"Clear\" is true\n end;\n end Runway;\n task body Controller is\n begin\n loop\n My_Runway.Wait_For_Clear; -- wait until runway is available (blocking call)\n select -- wait for two types of requests (whichever is runnable first)\n when Request_Approach'count = 0 =&gt; -- guard statement - only accept if there are no tasks queuing on Request_Approach\n accept Request_Takeoff (ID: in Airplane_ID; Takeoff: out Runway_Access)\n do -- start of synchronized part\n My_Runway.Assign_Aircraft (ID); -- reserve runway (potentially blocking call if protected object busy or entry guard false)\n Takeoff := My_Runway; -- assign \"out\" parameter value to tell airplane which runway\n end Request_Takeoff; -- end of the synchronised part\n or\n accept Request_Approach (ID: in Airplane_ID; Approach: out Runway_Access) do\n My_Runway.Assign_Aircraft (ID);\n Approach := My_Runway;\n end Request_Approach;\n or -- terminate if no tasks left who could call\n terminate;\n end select;\n end loop;\n end;\n task body Airplane is\n Rwy : Runway_Access;\n begin\n Controller1.Request_Takeoff (ID, Rwy); -- This call blocks until Controller task accepts and completes the accept block\n Put_Line (Airplane_ID'Image (ID) &amp; \" taking off...\");\n delay 2.0;\n Rwy.Cleared_Runway (ID); -- call will not block as \"Clear\" in Rwy is now false and no other tasks should be inside protected object\n delay 5.0; -- fly around a bit...\n loop\n select -- try to request a runway\n Controller1.Request_Approach (ID, Rwy); -- this is a blocking call - will run on controller reaching accept block and return on completion\n exit; -- if call returned we're clear for landing - leave select block and proceed...\n or\n delay 3.0; -- timeout - if no answer in 3 seconds, do something else (everything in following block)\n Put_Line (Airplane_ID'Image (ID) &amp; \" in holding pattern\"); -- simply print a message\n end select;\n end loop;\n delay 4.0; -- do landing approach...\n Put_Line (Airplane_ID'Image (ID) &amp; \" touched down!\");\n Rwy.Cleared_Runway (ID); -- notify runway that we're done here.\n end;\n New_Airplane: Airplane_Access;\nbegin\n for I in Airplane_ID'Range loop -- create a few airplane tasks\n New_Airplane := new Airplane (I); -- will start running directly after creation\n delay 4.0;\n end loop;\nend Traffic;\nPragmas.\nA pragma is a compiler directive that conveys information to the compiler to allow specific manipulating of compiled output. Certain pragmas are built into the language, while others are implementation-specific.\nExamples of common usage of compiler pragmas would be to disable certain features, such as run-time type checking or array subscript boundary checking, or to instruct the compiler to insert object code instead of a function call (as C/C++ does with inline functions).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRationale.\nThese documents have been published in various forms, including print.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1245", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1245", "title": "Alpha ray", "text": ""}
{"id": "1246", "revid": "962991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1246", "title": "Alfonso Ar\u00e1u", "text": ""}
{"id": "1247", "revid": "15996738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1247", "title": "Alfonso Cuar\u00f3n", "text": "Mexican filmmaker\nAlfonso Cuar\u00f3n Orozco ( , ] (); born 28 November 1961) is a Mexican filmmaker. He is known for directing films in a variety of genres, including the family drama \"A Little Princess\" (1995), the romantic drama \"Great Expectations\" (1998), the coming of age road film \"Y tu mam\u00e1 tambi\u00e9n\" (2001), the fantasy film \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\" (2004), science fiction films such as \"Children of Men\" (2006) and \"Gravity\" (2013) and the semi-autobiographical drama \"Roma\" (2018).\nCuar\u00f3n has received 11 Academy Award nominations, winning four: Best Director for \"Gravity\" and \"Roma\", Best Film Editing for \"Gravity\", and Best Cinematography for \"Roma\". He is the first Mexican filmmaker to win the Best Director award, and the second person to have been nominated for an Academy Award in seven different categories after Kenneth Branagh.\nEarly life.\nCuar\u00f3n was born in Mexico City, the son of Alfredo Cuar\u00f3n, a doctor specializing in nuclear medicine, and Cristina Orozco, a pharmaceutical biochemist. He has two brothers; Carlos, also a filmmaker, and Alfredo, a conservation biologist. Cuar\u00f3n studied philosophy at the National Autonomous University of Mexico and filmmaking at the Centro Universitario de Estudios Cinematogr\u00e1ficos, a school within the same university. There he met the director Carlos Marcovich and cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki, and they made what would be his first short film, \"Vengeance Is Mine\".\nCareer.\n1990s: Early career.\nCuar\u00f3n began working on television in Mexico, first as a technician and then as a director. His television work led to assignments as an assistant director for several film productions including \"La Gran Fiesta\", \"\" and \"Romero\", and in 1991 he landed his first big-screen directorial assignment.\nIn 1991, Cuar\u00f3n directed \"S\u00f3lo con tu pareja\", a sex comedy about a womanizing businessman (played by Daniel Gim\u00e9nez Cacho) who, after having sex with an attractive nurse, is fooled into believing he's contracted AIDS. In addition to writing, producing and directing, Cuar\u00f3n co-edited the film with Luis Patl\u00e1n. The film, which also starred cabaret singer Astrid Hadad and model/actress Claudia Ram\u00edrez (with whom Cuar\u00f3n was linked between 1989 and 1993) was a big hit in Mexico. After this success, director Sydney Pollack hired Cuar\u00f3n to direct an episode of \"Fallen Angels\", a series of neo-noir stories produced for the Showtime premium cable network in 1993; other directors who worked on the series included Steven Soderbergh, Jonathan Kaplan, Peter Bogdanovich, and Tom Hanks.\nIn 1995, Cuar\u00f3n released his first feature film produced in the United States, \"A Little Princess\", an adaptation of Frances Hodgson Burnett's classic novel. Cuar\u00f3n's next feature was also a literary adaptation, a modernized version of Charles Dickens's \"Great Expectations\" starring Ethan Hawke, Gwyneth Paltrow, and Robert De Niro.\n2000s: International success.\nIn 2001, Cuar\u00f3n found himself returning to Mexico with a Spanish-speaking cast to film \"Y tu mam\u00e1 tambi\u00e9n\", starring Gael Garc\u00eda Bernal, Diego Luna and Maribel Verd\u00fa. It was a provocative and controversial road comedy about two sexually obsessed teenagers who take an extended road trip with an attractive married woman who is much older than them. The film's open portrayal of sexuality and frequent rude humor, as well as the politically and socially relevant asides, made the film an international hit and a major success with critics. Cuar\u00f3n shared an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Screenplay with co-writer and brother Carlos Cuar\u00f3n.\nIn 2004, Cuar\u00f3n directed the third film in the successful \"Harry Potter\" series, \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\". Cuar\u00f3n faced criticism at the time from some \"Harry Potter\" fans for his approach to the film, notably its tendency to take more creative liberties with the source material than its predecessors. However, author J. K. Rowling, who had seen and loved Cuar\u00f3n's film \"Y tu mam\u00e1 tambi\u00e9n\", said that it was her personal favorite from the series so far. Critically, the film was also better received than the first two installments, with some critics remarking its new tone and for being the first \"Harry Potter\" film to truly capture the essence of the novels. It has been subsequently rated by audience polls and critics as the best of the movie franchise series.\nIn 2006, Cuar\u00f3n's feature \"Children of Men\", an adaptation of the P. D. James novel starring Clive Owen, Julianne Moore, and Michael Caine, received wide critical acclaim including three Academy Award nominations. Cuar\u00f3n himself received two nominations for his work on the film, in Best Film Editing (with Alex Rodr\u00edguez) and Best Adapted Screenplay (with several collaborators).\nHe created the production and distribution company Esperanto Filmoj (\"Esperanto Films\", named because of his support for the international language Esperanto), which has credits in the films \"Duck Season\", \"Pan's Labyrinth\", and \"Gravity\".\nCuar\u00f3n also directed the controversial public service announcement \"I Am Autism\" for Autism Speaks that was criticized by disability rights groups for its negative portrayal of autism.\n2010s: Awards success.\nIn 2010, Cuar\u00f3n began to develop the film \"Gravity\", a drama set in space. He was joined by producer David Heyman, with whom Cuar\u00f3n worked on \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\". Starring Sandra Bullock and George Clooney, the film opened the 70th Venice International Film Festival in August. The film was then released in America in October 2013. The film became a financial success, earning 723.2 million at the box office against a budget of 130 million. The film also received many awards nominations. For the film, he received the Golden Globe Award in the category of Best Director. The film received ten Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Director. Cuar\u00f3n won for Best Directing, becoming the first Latin American to win the award, while he and Mark Sanger received the award for Best Film Editing.\nIn 2013, Cuar\u00f3n created \"Believe\", a science fiction/fantasy/adventure series that was broadcast as part of the 2013\u201314 United States network television schedule on NBC as a mid-season entry. The series was created by Cuar\u00f3n for Bad Robot Productions and Warner Bros. Television. In 2014, \"Time\" placed him in its list of \"100 Most Influential People in the World\" \u2013 Pioneers.\nIn May 2015, Cuar\u00f3n was announced as the president of the jury for the 72nd Venice International Film Festival.\nProduction began in fall 2016 for Cuar\u00f3n's eighth film, \"Roma\", a tale of a housekeeper for a middle class Mexican family in 1970s Mexico City, based on the life of his family's longtime maid, Liboria Rodr\u00edguez. The project was produced by Cuar\u00f3n, Gabriela Rodr\u00edguez and Nicol\u00e1s Celis and starred Yalitza Aparicio and Marina de Tavira both of whom received Oscar nominations. The film debuted at the 75th Venice International Film Festival, where it won the Golden Lion, and was distributed to select Mexican and American theaters before its online release on Netflix. \"Roma\" was highly acclaimed upon release; among its accolades are two Golden Globes (Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film and Best Director for Cuar\u00f3n) and three Academy Awards (Best Director, Best Foreign Language Film, and Best Cinematography for Cuar\u00f3n) out of a leading ten nominations.\nIn 2019, Cuaron signed an overall TV deal at Apple. His first series for Apple will be the psychological thriller \"Disclaimer\", which is set to star Cate Blanchett and Kevin Kline.\nStyle.\nCuar\u00f3n often uses long takes and moving cameras to emulate a documentary film style.\nPersonal life.\nCuar\u00f3n is a vegetarian and has been living in London since 2000.\nCuar\u00f3n's first marriage was to Mariana Elizondo with whom he has a son, Jon\u00e1s Cuar\u00f3n, born in 1981. Jon\u00e1s is also a film director, known for \"Year of the Nail\" and \"Desierto\". Alfonso's second marriage, from 2001 to 2008 was to Italian actress and freelance journalist Annalisa Bugliani, with whom he has two children.\nHe has publicly shown his fascination for the Esperanto language and his support for the Esperanto movement. He called his production company Esperanto Filmoj.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1252", "revid": "34989777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1252", "title": "Arianism", "text": "Christological doctrine, attributed to Arius\nArianism (, ) is a Christological doctrine first attributed to Arius (c.\u2009AD 256\u2013336), a Christian presbyter from Alexandria, Egypt. Arian theology holds that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, who was begotten by God the Father with the difference that the Son of God did not always exist but was begotten/made before \"time\" by God the Father; therefore, Jesus was not coeternal with God the Father, but nonetheless Jesus began to exist outside time as time applies only to the creations of God.\nArius' trinitarian theology, later given an extreme form by Aetius and his disciple Eunomius and called anomoean (\"dissimilar\"), asserts a total dissimilarity between the Son and the Father. Arianism holds that the Son is distinct from the Father and therefore subordinate to him. The term \"Arian\" is derived from the name Arius; it was not what the followers of Arius' teachings called themselves, but rather a term used by outsiders. The nature of Arius's teachings and his supporters were opposed to the theological doctrines held by Homoousian Christians, regarding the nature of the Trinity and the nature of Christ.\nThere was a controversy between two interpretations of Jesus's divinity (Homoousianism and Arianism) based upon the theological orthodoxy of the time, one trinitarian and the other also a derivative of trinitarian orthodoxy, and both of them attempted to solve its respective theological dilemmas. Homoousianism was formally affirmed by the first two ecumenical councils; since then, Arianism has always been condemned as \"the heresy or sect of Arius\". As such, all mainstream branches of Christianity now consider Arianism to be heterodox and heretical. Trinitarian (Homoousian) doctrines were vigorously upheld by Patriarch Athanasius of Alexandria, who insisted that Jesus (God the Son) was \"same in being\" or \"same in essence\" with God the Father. Arius stated: \"If the Father begat the Son, then he who was begotten had a beginning in existence, and from this it follows there was a time when the Son was not.\" The ecumenical First Council of Nicaea of 325, convened by Emperor Constantine to ensure church unity, declared Arianism to be a heresy. According to Everett Ferguson, \"The great majority of Christians had no clear views about the nature of the Trinity and they did not understand what was at stake in the issues that surrounded it.\"\nArianism is also used to refer to other nontrinitarian theological systems of the 4th century, which regarded Jesus Christ\u2014the Son of God, the Logos\u2014as either a begotten creature of a similar or different substance to that of the Father, but not identical (as Homoiousian and Anomoeanism) or as neither uncreated nor created in the sense other beings are created (as in semi-Arianism).\nOrigin.\nSome early Christians that were counted among Orthodoxy denied the eternal generation of the Son, seeing the Son as being begotten in time. These include Tertullian and Justin Martyr. Tertullian is considered a pre-Arian. Among the other church fathers, Origen was accused of Arianism for using terms like \"second God\", and Patriarch Dionysius of Alexandria was denounced at Rome for saying that Son is a work and creature of God.\nControversy over Arianism arose in the late 3rd century and persisted throughout most of the 4th century. It involved most church members\u2014from simple believers, priests, and monks to bishops, emperors, and members of Rome's imperial family. Two Roman emperors, Constantius II and Valens, became Arians or Semi-Arians, as did prominent Gothic, Vandal, and Lombard warlords both before and after the fall of the Western Roman Empire. The antipopes Felix II and Ursinus were Arian, and Pope Liberius was forced to sign the Arian Creed of Sirmium of 357 although the letter says he willingly agreed with Arianism. Such a deep controversy within the early Church during this period of its development could not have materialized without significant historical influences providing a basis for the Arian doctrines.\nArius had been a pupil of Lucian of Antioch at Lucian's private academy in Antioch and inherited from him a modified form of the teachings of Paul of Samosata. Arius taught that God the Father and the Son of God did not always exist together eternally.\nCondemnation by the Council of Nicaea.\nEmperor Constantine the Great summoned the First Council of Nicaea, which defined the dogmatic fundaments of Christianity; these definitions served to rebut the questions posed by Arians. All the bishops who were there were in agreement with the major theological points of the proto-orthodoxy, since at that time all other forms of Christianity \"had by this time already been displaced, suppressed, reformed, or destroyed\". Although the proto-orthodox won the previous disputes, due to the more accurate defining of orthodoxy, they were vanquished with their own weapons, ultimately being declared heretics, not because they would have fought against ideas regarded as theologically correct, but because their positions lacked the accuracy and refinement needed by the fusion of several contradictory theses accepted at the same time by later orthodox theologians. According to Bart Ehrman that is why the Trinity is a \"paradoxical affirmation\".\nOf the roughly 300 bishops in attendance at the Council of Nicaea, two bishops did not sign the Nicene Creed that condemned Arianism. Constantine the Great also ordered a penalty of death for those who refused to surrender the Arian writings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In addition, if any writing composed by Arius should be found, it should be handed over to the flames, so that not only will the wickedness of his teaching be obliterated, but nothing will be left even to remind anyone of him. And I hereby make a public order, that if someone should be discovered to have hidden a writing composed by Arius, and not to have immediately brought it forward and destroyed it by fire, his penalty shall be death. As soon as he is discovered in this offence, he shall be submitted for capital punishment.\u00a0...\nTen years after the Council of Nicaea, Constantine the Great, who was himself later baptized by the Arian bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia in 337 AD, convened another gathering of church leaders at the regional First Synod of Tyre in 335 (attended by 310 bishops), to address various charges mounted against Athanasius by his detractors, such as \"murder, illegal taxation, sorcery, and treason\", following his refusal to readmit Arius into fellowship. Athanasius was exiled to Trier (in modern Germany) following his conviction at Tyre of conspiracy, and Arius was, effectively, exonerated. Athanasius eventually returned to Alexandria in 346, after the deaths of both Arius and Constantine. Though Arianism had spread, Athanasius and other Nicene Christian church leaders crusaded against Arian theology, and Arius was anathemised and condemned as a heretic once more at the ecumenical First Council of Constantinople of 381 (attended by 150 bishops). The Roman Emperors Constantius II (337\u2013361) and Valens (364\u2013378) were Arians or Semi-Arians, as was the first King of Italy, Odoacer (433?\u2013493), and the Lombards were also Arians or Semi-Arians until the 7th century. The ruling elite of Visigothic Spain was Arian until 589. Many Goths adopted Arian beliefs upon their conversion to Christianity. The Vandals actively spread Arianism in North Africa.\nBeliefs.\nLittle of Arius's own work survives except in quotations selected for polemical purposes by his opponents, and there is no certainty about what theological and philosophical traditions formed his thought. The influence from the One of Neo-Platonism was widespread throughout the Eastern Roman Empire and this influenced Arius.\nArius's basic premise is that only God is independent for his existence. Since the Son is dependent he must therefore be called a creature. Arians put forward a question for their belief: \"has God birthed Jesus willingly or unwillingly?\" This question was used to argue that Jesus is dependent for his existence since Jesus exists only because God wants him to be.\nArianism taught that the Logos was a divine being begotten by God the Father before the creation of the world, made him a medium through whom everything else was created, and that the Son of God is subordinate to God the Father. The Logos is an inner attribute of God that is wisdom, while Jesus is called Logos only because of resemblance with the inner Logos of God.\nA verse from Proverbs was used for the creation of the Son: \"The Lord created me at the beginning of his work.\" Therefore, the Son was rather the very first and the most perfect of God's creatures, and he was called \"God\" only by the Father's permission and power. The definition of \"Son\" is ambiguous as Arians have applied an adoptionist theology to defend the creation ex nihilo of Jesus from God.\nArians do not believe in the traditional doctrine of the Trinity. The letter of the Arian bishop Auxentius of Durostorum regarding the Arian missionary Ulfilas gives a picture of Arian beliefs. The Arian Ulfilas, who was ordained a bishop by the Arian bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia and returned to his people to work as a missionary, believed: God, the Father, (\"unbegotten\" God; Almighty God) always existing and who is the only true God. The Son of God, Jesus Christ, (\"only-begotten god\"), was begotten before time began. The Holy Spirit is the illuminating and sanctifying power of God. 1 Corinthians 8:5\u20136 was cited as proof text:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Indeed, even though there may be so-called gods in heaven or on earth\u2014as in fact there are many gods and many lords/masters\u2014yet for us there is one God (Gk. \"theos\" \u2013 \u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2), the Father, from whom are all things and for whom we exist, and one Lord/Master (\"kyrios\" \u2013 \u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2), Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and through whom we exist.\nThe creed of Arian Ulfilas (c. 311\u2013383), which concludes the above-mentioned letter by Auxentius, distinguishes God the Father (\"unbegotten\"), who is the only true God, from the Son of God (\"only-begotten\"); and the Holy Spirit, the illuminating and sanctifying power, which is neither God the Father nor the Lord Jesus Christ:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I, Ulfila, bishop and confessor, have always so believed, and in this, the one true faith, I make the journey to my Lord; I believe in only one God the Father, the unbegotten and invisible, and in his only-begotten Son, our Lord/Master and God, the designer and maker of all creation, having none other like him. Therefore, there is one God of all, who is also God of our God; and in one Holy Spirit, the illuminating and sanctifying power, as Christ said after his resurrection to his apostles: \"And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be clothed with power from on high\" and again \"But ye shall receive power, when the Holy Ghost is come upon you\"; Neither God nor Lord, but the faithful minister of Christ; not equal, but subject and obedient in all things to the Son. And I believe the Son to be subject and obedient in all things to God the Father.\nA letter from Arius (c. 250\u2013336) to the Arian Eusebius of Nicomedia (died 341) states the core beliefs of the Arians:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some of them say that the Son is an eructation, others that he is a production, others that he is also unbegotten. These are impieties to which we cannot listen, even though the heretics threaten us with a thousand deaths. But we say and believe and have taught, and do teach, that the Son is not unbegotten, nor in any way part of the unbegotten; and that he does not derive his subsistence from any matter; but that by his own will and counsel he has subsisted before time and before ages as perfect as God, only begotten and unchangeable, and that before he was begotten, or created, or purposed, or established, he was not. For he was not unbegotten. We are persecuted because we say that the Son has a beginning but that God is without beginning.\nPrincipally, the dispute between Trinitarianism and Arianism was about:\nFor Constantine, these were minor theological points that stood in the way of uniting the Empire, but for the theologians, it was of huge importance; for them, it was a matter of salvation.\nFor the theologians of the 19th century it was already obvious that in fact Arius and Alexander/Athanasius did not have much to quarrel about, the difference between their views was very small, and that the end of the fight was by no means clear during their quarrel, both Arius and Athanasius suffering a great deal for their own views. Arius was the father of Homoiousianism and Alexander the father of Homoousianism, which was championed by Athanasius. For those theologians it was clear that Arius, Alexander and Athanasius were far from a true doctrine of Trinity, which developed later, historically speaking.\nGuido M. Berndt and Roland Steinacher state clearly that the beliefs of Arius were acceptable (\"not especially unusual\") to a huge number of orthodox clergy; this is the reason why such a major conflict was able to develop inside the Church, since Arius's theology received widespread sympathy (or at least was not considered to be overly controversial) and could not be dismissed outright as individual heresy.\nHomoian Arianism.\nArianism had several different variants, including Eunomianism and Homoian Arianism. Homoian Arianism is associated with Acacius and Eudoxius. Homoian Arianism avoided the use of the word \"ousia\" to describe the relation of Father to Son, and described these as \"like\" each other. Hanson lists twelve creeds that reflect the Homoian faith:\nStruggles with orthodoxy.\nFirst Council of Nicaea.\nIn 321, Arius was denounced by a synod at Alexandria for teaching a heterodox view of the relationship of Jesus to God the Father. Because Arius and his followers had great influence in the schools of Alexandria\u2014counterparts to modern universities or seminaries\u2014their theological views spread, especially in the eastern Mediterranean.\nBy 325, the controversy had become significant enough that the Emperor Constantine called an assembly of bishops, the First Council of Nicaea, which condemned Arius's doctrine and formulated the original Nicene Creed of 325. The Nicene Creed's central term, used to describe the relationship between the Father and the Son, is Homoousios (), or Consubstantiality, meaning \"of the same substance\" or \"of one being\" (the Athanasian Creed is less often used but is a more overtly anti-Arian statement on the Trinity).\nThe focus of the Council of Nicaea was the nature of the Son of God and his precise relationship to God the Father (see Paul of Samosata and the Synods of Antioch). Arius taught that Jesus Christ was divine/holy and was sent to earth for the salvation of mankind but that Jesus Christ was not equal to God the Father (infinite, primordial origin) in rank \"and\" that God the Father and the Son of God were not equal to the Holy Spirit. Under Arianism, Christ was instead not consubstantial with God the Father since both the Father and the Son under Arius were made of \"like\" essence or being (see homoiousia) but not of the same essence or being (see homoousia).\nIn the Arian view, God the Father is a deity and is divine \"and\" the Son of God is not a deity but divine (I, the LORD, am Deity alone.) God the Father sent Jesus to earth for salvation of mankind. Ousia is essence or being, in Eastern Christianity, and is the aspect of God that is completely incomprehensible to mankind and human perception. It is all that subsists by itself and which has not its being in another, God the Father and God the Son and God the Holy Spirit all being uncreated.\nAccording to the teaching of Arius, the preexistent Logos and thus the incarnate Jesus Christ was a begotten being; only the Son was directly begotten by God the Father, before ages, but was of a distinct, though similar, essence or substance from the Creator. His opponents argued that this would make Jesus less than God and that this was heretical. Much of the distinction between the differing factions was over the phrasing that Christ expressed in the New Testament to express submission to God the Father. The theological term for this submission is kenosis. This ecumenical council declared that Jesus Christ was true God, co-eternal and consubstantial (i.e., of the same substance) with God the Father.\nConstantine is believed to have exiled those who refused to accept the Nicaean Creed\u2014Arius himself, the deacon Euzoios, and the Libyan bishops Theonas of Marmarica and Secundus of Ptolemais\u2014and also the bishops who signed the creed but refused to join in condemnation of Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia and Theognis of Nicaea. The emperor also ordered all copies of the \"Thalia\", the book in which Arius had expressed his teachings, to be burned. However, there is no evidence that his son and ultimate successor, Constantius II, who was a Semi-Arian Christian, was exiled.\nAlthough he was committed to maintaining what the Great Church had defined at Nicaea, Constantine was also bent on pacifying the situation and eventually became more lenient toward those condemned and exiled at the council. First, he allowed Eusebius of Nicomedia, who was a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of his sister, and Theognis to return once they had signed an ambiguous statement of faith. The two, and other friends of Arius, worked for Arius's rehabilitation.\nAt the First Synod of Tyre in AD 335, they brought accusations against Athanasius, now bishop of Alexandria, the primary opponent of Arius. After this, Constantine had Athanasius banished since he considered him an impediment to reconciliation. In the same year, the Synod of Jerusalem under Constantine's direction readmitted Arius to communion in 336. Arius died on the way to this event in Constantinople. Some scholars suggest that Arius may have been poisoned by his opponents. Eusebius and Theognis remained in the Emperor's favor, and when Constantine, who had been a catechumen much of his adult life, accepted baptism on his deathbed, it was from Eusebius of Nicomedia.\nAftermath of Nicaea.\nThe First Council of Nicaea did not end the controversy, as many bishops of the Eastern provinces disputed the \"homoousios\", the central term of the Nicene Creed, as it had been used by Paul of Samosata, who had advocated a monarchianist Christology. Both the man and his teaching, including the term \"homoousios\", had been condemned by the Synods of Antioch in 269.\nHence, after Constantine's death in 337, open dispute resumed again. Constantine's son Constantius II, who had become emperor of the eastern part of the Roman Empire, actually encouraged the Arians and set out to reverse the Nicene Creed. His advisor in these affairs was Eusebius of Nicomedia, who had already at the Council of Nicaea been the head of the Arian party, who also was made the bishop of Constantinople.\nConstantius used his power to exile bishops adhering to the Nicene Creed, especially St Athanasius of Alexandria, who fled to Rome. In 355 Constantius became the sole Roman emperor and extended his pro-Arian policy toward the western provinces, frequently using force to push through his creed, even exiling Pope Liberius and installing Antipope Felix II.\nThe Third Council of Sirmium in 357 was the high point of Arianism. The Seventh Arian Confession (Second Sirmium Confession) held that both \"homoousios\" (of one substance) and \"homoiousios\" (of similar substance) were unbiblical and that the Father is greater than the Son. (This confession was later known as the Blasphemy of Sirmium.)\nBut since many persons are disturbed by questions concerning what is called in Latin \"substantia\", but in Greek \"ousia\", that is, to make it understood more exactly, as to 'coessential,' or what is called, 'like-in-essence,' there ought to be no mention of any of these at all, nor exposition of them in the Church, for this reason and for this consideration, that in divine Scripture nothing is written about them, and that they are above men's knowledge and above men's understanding;\nAs debates raged in an attempt to come up with a new formula, three camps evolved among the opponents of the Nicene Creed. The first group mainly opposed the Nicene terminology and preferred the term \"homoiousios\" (alike in substance) to the Nicene \"homoousios\", while they rejected Arius and his teaching and accepted the equality and co-eternality of the persons of the Trinity. Because of this centrist position, and despite their rejection of Arius, they were called \"Semi-Arians\" by their opponents. The second group also avoided invoking the name of Arius, but in large part followed Arius's teachings and, in another attempted compromise wording, described the Son as being like (\"homoios\") the Father. A third group explicitly called upon Arius and described the Son as unlike (\"anhomoios\") the Father. Constantius wavered in his support between the first and the second party, while harshly persecuting the third.\nEpiphanius of Salamis labeled the party of Basil of Ancyra in 358 \"Semi-Arianism\". This is considered unfair by Kelly who states that some members of the group were virtually orthodox from the start but disliked the adjective \"homoousios\" while others had moved in that direction after the out-and-out Arians had come into the open.\nThe debates among these groups resulted in numerous synods, among them the Council of Serdica in 343, the Fourth Council of Sirmium in 358 and the double Council of Rimini and Seleucia in 359, and no fewer than fourteen further creed formulas between 340 and 360, leading the pagan observer Ammianus Marcellinus to comment sarcastically: \"The highways were covered with galloping bishops.\" None of these attempts were acceptable to the defenders of Nicene orthodoxy; writing about the latter councils, Saint Jerome remarked that the world \"awoke with a groan to find itself Arian.\"\nAfter Constantius's death in 361, his successor Julian, a devotee of Rome's pagan gods, declared that he would no longer attempt to favor one church faction over another, and allowed all exiled bishops to return; this resulted in further increasing dissension among Nicene Christians. The emperor Valens, however, revived Constantius's policy and supported the \"Homoian\" party, exiling bishops and often using force. During this persecution many bishops were exiled to the other ends of the Roman Empire (e.g., Saint Hilary of Poitiers to the eastern provinces). These contacts and the common plight subsequently led to a rapprochement between the western supporters of the Nicene Creed and the \"homoousios\" and the eastern Semi-Arians.\nCouncil of Constantinople.\nIt was not until the co-reigns of Gratian and Theodosius that Arianism was effectively wiped out among the ruling class and elite of the Eastern Empire. Valens died in the Battle of Adrianople in 378 and was succeeded by Theodosius I, who adhered to the Nicene Creed. This allowed for settling the dispute. Theodosius's wife St Flacilla was instrumental in his campaign to end Arianism.\nTwo days after Theodosius arrived in Constantinople, 24 November 380, he expelled the Homoiousian bishop, Demophilus of Constantinople, and surrendered the churches of that city to Gregory of Nazianzus, the leader of the rather small Nicene community there, an act which provoked rioting. Theodosius had just been baptized, by bishop Acholius of Thessalonica, during a severe illness, as was common in the early Christian world. In February he and Gratian had published an edict that all their subjects should profess the faith of the bishops of Rome and Alexandria (i.e., the Nicene faith), or be handed over for punishment for not doing so.\nAlthough much of the church hierarchy in the East had opposed the Nicene Creed in the decades leading up to Theodosius's accession, he managed to achieve unity on the basis of the Nicene Creed. In 381, at the Second Ecumenical Council in Constantinople, a group of mainly Eastern bishops assembled and accepted the Nicene Creed of 381, which was supplemented in regard to the Holy Spirit, as well as some other changes: see Comparison of Nicene Creeds of 325 and 381. This is generally considered the end of the dispute about the Trinity and the end of Arianism among the Roman, non-Germanic peoples.\nAmong medieval Germanic tribes.\nDuring the time of Arianism's flowering in Constantinople, the Gothic convert and Arian bishop Ulfilas (later the subject of the letter of Auxentius cited above) was sent as a missionary to the Gothic tribes across the Danube, a mission favored for political reasons by the Emperor Constantius II. The Homoians in the Danubian provinces played a major role in the conversion of the Goths to Arianism. Ulfilas's translation of the Bible into Gothic language and his initial success in converting the Goths to Arianism was strengthened by later events; the conversion of Goths led to a widespread diffusion of Arianism among other Germanic tribes as well (Vandals, Langobards, Svevi, and Burgundians). When the Germanic peoples entered the provinces of the Western Roman Empire and began founding their own kingdoms there, most of them were Arian Christians.\nThe conflict in the 4th century had seen Arian and Nicene factions struggling for control of Western Europe. In contrast, among the Arian German kingdoms established in the collapsing Western Empire in the 5th century were entirely separate Arian and Nicene Churches with parallel hierarchies, each serving different sets of believers. The Germanic elites were Arians, and the Romance majority population was Nicene.\nThe Arian Germanic tribes were generally tolerant towards Nicene Christians and other religious minorities, including the Jews.\nThe apparent resurgence of Arianism after Nicaea was more an anti-Nicene reaction exploited by Arian sympathizers than a pro-Arian development. By the end of the 4th century it had surrendered its remaining ground to Trinitarianism. In Western Europe, Arianism, which had been taught by Ulfilas, the Arian missionary to the Germanic tribes, was dominant among the Goths, Langobards and Vandals. By the 8th century, it had ceased to be the tribes' mainstream belief as the tribal rulers gradually came to adopt Nicene orthodoxy. This trend began in 496 with Clovis I of the Franks, then Reccared I of the Visigoths in 587 and Aripert I of the Lombards in 653.\nThe Franks and the Anglo-Saxons were unlike the other Germanic peoples in that they entered the Western Roman Empire as Pagans and were converted to Chalcedonian Christianity, led by their kings, Clovis I of the Franks, and \u00c6thelberht of Kent and others in Britain (see also Christianity in Gaul and Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England). The remaining tribes \u2013 the Vandals and the Ostrogoths \u2013 did not convert as a people nor did they maintain territorial cohesion. Having been militarily defeated by the armies of Emperor Justinian I, the remnants were dispersed to the fringes of the empire and became lost to history. The Vandalic War of 533\u2013534 dispersed the defeated Vandals. Following their final defeat at the Battle of Mons Lactarius in 553, the Ostrogoths went back north and (re)settled in south Austria.\nFrom the 5th to the 7th century.\nMuch of south-eastern Europe and central Europe, including many of the Goths and Vandals respectively, had embraced Arianism (the Visigoths converted to Arian Christianity in 376 through their bishop Wulfila), which led to Arianism being a religious factor in various wars in the Roman Empire. In the west, organized Arianism survived in North Africa, in Hispania, and parts of Italy until it was finally suppressed in the 6th and 7th centuries. Visigothic Spain converted to Nicene Christianity through their king Reccared I at the Third Council of Toledo in 589. Grimoald, King of the Lombards (662\u2013671), and his young son and successor Garibald (671), were the last Arian kings in Europe.\nFrom the 16th to the 19th century.\nFollowing the Protestant Reformation from 1517, it did not take long for Arian and other nontrinitarian views to resurface. The first recorded English antitrinitarian was John Assheton, who was forced to recant before Thomas Cranmer in 1548. At the Anabaptist Council of Venice 1550, the early Italian instigators of the Radical Reformation committed to the views of Michael Servetus, who was burned alive by the orders of John Calvin in 1553, and these were promulgated by Giorgio Biandrata and others into Poland and Transylvania.\nThe antitrinitarian wing of the Polish Reformation separated from the Calvinist \"ecclesia maior\" to form the \"ecclesia minor\" or Polish Brethren. These were commonly referred to as \"Arians\" due to their rejection of the Trinity, though in fact the Socinians, as they were later known, went further than Arius to the position of Photinus. The epithet \"Arian\" was also applied to the early Unitarians such as John Biddle, though in denial of the pre-existence of Christ they were again largely Socinians, not Arians.\nIn 1683, when Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury, lay dying in Amsterdam\u2014driven into exile by his outspoken opposition to King Charles II\u2014he spoke to the minister Robert Ferguson, and professed himself an Arian.\nIn the 18th century the \"dominant trend\" in Britain, particularly in Latitudinarianism, was towards Arianism, with which the names of Samuel Clarke, Benjamin Hoadly, William Whiston and Isaac Newton are associated. To quote the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\"'s article on Arianism: \"In modern times some Unitarians are virtually Arians in that they are unwilling either to reduce Christ to a mere human being or to attribute to him a divine nature identical with that of the Father.\"\nA similar view was held by the ancient anti-Nicene Pneumatomachi (Greek: , \"breath\" or \"spirit\" and \"fighters\", combining as \"fighters against the spirit\"), so called because they opposed the deifying of the Nicene Holy Ghost. Although the Pneumatomachi's beliefs were somewhat reminiscent of Arianism, they were a distinct group.\nToday.\nMany American Evangelicals agree that Jesus is not eternal but is the greatest creature made by God. The percentage of Evangelicals that agree with this statement range between 44% and 68%.\nThe teachings of the first two ecumenical councils\u2014which entirely reject Arianism\u2014are held by the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Assyrian Church of the East and almost all historic Protestant churches (including Lutheran, Reformed {Presbyterian, Continental Reformed, and Congregationalist}, Anglican, Methodist, Baptist, and Free Evangelical) entirely reject the teachings associated with Arianism. Modern groups which currently appear to embrace some of the principles of Arianism include Unitarians and Jehovah's Witnesses. Although the origins of their beliefs are not necessarily attributed to the teachings of Arius, many of the core beliefs of Unitarians and Jehovah's Witnesses are very similar to them.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witnesses are often referred to as \"modern-day Arians,\" usually by their opponents, although Jehovah's Witnesses themselves have denied these claims. Significant similarities in doctrine include the identification of the Father as the only true God and of Jesus Christ as the first creation of God and the intermediate agent in the creation of all other things. Jehovah's Witnesses differ from Arians by stating that the Son can fully know the Father (something which Arius himself denied). They also deny the personhood of the Holy Spirit, which some Arians historically affirmed. Jehovah's Witnesses exclusively worship and pray to God the Father, or Jehovah, only through Jesus the son as a mediator.\nIglesia ni Cristo.\nWhile Iglesia ni Cristo's christology has parallels with Arianism in that it affirms that the Father is the only true God, it denies the preexistence of Christ. Thus, Iglesia ni Cristo is Socinian rather than Arian in its Christology.\nOther Socinian groups.\nOther Biblical Unitarians such as the Christadelphians and Church of God General Conference are also typically Socinian rather than Arian in their Christology.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) teaches a nontrinitarian theology concerning the nature of the Godhead. Similarities between LDS doctrines and Arianism were alleged as early as 1846. However, there are a number of key differences between Arianism and Latter-day Saint theology. Whereas Arianism is a unitarian Christian form of classical theism, Latter-day Saint theology is a non-trinitarian (but not unitarian) form of Christianity outside of classical theism. Whereas Arianism teaches that God is eternal, was never a man, and could not incarnate as a man, the LDS Church teaches that \"God Himself is an exalted man, perfected, enthroned, and supreme.\" Whereas Arianism denies that humans can become gods, the LDS Church affirms that humans can become gods through exaltation. Whereas Arianism teaches that the Son was created, the LDS Church teaches that he was procreated as a literal spirit child of the Heavenly Father and the Heavenly Mother. Whereas the creation of Christ ex nihilo is a fundamental premise of Arianism, the LDS Church denies any form of creation \"ex nihilo\". Whereas Arianism teaches that God is incorporeal, the LDS Church teaches that God has a body of flesh of bones: \"The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us.\" Whereas Arianism traditionally taught that God is incomprehensible even to the Son, the LDS Church rejects the doctrine that God is incomprehensible. Whereas Arianism teaches that Christ is ontologically inferior and subordinate to the Father, the LDS Church teaches that Christ is equal in power and glory with the Father. The two should therefore be carefully distinguished; they are more similar in what they deny than in what they affirm.\nThe LDS Church teaches that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are three separate beings united in purpose: \"the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost)... are three physically separate beings, but fully one in love, purpose and will\", as illustrated in Jesus' Farewell Prayer, his baptism at the hands of John, his transfiguration, and the martyrdom of Stephen. Thus, the church's first Article of Faith states: \"We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.\" Latter-day Saints believe that the three are collectively \"one eternal God\" but reject the Nicene definition of the Trinity (that the three are consubstantial). In some respects, Latter-day Saint theology is more similar to Social Trinitarianism than to Arianism.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "1254", "revid": "17517001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1254", "title": "August 1", "text": "Day of the yearAugust 1 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1255", "revid": "19382112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1255", "title": "Astronomical Units", "text": ""}
{"id": "1256", "revid": "1159932049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1256", "title": "Antoninus Pius", "text": "Roman emperor from 138 to 161\nTitus Aelius Hadrianus Antoninus Pius (19 September 86\u00a0\u2013 7 March 161) was Roman emperor from 138 to 161. He was the fourth of the Five Good Emperors from the Nerva\u2013Antonine dynasty.\nBorn into a senatorial family, Antoninus held various offices during the reign of Emperor Hadrian. He married Hadrian's niece Faustina, and Hadrian adopted him as his son and successor shortly before his death. Antoninus acquired the cognomen Pius after his accession to the throne, either because he compelled the Senate to deify his adoptive father, or because he had saved senators sentenced to death by Hadrian in his later years. His reign is notable for the peaceful state of the Empire, with no major revolts or military incursions during this time. A successful military campaign in southern Scotland early in his reign resulted in the construction of the Antonine Wall.\nAntoninus was an effective administrator, leaving his successors a large surplus in the treasury, expanding free access to drinking water throughout the Empire, encouraging legal conformity, and facilitating the enfranchisement of freed slaves. He died of illness in 161 and was succeeded by his adopted sons Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus as co-emperors.\nEarly life.\nChildhood and family.\nAntoninus Pius was born Titus Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Antoninus near Lanuvium (modern-day Lanuvio) in Italy to Titus Aurelius Fulvus, consul in 86, and wife Arria Fadilla The Aurelii Fulvi were an Aurelian family settled in Nemausus (modern N\u00eemes). Titus Aurelius Fulvus was the son of a senator of the same name, who, as legate of Legio III Gallica, had supported Vespasian in his bid to the Imperial office and been rewarded with a suffect consulship, plus an ordinary one under Domitian in 85. The Aurelii Fulvi were therefore a relatively new senatorial family from Gallia Narbonensis whose rise to prominence was supported by the Flavians. The link between Antoninus' family and their home province explains the increasing importance of the post of proconsul of Gallia Narbonensis during the late second century.\nAntoninus' father had no other children and died shortly after his 89 ordinary consulship. Antoninus was raised by his maternal grandfather Gnaeus Arrius Antoninus, reputed by contemporaries to be a man of integrity and culture and a friend of Pliny the Younger. The Arrii Antonini were an older senatorial family from Italy, very influential during Nerva's reign. Arria Fadilla, Antoninus' mother, married afterwards Publius Julius Lupus, suffect consul in 98; from that marriage came two daughters, Arria Lupula and Julia Fadilla.\nMarriage and children.\nSome time between 110 and 115, Antoninus married Annia Galeria Faustina the Elder. They are believed to have enjoyed a happy marriage. Faustina was the daughter of consul Marcus Annius Verus (II) and Rupilia Faustina (a step-sister to the Empress Vibia Sabina). Faustina was a beautiful woman, and despite rumours about her character, it is clear that Antoninus cared for her deeply.\nFaustina bore Antoninus four children, two sons and two daughters. They were:\nWhen Faustina died in 141, Antoninus was greatly distressed. In honour of her memory, he asked the Senate to deify her as a goddess, and authorised the construction of a temple to be built in the Roman Forum in her name, with priestesses serving in her temple. He had various coins with her portrait struck in her honor. These coins were scripted \"DIVA FAUSTINA\" and were elaborately decorated. He further founded a charity, calling it \"Puellae Faustinianae\" or \"Girls of Faustina\", which assisted destitute girls of good family. Finally, Antoninus created a new \"alimenta\", a Roman welfare programme, as part of \"Cura Annonae\".\nThe emperor never remarried. Instead, he lived with Galeria Lysistrate, one of Faustina's freed women. Concubinage was a form of female companionship sometimes chosen by powerful men in Ancient Rome, especially widowers like Vespasian, and Marcus Aurelius. Their union could not produce any legitimate offspring who could threaten any heirs, such as those of Antoninus. Also, as one could not have a wife and an official concubine (or two concubines) at the same time, Antoninus avoided being pressed into a marriage with a noblewoman from another family. (Later, Marcus Aurelius would also reject the advances of his former fianc\u00e9e Ceionia Fabia, Lucius Verus's sister, on the grounds of protecting his children from a stepmother, and took a concubine instead.)\nFavour with Hadrian.\nHaving filled the offices of quaestor and praetor with more than usual success, he obtained the consulship in 120 having as his colleague Lucius Catilius Severus. He was next appointed by the Emperor Hadrian as one of the four proconsuls to administer Italia, his district including Etruria, where he had estates. He then greatly increased his reputation by his conduct as proconsul of Asia, probably during 134\u2013135.\nHe acquired much favor with Hadrian, who adopted him as his son and successor on 25 February 138, after the death of his first adopted son Lucius Aelius, on the condition that Antoninus would in turn adopt Marcus Annius Verus, the son of his wife's brother, and Lucius, son of Lucius Aelius, who afterwards became the emperors Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus. He also adopted (briefly) the name Imperator Titus Aelius Caesar Antoninus, in preparation for his rule. There seems to have been some opposition to Antoninus' appointment on the part of other potential claimants, among them his former consular colleague Lucius Catilius Severus, then prefect of the city. Nevertheless, Antoninus assumed power without opposition.\nEmperor.\nOn his accession, Antoninus' name and style became \"Imperator Caesar Titus Aelius Hadrianus Antoninus Augustus Pontifex Maximus\". One of his first acts as Emperor was to persuade the Senate to grant divine honours to Hadrian, which they had at first refused; his efforts to persuade the Senate to grant these honours is the most likely reason given for his title of \"Pius\" (dutiful in affection; compare \"pietas\"). Two other reasons for this title are that he would support his aged father-in-law with his hand at Senate meetings, and that he had saved those men that Hadrian, during his period of ill-health, had condemned to death.\nImmediately after Hadrian's death, Antoninus approached Marcus and requested that his marriage arrangements be amended: Marcus' betrothal to Ceionia Fabia would be annulled, and he would be betrothed to Faustina, Antoninus' daughter, instead. Faustina's betrothal to Ceionia's brother Lucius Commodus would also have to be annulled. Marcus consented to Antoninus' proposal.\nAntoninus built temples, theaters, and mausoleums, promoted the arts and sciences, and bestowed honours and financial rewards upon the teachers of rhetoric and philosophy. Antoninus made few initial changes when he became emperor, leaving intact as far as possible the arrangements instituted by Hadrian. Epigraphical and prosopographical research has revealed that Antoninus' imperial ruling team centered around a group of closely knit senatorial families, most of them members of the priestly congregation for the cult of Hadrian, the \"sodales Hadrianales\". According to the German historian H.G. Pflaum, prosopographical research of Antoninus' ruling team allows us to grasp the deeply conservative character of the ruling senatorial caste.\nLack of warfare.\nThere are no records of any military related acts in his time in which he participated. One modern scholar has written \"It is almost certain not only that at no time in his life did he ever see, let alone command, a Roman army, but that, throughout the twenty-three years of his reign, he never went within five hundred miles of a legion.\"\nHis reign was the most peaceful in the entire history of the Principate, notwithstanding the fact that there were several military disturbances in the Empire in his time. Such disturbances happened in Mauretania, where a senator was named as governor of Mauretania Tingitana in place of the usual equestrian procurator and cavalry reinforcements from Pannonia were brought in, towns such as Sala and Tipasa being fortified. Similar disturbances took place in Judea, and amongst the Brigantes in Britannia; however, these were considered less serious than prior (and later) revolts among both. It was however in Britain that Antoninus decided to follow a new, more aggressive path, with the appointment of a new governor in 139, Quintus Lollius Urbicus, a native of Numidia and previously governor of Germania Inferior as well as a new man.\nUnder instructions from the emperor, Lollius undertook an invasion of southern Scotland, winning some significant victories, and constructing the Antonine Wall from the Firth of Forth to the Firth of Clyde. The wall, however, was soon gradually decommissioned during the mid-150s and eventually abandoned late during the reign (early 160s), for reasons that are still not quite clear. Antonine's Wall is mentioned in just one literary source, Antoninus' biography in the \"Historia Augusta\". Pausanias makes a brief and confused mention of a war in Britain. In one inscription honouring Antoninus, erected by Legio II Augusta, which participated in the building of the Wall, a relief showing four naked prisoners, one of them beheaded, seems to stand for some actual warfare.\nAlthough Antonine's Wall was, in principle, much shorter (37 miles in length as opposed to 73), and at first sight more defensible than Hadrian's Wall, the additional area that it enclosed within the Empire was barren, with land use for grazing already in decay. This meant that supply lines to the wall were strained enough such as the costs for maintaining the additional territory outweighed the benefits of doing so. Also, in the absence of urban development and the ensuing Romanization process, the rear of the wall could not be lastingly pacified.\nIt has been therefore speculated that the invasion of Lowland Scotland and the building of the wall had to do mostly with internal politics, that is, offering Antoninus an opportunity to gain some modicum of necessary military prestige at the start of his reign. Actually, the campaign in Britannia was followed by an Imperial salutation, that is, by Antoninus formally taking for the second (and last) time the title of Imperator\u00a0in 142. The fact that around the same time coins were struck announcing a victory in Britain points to Antoninus' need to publicise his achievements. The orator Fronto was later to say that, although Antoninus bestowed the direction of the British campaign to others, he should be regarded as the helmsman who directed the voyage, whose glory, therefore, belonged to him.\nThat this quest for some military achievement responded to an actual need is proved by the fact that, although generally peaceful, Antoninus' reign was not free from attempts at usurpation: \"Historia Augusta\" mentions two, made by the senators Cornelius Priscianus (\"for disturbing the peace of Spain\"; Priscianus had also been Lollius Urbicus' successor as governor of Britain) and Atilius Rufius Titianus (possibly a troublemaker already exiled under Hadrian). Both attempts are confirmed by the Fasti Ostienses as well as by the erasing of Priscianus' name from an inscription. In both cases, Antoninus was not in formal charge of the ensuing repression: Priscianus committed suicide and Titianus was found guilty by the Senate, with Antoninus abstaining from sequestering their families' properties.\nThere were also some troubles in Dacia Inferior which required the granting of additional powers to the procurator governor and the dispatch of additional soldiers to the province. On the northern Black Sea coast, the Greek city of Olbia was held against the Scythians. Also during his reign the governor of Upper Germany, probably Caius Popillius Carus Pedo, built new fortifications in the Agri Decumates, advancing the Limes Germanicus fifteen miles forward in his province and neighboring Raetia. In the East, Roman suzerainty over Armenia was retained by the choice in AD 140 of Arsacid scion Sohaemus as client king.\nNevertheless, Antoninus was virtually unique among emperors in that he dealt with these crises without leaving Italy once during his reign, but instead dealt with provincial matters of war and peace through their governors or through imperial letters to the cities such as Ephesus (of which some were publicly displayed). This style of government was highly praised by his contemporaries and by later generations.\nAntoninus was the last Roman Emperor recognised by the Indian Kingdoms, especially the Kushan Empire. Raoul McLaughlin quotes Aurelius Victor as saying \"The Indians, the Bactrians, and the Hyrcanians all sent ambassadors to Antoninus. They had all heard about the spirit of justice held by this great emperor, justice that was heightened by his handsome and grave countenance, and his slim and vigorous figure.\" Due to the outbreak of the Antonine epidemic and wars against northern Germanic tribes, the reign of Marcus Aurelius was forced to alter the focus of foreign policies, and matters relating to the Far East were increasingly abandoned in favour of those directly concerning the Empire's survival.\nEconomy and administration.\nAntoninus was regarded as a skilled administrator and as a builder. In spite of an extensive building directive\u2014the free access of the people of Rome to drinking water was expanded with the construction of aqueducts, not only in Rome but throughout the Empire, as well as bridges and roads\u2014the emperor still managed to leave behind a sizable public treasury of around 2.7 billion sesterces. Rome would not witness another Emperor leaving his successor with a surplus for a long time, but this treasury was depleted almost immediately after Antoninus's reign due to the Antonine Plague brought back by soldiers after the Parthian victory.\nThe Emperor also famously suspended the collection of taxes from cities affected by natural disasters, such as when fires struck Rome and Narbona, and earthquakes affected Rhodes and the Province of Asia. He offered hefty financial grants for rebuilding and recovery of various Greek cities after two serious earthquakes: the first, \"circa\" 140, which affected mostly Rhodes and other islands; the second, in 152, which hit Cyzicus (where the huge and newly built Temple to Hadrian was destroyed), Ephesus, and Smyrna. Antoninus' financial help earned him praise by Greek writers such as Aelius Aristides and Pausanias. These cities received from Antoninus the usual honorific accolades, such as when he commanded that all governors of Asia should enter the province, when taking office, by way of Ephesus. Ephesus was specially favoured by Antoninus, who confirmed and upheld its distinction of having two temples for the imperial cult (neocorate), therefore having first place in the list of imperial honor titles, surpassing both Smyrna and Pergamon.\nIn his dealings with Greek-speaking cities, Antoninus followed the policy adopted by Hadrian of ingratiating himself with local elites, especially with local intellectuals: philosophers, teachers of literature, rhetoricians and physicians were explicitly exempted from any duties involving private spending for civic purposes, a privilege granted by Hadrian that Antoninus confirmed by means of an edict preserved in the Digest (27.1.6.8). Antoninus also created a chair for the teaching of rhetoric in Athens.\nAntoninus was known as an avid observer of rites of religion and of formal celebrations, both Roman and foreign. He is known for having increasingly formalized the official cult offered to the Great Mother, which from his reign onwards included a bull sacrifice, a taurobolium, formerly only a private ritual, now being also performed for the sake of the Emperor's welfare. Antoninus also offered patronage to the worship of Mithras, to whom he erected a temple in Ostia. In 148, he presided over the celebrations of the 900th anniversary of the founding of Rome.\nLegal reforms.\nAntoninus tried to portray himself as a magistrate of the \"res publica\", no matter how extended and ill-defined his competencies were. He is credited with the splitting of the imperial treasury, the fiscus. This splitting had to do with the division of imperial properties into two parts. Firstly, the fiscus itself, or \"patrimonium\", meaning the properties of the \"Crown\", the hereditary properties of each succeeding person that sat on the throne, transmitted to his successors in office, regardless of their previous membership in the imperial family. Secondly, the \"res privata\", the \"private\" properties tied to the personal maintenance of the Emperor and his family, something like a Privy Purse. An anecdote in the \"Historia Augusta\" biography, where Antoninus replies to Faustina (who complained about his stinginess) that \"we have gained an empire [and] lost even what we had before\" possibly relates to Antoninus' actual concerns at the creation of the \"res privata\". While still a private citizen, Antoninus had increased his personal fortune greatly by mean of various legacies, the consequence of his caring scrupulously for his relatives. Also, Antoninus left behind him a reputation for stinginess and was probably determined not to leave his personal property to be \"swallowed up by the demands of the imperial throne\".\nThe \"res privata\" lands could be sold and/or given away, while the \"patrimonium\" properties were regarded as public. It was a way of pretending that the Imperial function\u2014and most properties attached to it\u2014was a public one, formally subject to the authority of the Senate and the Roman people. That the distinction played no part in subsequent political history\u2014that the \"personal\" power of the princeps absorbed his role as office-holder\u2014proves that the autocratic logic of the imperial order had already subsumed the old republican institutions.\nOf the public transactions of this period there is only the scantiest of information, but, to judge by what is extant, those twenty-two years were not remarkably eventful in comparison to those before and after the reign. However, Antoninus did take a great interest in the revision and practice of the law throughout the empire. One of his chief concerns was to having local communities conform their legal procedures to existing Roman norms: in a case concerning repression of banditry by local police officers (\"irenarchs\", Greek for \"peace keepers\") in Asia Minor, Antoninus ordered that these officers should not treat suspects as already condemned, and also keep a detailed copy of their interrogations, to be used in the possibility of an appeal to the Roman governor. Also, although Antoninus was not an innovator, he would not always follow the absolute letter of the law; rather he was driven by concerns over humanity and equality, and introduced into Roman law many important new principles based upon this notion.\nIn this, the emperor was assisted by five chief lawyers: Lucius Fulvius Aburnius Valens, an author of legal treatises; Lucius Ulpius Marcellus, a prolific writer; and three others. Of these three, the most prominent was Lucius Volusius Maecianus, a former military officer turned by Antoninus into a civil procurator, and who, in view of his subsequent career (discovered on the basis of epigraphical and prosopographical research), was the Emperor's most important legal adviser. Maecianus would eventually be chosen to occupy various prefectures (see below) as well as to conduct the legal studies of Marcus Aurelius. He was also the author of a large work on \"Fidei commissa\" (Testamentary Trusts). As a hallmark of the increased connection between jurists and the imperial government, Antoninus' reign also saw the appearance of the \"Institutes\" of Gaius, an elementary legal textbook for beginners.\nAntoninus passed measures to facilitate the enfranchisement of slaves. Mostly, he favoured the principle of \"favor libertatis\", giving the putative freedman the benefit of the doubt when the claim to freedom was not clearcut. Also, he punished the killing of a slave by his/her master without previous trial and determined that slaves could be forcibly sold to another master by a proconsul in cases of consistent mistreatment. Antoninus upheld the enforcement of contracts for selling of female slaves forbidding their further employment in prostitution. In criminal law, Antoninus introduced the important principle that accused persons are not to be treated as guilty before trial, as in the case of the irenarchs (see above). It was to Antoninus that the Christian apologist Justin Martyr addressed his defense of the Christian faith, reminding him of his father's (Emperor Hadrian's) rule that accusations against Christians required proof. Antoninus also asserted the principle that the trial was to be held, and the punishment inflicted, in the place where the crime had been committed. He mitigated the use of torture in examining slaves by certain limitations. Thus he prohibited the application of torture to children under fourteen years, though this rule had exceptions. However, it must be stressed that Antoninus \"extended\", by means of a rescript, the use of torture as a means of obtaining evidence to pecuniary cases, when it had been applied up until then only in criminal cases. Also, already at the time torture of free men of low status (\"humiliores\") had become legal, as proved by the fact that Antoninus exempted town councillors expressly from it, and also free men of high rank (\"honestiores\") in general.\nOne highlight during his reign occurred in 148, with the nine-hundredth anniversary of the foundation of Rome being celebrated by the hosting of magnificent games in Rome. It lasted a number of days, and a host of exotic animals were killed, including elephants, giraffes, tigers, rhinoceroses, crocodiles and hippopotamuses. While this increased Antoninus's popularity, the frugal emperor had to debase the Roman currency. He decreased the silver purity of the denarius from 89% to 83.5, the actual silver weight dropping from 2.88\u00a0grams to 2.68\u00a0grams.\nScholars name Antoninus Pius as the leading candidate for an individual identified as a friend of Rabbi Judah the Prince. According to the Talmud (Avodah Zarah 10a\u2013b), Rabbi Judah was very wealthy and greatly revered in Rome. He had a close friendship with \"Antoninus\", possibly Antoninus Pius, who would consult Rabbi Judah on various worldly and spiritual matters.\nDiplomatic mission to China.\nThe first group of people claiming to be an ambassadorial mission of Romans to China was recorded in 166 AD by the \"Hou Hanshu\". Harper (2017) states that the embassy was likely to be a group of merchants, as many Roman merchants traveled to India and some might have gone beyond, while there are no records of official ambassadors of Rome travelling as far east. The group came to Emperor Huan of Han China and claimed to be an embassy from \"Andun\" (; for \"Anton\"-inus), \"king of Daqin\" (Rome). As Antoninus Pius died in 161, leaving the empire to his adoptive son Marcus Aurelius (Antoninus), and the envoy arrived in 166, confusion remains about who sent the mission, given that both Emperors were named \"Antoninus\". The Roman mission came from the south (therefore probably by sea), entering China by the frontier province of Jiaozhi at Rinan or Tonkin (present-day northern Vietnam). It brought presents of rhinoceros horns, ivory, and tortoise shell, probably acquired in South Asia. The text specifically states that it was the first time there had been direct contact between the two countries.\nFurthermore, a piece of Republican-era Roman glassware has been found at a Western Han tomb in Guangzhou along the South China Sea, dated to the early 1st century BC. Roman golden medallions made during the reign of Antoninus Pius and perhaps even Marcus Aurelius have been found at \u00d3c Eo in southern Vietnam, then part of the Kingdom of Funan near the Chinese province of Jiaozhi. This may have been the port city of Kattigara, described by Ptolemy (c.\u2009150) as being visited by a Greek sailor named Alexander and lying beyond the Golden Chersonese (i.e., Malay Peninsula). Roman coins from the reigns of Tiberius to Aurelian have been discovered in Xi'an, China (site of the Han capital Chang'an), although the significantly greater amount of Roman coins unearthed in India suggest the Roman maritime trade for purchasing Chinese silk was centered there, not in China or even the overland Silk Road running through ancient Iran.\nDeath and legacy.\nIn 156, Antoninus Pius turned 70. He found it difficult to keep himself upright without stays. He started nibbling on dry bread to give him the strength to stay awake through his morning receptions.\nMarcus Aurelius had already been created consul with Antoninus in 140, receiving the title of Caesar, i.e., heir apparent. As Antoninus aged, Marcus took on more administrative duties. Marcus's administrative duties increased again after the death, in 156 or 157, of one of Antoninus' most trusted advisers, Marcus Gavius Maximus.\nFor twenty years, Gavius Maximus had been praetorian prefect, an office that was as much secretarial as military. Gavius Maximus had been awarded with the consular insignia and the honours due a senator. He had a reputation as a most strict disciplinarian (\"vir severissimus\", according to \"Historia Augusta\") and some fellow equestrian procurators held lasting grudges against him. A procurator named Gaius Censorius Niger died while Gavius Maximus was alive. In his will, Censorius Niger vilified Maximus, creating serious embarrassment for one of the heirs, the orator Fronto.\nGavius Maximus' death initiated a change in the ruling team. It has been speculated that it was the legal adviser Lucius Volusius Maecianus who assumed the role of grey eminence. Maecianus was briefly Praefect of Egypt, and subsequently Praefectus annonae in Rome. If it was Maecianus who rose to prominence, he may have risen precisely in order to prepare the incoming\u00a0\u2014 and unprecedented\u00a0\u2014 joint succession. In 160, Marcus and Lucius were designated joint consuls for the following year. Perhaps Antoninus was already ill; in any case, he died before the year was out, probably on 7 March.\nTwo days before his death, the biographer reports, Antoninus was at his ancestral estate at Lorium, in Etruria, about from Rome. He ate Alpine Gruyere cheese at dinner quite greedily. In the night he vomited; he had a fever the next day. The day after that, he summoned the imperial council, and passed the state and his daughter to Marcus. The emperor gave the keynote to his life in the last word that he uttered: when the tribune of the night-watch came to ask the password, he responded, \"aequanimitas\" (equanimity). He then turned over, as if going to sleep, and died. His death closed out the longest reign since Augustus (surpassing Tiberius by a couple of months). His record for the second-longest reign would be unbeaten for 168 years, until 329 when it was surpassed by Constantine the Great.\nAntoninus Pius' funeral ceremonies were, in the words of the biographer, \"elaborate\". If his funeral followed the pattern of past funerals, his body would have been incinerated on a pyre at the Campus Martius, while his spirit would rise to the gods' home in the heavens. However, it seems that this was not the case: according to his \"Historia Augusta\" biography (which seems to reproduce an earlier, detailed report) Antoninus' body (and not his ashes) was buried in Hadrian's mausoleum. After a seven-day interval (\"justitium\"), Marcus and Lucius nominated their father for deification. In contrast to their behaviour during Antoninus' campaign to deify Hadrian, the senate did not oppose the emperors' wishes. A \"flamen\", or cultic priest, was appointed to minister the cult of the deified Antoninus, now \"Divus Antoninus\".\nA column was dedicated to Antoninus on the Campus Martius, and the temple he had built in the Forum in 141 to his deified wife Faustina was rededicated to the deified Faustina and the deified Antoninus. It survives as the church of San Lorenzo in Miranda.\nHistoriography.\nThe only intact account of his life handed down to us is that of the \"Augustan History\", an unreliable and mostly fabricated work. Nevertheless, it still contains information that is considered reasonably sound; for instance, it is the only source that mentions the erection of the Antonine Wall in Britain. Antoninus is unique among Roman emperors in that he has no other biographies.\nAntoninus in many ways was the ideal of the landed gentleman praised not only by ancient Romans, but also by later scholars of classical history, such as Edward Gibbon or the author of the article on Antoninus Pius in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A few months afterwards, on Hadrian's death, he was enthusiastically welcomed to the throne by the Roman people, who, for once, were not disappointed in their anticipation of a happy reign. For Antoninus came to his new office with simple tastes, kindly disposition, extensive experience, a well-trained intelligence and the sincerest desire for the welfare of his subjects. Instead of plundering to support his prodigality, he emptied his private treasury to assist distressed provinces and cities, and everywhere exercised rigid economy (hence the nickname \u03ba\u03c5\u03bc\u03b9\u03bd\u03bf\u03c0\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \"cummin-splitter\"). Instead of exaggerating into treason whatever was susceptible of unfavorable interpretation, he turned the very conspiracies that were formed against him into opportunities for demonstrating his clemency. Instead of stirring up persecution against the Christians, he extended to them the strong hand of his protection throughout the empire. Rather than give occasion to that oppression which he regarded as inseparable from an emperor's progress through his dominions, he was content to spend all the years of his reign in Rome, or its neighbourhood.\nSome historians have a less positive view of his reign. According to the historian J. B. Bury,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;however estimable the man, Antoninus was hardly a great statesman. The rest which the Empire enjoyed under his auspices had been rendered possible through Hadrian's activity, and was not due to his own exertions; on the other hand, he carried the policy of peace at any price too far, and so entailed calamities on the state after his death. He not only had no originality or power of initiative, but he had not even the insight or boldness to work further on the new lines marked out by Hadrian.\nGerman historian Ernst Kornemann has had it in his \"R\u00f6mische Geschichte\" [2 vols., ed. by H. Bengtson, Stuttgart 1954] that the reign of Antoninus comprised \"a succession of grossly wasted opportunities\", given the upheavals that were to come. There is more to this argument, given that the Parthians in the East were themselves soon to make no small amount of mischief after Antoninus' death. Kornemann's brief is that Antoninus might have waged preventive wars to head off these outsiders. Michael Grant agrees that it is possible that had Antoninus acted decisively sooner (it appears that, on his death bed, he was preparing a large-scale action against the Parthians), the Parthians might have been unable to choose their own time, but current evidence is not conclusive. Grant opines that Antoninus and his officers did act in a resolute manner dealing with frontier disturbances of his time, although conditions for long-lasting peace were not created. On the whole, according to Grant, Marcus Aurelius' eulogistic picture of Antoninus seems deserved, and Antoninus appears to have been a conservative and nationalistic (although he respected and followed Hadrian's example of Philhellenism moderately) Emperor who was not tainted by the blood of either citizen or foe, combined and maintained Numa Pompilius' good fortune, pacific dutifulness and religious scrupulousness, and whose laws removed anomalies and softened harshnesses.\nKrzysztof Ulanowski argues that the claims of military inability are exaggerated, considering that although the sources praise Antoninus' love for peace and his efforts \"rather to defend, than enlarge the provinces\", he could hardly be considered a pacifist, as shown by the conquest of the Lowlands, the building of the Antonine Wall and the expansion of Germania Superior. Ulanowski also praises Antoninus for being successful in deterrence by diplomatic means.\nDescendants.\nAlthough only one of his four children survived to adulthood, Antoninus came to be ancestor to four generations of prominent Romans, including the Emperor Commodus. Hans-Georg Pflaum has identified five direct descendants of Antoninus and Faustina who were consuls in the first half of the third century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1259", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1259", "title": "August 3", "text": "Day of the yearAugust 3 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1260", "revid": "1160819034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1260", "title": "Advanced Encryption Standard", "text": "Standard for the encryption of electronic data\nThe Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), also known by its original name Rijndael (]), is a specification for the encryption of electronic data established by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in 2001.\nAES is a variant of the Rijndael block cipher developed by two Belgian cryptographers, Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen, who submitted a proposal to NIST during the AES selection process. Rijndael is a family of ciphers with different key and block sizes. For AES, NIST selected three members of the Rijndael family, each with a block size of 128 bits, but three different key lengths: 128, 192 and 256 bits.\nAES has been adopted by the U.S. government. It supersedes the Data Encryption Standard (DES), which was published in 1977. The algorithm described by AES is a symmetric-key algorithm, meaning the same key is used for both encrypting and decrypting the data.\nIn the United States, AES was announced by the NIST as U.S. FIPS PUB 197 (FIPS 197) on November 26, 2001. This announcement followed a five-year standardization process in which fifteen competing designs were presented and evaluated, before the Rijndael cipher was selected as the most suitable.\nAES is included in the ISO/IEC 18033-3 standard. AES became effective as a U.S. federal government standard on May 26, 2002, after approval by the U.S. Secretary of Commerce. AES is available in many different encryption packages, and is the first (and only) publicly accessible cipher approved by the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) for top secret information when used in an NSA approved cryptographic module.\nDefinitive standards.\nThe Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) is defined in each of:\nDescription of the ciphers.\nAES is based on a design principle known as a substitution\u2013permutation network, and is efficient in both software and hardware. Unlike its predecessor DES, AES does not use a Feistel network. AES is a variant of Rijndael, with a fixed block size of 128 bits, and a key size of 128, 192, or 256 bits. By contrast, Rijndael \"per se\" is specified with block and key sizes that may be any multiple of 32 bits, with a minimum of 128 and a maximum of 256 bits. Most AES calculations are done in a particular finite field.\nAES operates on a 4 \u00d7 4 column-major order array of 16 bytes termed the \"state\":\nformula_1\nThe key size used for an AES cipher specifies the number of transformation rounds that convert the input, called the plaintext, into the final output, called the ciphertext. The number of rounds are as follows:\nEach round consists of several processing steps, including one that depends on the encryption key itself. A set of reverse rounds are applied to transform ciphertext back into the original plaintext using the same encryption key.\nThe SubBytes step.\nIn the SubBytes step, each byte formula_2 in the \"state\" array is replaced with a SubByte formula_3 using an 8-bit substitution box. Note that before round 0, the \"state\" array is simply the plaintext/input. This operation provides the non-linearity in the cipher. The S-box used is derived from the multiplicative inverse over GF(28), known to have good non-linearity properties. To avoid attacks based on simple algebraic properties, the S-box is constructed by combining the inverse function with an invertible affine transformation. The S-box is also chosen to avoid any fixed points (and so is a derangement), i.e., formula_4, and also any opposite fixed points, i.e., formula_5.\nWhile performing the decryption, the InvSubBytes step (the inverse of SubBytes) is used, which requires first taking the inverse of the affine transformation and then finding the multiplicative inverse.\nThe ShiftRows step.\nThe ShiftRows step operates on the rows of the state; it cyclically shifts the bytes in each row by a certain offset. For AES, the first row is left unchanged. Each byte of the second row is shifted one to the left. Similarly, the third and fourth rows are shifted by offsets of two and three respectively. In this way, each column of the output state of the ShiftRows step is composed of bytes from each column of the input state. The importance of this step is to avoid the columns being encrypted independently, in which case AES would degenerate into four independent block ciphers.\nThe MixColumns step.\nIn the MixColumns step, the four bytes of each column of the state are combined using an invertible linear transformation. The MixColumns function takes four bytes as input and outputs four bytes, where each input byte affects all four output bytes. Together with ShiftRows, MixColumns provides diffusion in the cipher.\nDuring this operation, each column is transformed using a fixed matrix (matrix left-multiplied by column gives new value of column in the state):\nformula_6\nMatrix multiplication is composed of multiplication and addition of the entries. Entries are bytes treated as coefficients of polynomial of order formula_7. Addition is simply XOR. Multiplication is modulo irreducible polynomial formula_8. If processed bit by bit, then, after shifting, a conditional XOR with 1B16 should be performed if the shifted value is larger than FF16 (overflow must be corrected by subtraction of generating polynomial). These are special cases of the usual multiplication in formula_9.\nIn more general sense, each column is treated as a polynomial over formula_9 and is then multiplied modulo formula_11 with a fixed polynomial formula_12. The coefficients are displayed in their hexadecimal equivalent of the binary representation of bit polynomials from formula_13. The MixColumns step can also be viewed as a multiplication by the shown particular MDS matrix in the finite field formula_9. This process is described further in the article Rijndael MixColumns.\nThe AddRoundKey.\nIn the AddRoundKey step, the subkey is combined with the state. For each round, a subkey is derived from the main key using Rijndael's key schedule; each subkey is the same size as the state. The subkey is added by combining of the state with the corresponding byte of the subkey using bitwise XOR.\nOptimization of the cipher.\nOn systems with 32-bit or larger words, it is possible to speed up execution of this cipher by combining the SubBytes and ShiftRows steps with the MixColumns step by transforming them into a sequence of table lookups. This requires four 256-entry 32-bit tables (together occupying 4096 bytes). A round can then be performed with 16 table lookup operations and 12 32-bit exclusive-or operations, followed by four 32-bit exclusive-or operations in the AddRoundKey step. Alternatively, the table lookup operation can be performed with a single 256-entry 32-bit table (occupying 1024 bytes) followed by circular rotation operations.\nUsing a byte-oriented approach, it is possible to combine the SubBytes, ShiftRows, and MixColumns steps into a single round operation.\nSecurity.\nThe National Security Agency (NSA) reviewed all the AES finalists, including Rijndael, and stated that all of them were secure enough for U.S. Government non-classified data. In June 2003, the U.S. Government announced that AES could be used to protect classified information:\nThe design and strength of all key lengths of the AES algorithm (i.e., 128, 192 and 256) are sufficient to protect classified information up to the SECRET level. TOP SECRET information will require use of either the 192 or 256 key lengths. The implementation of AES in products intended to protect national security systems and/or information must be reviewed and certified by NSA prior to their acquisition and use.\nAES has 10 rounds for 128-bit keys, 12 rounds for 192-bit keys, and 14 rounds for 256-bit keys.\nBy 2006, the best known attacks were on 7 rounds for 128-bit keys, 8 rounds for 192-bit keys, and 9 rounds for 256-bit keys.\nKnown attacks.\nFor cryptographers, a cryptographic \"break\" is anything faster than a brute-force attack \u2013 i.e., performing one trial decryption for each possible key in sequence. A break can thus include results that are infeasible with current technology. Despite being impractical, theoretical breaks can sometimes provide insight into vulnerability patterns. The largest successful publicly known brute-force attack against a widely implemented block-cipher encryption algorithm was against a 64-bit RC5 key by distributed.net in 2006.\nThe key space increases by a factor of 2 for each additional bit of key length, and if every possible value of the key is equiprobable, this translates into a doubling of the average brute-force key search time. This implies that the effort of a brute-force search increases exponentially with key length. Key length in itself does not imply security against attacks, since there are ciphers with very long keys that have been found to be vulnerable.\nAES has a fairly simple algebraic framework. In 2002, a theoretical attack, named the \"XSL attack\", was announced by Nicolas Courtois and Josef Pieprzyk, purporting to show a weakness in the AES algorithm, partially due to the low complexity of its nonlinear components. Since then, other papers have shown that the attack, as originally presented, is unworkable; see XSL attack on block ciphers.\nDuring the AES selection process, developers of competing algorithms wrote of Rijndael's algorithm \"we are concerned about [its] use ... in security-critical applications.\" In October 2000, however, at the end of the AES selection process, Bruce Schneier, a developer of the competing algorithm Twofish, wrote that while he thought successful academic attacks on Rijndael would be developed someday, he \"did not believe that anyone will ever discover an attack that will allow someone to read Rijndael traffic.\"\nUntil May 2009, the only successful published attacks against the full AES were side-channel attacks on some specific implementations. In 2009, a new related-key attack was discovered that exploits the simplicity of AES's key schedule and has a complexity of 2119. In December 2009 it was improved to 299.5. This is a follow-up to an attack discovered earlier in 2009 by Alex Biryukov, Dmitry Khovratovich, and Ivica Nikoli\u0107, with a complexity of 296 for one out of every 235 keys. However, related-key attacks are not of concern in any properly designed cryptographic protocol, as a properly designed protocol (i.e., implementational software) will take care not to allow related keys, essentially by constraining an attacker's means of selecting keys for relatedness.\nAnother attack was blogged by Bruce Schneier\non July 30, 2009, and released as a preprint\non August 3, 2009. This new attack, by Alex Biryukov, Orr Dunkelman, Nathan Keller, Dmitry Khovratovich, and Adi Shamir, is against AES-256 that uses only two related keys and 239 time to recover the complete 256-bit key of a 9-round version, or 245 time for a 10-round version with a stronger type of related subkey attack, or 270 time for an 11-round version. 256-bit AES uses 14 rounds, so these attacks are not effective against full AES.\nThe practicality of these attacks with stronger related keys has been criticized, for instance, by the paper on chosen-key-relations-in-the-middle attacks on AES-128 authored by Vincent Rijmen in 2010.\nIn November 2009, the first known-key distinguishing attack against a reduced 8-round version of AES-128 was released as a preprint.\nThis known-key distinguishing attack is an improvement of the rebound, or the start-from-the-middle attack, against AES-like permutations, which view two consecutive rounds of permutation as the application of a so-called Super-S-box. It works on the 8-round version of AES-128, with a time complexity of 248, and a memory complexity of 232. 128-bit AES uses 10 rounds, so this attack is not effective against full AES-128.\nThe first key-recovery attacks on full AES were by Andrey Bogdanov, Dmitry Khovratovich, and Christian Rechberger, and were published in 2011. The attack is a biclique attack and is faster than brute force by a factor of about four. It requires 2126.2 operations to recover an AES-128 key. For AES-192 and AES-256, 2190.2 and 2254.6 operations are needed, respectively. This result has been further improved to 2126.0 for AES-128, 2189.9 for AES-192 and 2254.3 for AES-256, which are the current best results in key recovery attack against AES.\nThis is a very small gain, as a 126-bit key (instead of 128-bits) would still take billions of years to brute force on current and foreseeable hardware. Also, the authors calculate the best attack using their technique on AES with a 128-bit key requires storing 288 bits of data. That works out to about 38 trillion terabytes of data, which is more than all the data stored on all the computers on the planet in 2016. As such, there are no practical implications on AES security. The space complexity has later been improved to 256 bits, which is 9007 terabytes (while still keeping a time complexity of 2126.2).\nAccording to the Snowden documents, the NSA is doing research on whether a cryptographic attack based on tau statistic may help to break AES.\nAt present, there is no known practical attack that would allow someone without knowledge of the key to read data encrypted by AES when correctly implemented.\nSide-channel attacks.\nSide-channel attacks do not attack the cipher as a black box, and thus are not related to cipher security as defined in the classical context, but are important in practice. They attack implementations of the cipher on hardware or software systems that inadvertently leak data. There are several such known attacks on various implementations of AES.\nIn April 2005, D.\u00a0J. Bernstein announced a cache-timing attack that he used to break a custom server that used OpenSSL's AES encryption. The attack required over 200 million chosen plaintexts. The custom server was designed to give out as much timing information as possible (the server reports back the number of machine cycles taken by the encryption operation). However, as Bernstein pointed out, \"reducing the precision of the server's timestamps, or eliminating them from the server's responses, does not stop the attack: the client simply uses round-trip timings based on its local clock, and compensates for the increased noise by averaging over a larger number of samples\".\nIn October 2005, Dag Arne Osvik, Adi Shamir and Eran Tromer presented a paper demonstrating several cache-timing attacks against the implementations in AES found in OpenSSL and Linux's codice_1 partition encryption function. One attack was able to obtain an entire AES key after only 800\u00a0operations triggering encryptions, in a total of 65\u00a0milliseconds. This attack requires the attacker to be able to run programs on the same system or platform that is performing AES.\nIn December 2009 an attack on some hardware implementations was published that used differential fault analysis and allows recovery of a key with a complexity of 232.\nIn November 2010 Endre Bangerter, David Gullasch and Stephan Krenn published a paper which described a practical approach to a \"near real time\" recovery of secret keys from AES-128 without the need for either cipher text or plaintext. The approach also works on AES-128 implementations that use compression tables, such as OpenSSL. Like some earlier attacks, this one requires the ability to run unprivileged code on the system performing the AES encryption, which may be achieved by malware infection far more easily than commandeering the root account.\nIn March 2016, Ashokkumar C., Ravi Prakash Giri and Bernard Menezes presented a side-channel attack on AES implementations that can recover the complete 128-bit AES key in just 6\u20137 blocks of plaintext/ciphertext, which is a substantial improvement over previous works that require between 100 and a million encryptions. The proposed attack requires standard user privilege and key-retrieval algorithms run under a minute.\nMany modern CPUs have built-in hardware instructions for AES, which protect against timing-related side-channel attacks.\nNIST/CSEC validation.\nThe Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP) is operated jointly by the United States Government's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Computer Security Division and the Communications Security Establishment (CSE) of the Government of Canada. The use of cryptographic modules validated to NIST FIPS 140-2 is required by the United States Government for encryption of all data that has a classification of Sensitive but Unclassified (SBU) or above. From NSTISSP #11, National Policy Governing the Acquisition of Information Assurance: \u201cEncryption products for protecting classified information will be certified by NSA, and encryption products intended for protecting sensitive information will be certified in accordance with NIST FIPS 140-2.\u201d\nThe Government of Canada also recommends the use of FIPS 140 validated cryptographic modules in unclassified applications of its departments.\nAlthough NIST publication 197 (\u201cFIPS 197\u201d) is the unique document that covers the AES algorithm, vendors typically approach the CMVP under FIPS 140 and ask to have several algorithms (such as Triple\u00a0DES or SHA1) validated at the same time. Therefore, it is rare to find cryptographic modules that are uniquely FIPS 197 validated and NIST itself does not generally take the time to list FIPS 197 validated modules separately on its public web site. Instead, FIPS 197 validation is typically just listed as an \"FIPS approved: AES\" notation (with a specific FIPS 197 certificate number) in the current list of FIPS 140 validated cryptographic modules.\nThe Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) allows for independent validation of the correct implementation of the AES algorithm. Successful validation results in being listed on the NIST validations page. This testing is a pre-requisite for the FIPS 140-2 module validation. However, successful CAVP validation in no way implies that the cryptographic module implementing the algorithm is secure. A cryptographic module lacking FIPS 140-2 validation or specific approval by the NSA is not deemed secure by the US Government and cannot be used to protect government data.\nFIPS 140-2 validation is challenging to achieve both technically and fiscally. There is a standardized battery of tests as well as an element of source code review that must be passed over a period of a few weeks. The cost to perform these tests through an approved laboratory can be significant (e.g., well over $30,000 US) and does not include the time it takes to write, test, document and prepare a module for validation. After validation, modules must be re-submitted and re-evaluated if they are changed in any way. This can vary from simple paperwork updates if the security functionality did not change to a more substantial set of re-testing if the security functionality was impacted by the change.\nTest vectors.\nTest vectors are a set of known ciphers for a given input and key. NIST distributes the reference of AES test vectors as AES Known Answer Test (KAT) Vectors.\nPerformance.\nHigh speed and low RAM requirements were some of the criteria of the AES selection process. As the chosen algorithm, AES performed well on a wide variety of hardware, from 8-bit smart cards to high-performance computers.\nOn a Pentium Pro, AES encryption requires 18 clock cycles per byte, equivalent to a throughput of about 11\u00a0MiB/s for a 200\u00a0MHz processor.\nOn Intel Core and AMD Ryzen CPUs supporting AES-NI instruction set extensions, throughput can be multiple GiB/s (even over 15\u00a0GiB/s on an i7-12700k).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1261", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1261", "title": "April 26", "text": "Day of the yearApril 26 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1262", "revid": "29291527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1262", "title": "Argot", "text": ""}
{"id": "1264", "revid": "1160148026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1264", "title": "Anisotropy", "text": "In geometry, property of being directionally dependent\nAnisotropy () is the property of a material which allows it to change or assume different properties in different directions, as opposed to isotropy. It can be defined as a difference, when measured along different axes, in a material's physical or mechanical properties (absorbance, refractive index, conductivity, tensile strength, etc.).\nAn example of anisotropy is light coming through a polarizer. Another is wood, which is easier to split along its grain than across it.\nFields of interest.\nComputer graphics.\nIn the field of computer graphics, an anisotropic surface changes in appearance as it rotates about its geometric normal, as is the case with velvet.\nAnisotropic filtering (AF) is a method of enhancing the image quality of textures on surfaces that are far away and steeply angled with respect to the point of view. Older techniques, such as bilinear and trilinear filtering, do not take into account the angle a surface is viewed from, which can result in aliasing or blurring of textures. By reducing detail in one direction more than another, these effects can be reduced easily.\nChemistry.\nA chemical anisotropic filter, as used to filter particles, is a filter with increasingly smaller interstitial spaces in the direction of filtration so that the proximal regions filter out larger particles and distal regions increasingly remove smaller particles, resulting in greater flow-through and more efficient filtration.\nIn fluorescence spectroscopy, the fluorescence anisotropy, calculated from the polarization properties of fluorescence from samples excited with plane-polarized light, is used, e.g., to determine the shape of a macromolecule. Anisotropy measurements reveal the average angular displacement of the fluorophore that occurs between absorption and subsequent emission of a photon.\nIn NMR spectroscopy, the orientation of nuclei with respect to the applied magnetic field determines their chemical shift. In this context, anisotropic systems refer to the electron distribution of molecules with abnormally high electron density, like the pi system of benzene. This abnormal electron density affects the applied magnetic field and causes the observed chemical shift to change.\nReal-world imagery.\nImages of a gravity-bound or man-made environment are particularly anisotropic in the orientation domain, with more image structure located at orientations parallel with or orthogonal to the direction of gravity (vertical and horizontal).\nPhysics.\nPhysicists from University of California, Berkeley reported about their detection of the cosmic anisotropy in cosmic microwave background radiation in 1977. Their experiment demonstrated the Doppler shift caused by the movement of the earth with respect to the early Universe matter, the source of the radiation. Cosmic anisotropy has also been seen in the alignment of galaxies' rotation axes and polarization angles of quasars.\nPhysicists use the term anisotropy to describe direction-dependent properties of materials. Magnetic anisotropy, for example, may occur in a plasma, so that its magnetic field is oriented in a preferred direction. Plasmas may also show \"filamentation\" (such as that seen in lightning or a plasma globe) that is directional.\nAn \"anisotropic liquid\" has the fluidity of a normal liquid, but has an average structural order relative to each other along the molecular axis, unlike water or chloroform, which contain no structural ordering of the molecules. Liquid crystals are examples of anisotropic liquids.\nSome materials conduct heat in a way that is isotropic, that is independent of spatial orientation around the heat source. Heat conduction is more commonly anisotropic, which implies that detailed geometric modeling of typically diverse materials being thermally managed is required. The materials used to transfer and reject heat from the heat source in electronics are often anisotropic.\nMany crystals are anisotropic to light (\"optical anisotropy\"), and exhibit properties such as birefringence. Crystal optics describes light propagation in these media. An \"axis of anisotropy\" is defined as the axis along which isotropy is broken (or an axis of symmetry, such as normal to crystalline layers). Some materials can have multiple such optical axes.\nGeophysics and geology.\nSeismic anisotropy is the variation of seismic wavespeed with direction. Seismic anisotropy is an indicator of long range order in a material, where features smaller than the seismic wavelength (e.g., crystals, cracks, pores, layers, or inclusions) have a dominant alignment. This alignment leads to a directional variation of elasticity wavespeed. Measuring the effects of anisotropy in seismic data can provide important information about processes and mineralogy in the Earth; significant seismic anisotropy has been detected in the Earth's crust, mantle, and inner core.\nGeological formations with distinct layers of sedimentary material can exhibit electrical anisotropy; electrical conductivity in one direction (e.g. parallel to a layer), is different from that in another (e.g. perpendicular to a layer). This property is used in the gas and oil exploration industry to identify hydrocarbon-bearing sands in sequences of sand and shale. Sand-bearing hydrocarbon assets have high resistivity (low conductivity), whereas shales have lower resistivity. Formation evaluation instruments measure this conductivity or resistivity, and the results are used to help find oil and gas in wells. The mechanical anisotropy measured for some of the sedimentary rocks like coal and shale can change with corresponding changes in their surface properties like sorption when gases are produced from the coal and shale reservoirs.\nThe hydraulic conductivity of aquifers is often anisotropic for the same reason. When calculating groundwater flow to drains or to wells, the difference between horizontal and vertical permeability must be taken into account; otherwise the results may be subject to error.\nMost common rock-forming minerals are anisotropic, including quartz and feldspar. Anisotropy in minerals is most reliably seen in their optical properties. An example of an isotropic mineral is garnet.\nMedical acoustics.\nAnisotropy is also a well-known property in medical ultrasound imaging describing a different resulting echogenicity of soft tissues, such as tendons, when the angle of the transducer is changed. Tendon fibers appear hyperechoic (bright) when the transducer is perpendicular to the tendon, but can appear hypoechoic (darker) when the transducer is angled obliquely. This can be a source of interpretation error for inexperienced practitioners.\nMaterials science and engineering.\nAnisotropy, in materials science, is a material's directional dependence of a physical property. This is a critical consideration for materials selection in engineering applications. A material with physical properties that are symmetric about an axis that is normal to a plane of isotropy is called a transversely isotropic material. Tensor descriptions of material properties can be used to determine the directional dependence of that property. For a monocrystalline material, anisotropy is associated with the crystal symmetry in the sense that more symmetric crystal types have fewer independent coefficients in the tensor description of a given property. When a material is polycrystalline, the directional dependence on properties is often related to the processing techniques it has undergone. A material with randomly oriented grains will be isotropic, whereas materials with texture will be often be anisotropic. Textured materials are often the result of processing techniques like cold rolling, wire drawing, and heat treatment.\nMechanical properties of materials such as Young's modulus, ductility, yield strength, and high-temperature creep rate, are often dependent on the direction of measurement. Fourth-rank tensor properties, like the elastic constants, are anisotropic, even for materials with cubic symmetry. The Young's modulus relates stress and strain when an isotropic material is elastically deformed; to describe elasticity in an anisotropic material, stiffness (or compliance) tensors are used instead.\nIn metals, anisotropic elasticity behavior is present in all single crystals with three independent coefficients for cubic crystals, for example. For face-centered cubic materials such as nickel and copper, the stiffness is highest along the &lt;111&gt; direction, normal to the close-packed planes, and smallest parallel to &lt;100&gt;. Tungsten is so nearly isotropic at room temperature that it can be considered to have only two stiffness coefficients; aluminium is another metal that is nearly isotropic.\nFor an isotropic material, formula_1 where formula_2 is the shear modulus, formula_3 is the Young's modulus, and formula_4 is the material's Poisson's ratio. Therefore, for cubic materials, we can think of anisotropy, formula_5, as the ratio between the empirically determined shear modulus for the cubic material and its (isotropic) equivalent:\nformula_6\nThe latter expression is known as the Zener ratio, formula_5, where formula_8 refers to elastic constants in Voigt (vector-matrix) notation. For an isotropic material, the ratio is one.\nLimitation of the Zener ratio to cubic materials is waived in the Tensorial anisotropy index AT that takes into consideration all the 27 components of the fully anisotropic stiffness tensor. It is composed of two major parts formula_9and formula_10, the former referring to components existing in cubic tensor and the latter in anisotropic tensor so that formula_11 This first component includes the modified Zener ratio and additionally accounts for directional differences in the material, which exist in orthotropic material, for instance. The second component of this index formula_10 covers the influence of stiffness coefficients that are nonzero only for non-cubic materials and remains zero otherwise.\nFiber-reinforced or layered composite materials exhibit anisotropic mechanical properties, due to orientation of the reinforcement material. In many fiber-reinforced composites like carbon fiber or glass fiber based composites, the weave of the material (e.g. unidirectional or plain weave) can determine the extent of the anisotropy of the bulk material. The tunability of orientation of the fibers allows for application-based designs of composite materials, depending on the direction of stresses applied onto the material.\nAmorphous materials such as glass and polymers are typically isotropic. Due to the highly randomized orientation of macromolecules in polymeric materials, polymers are in general described as isotropic. However, mechanically gradient polymers can be engineered to have directionally dependent properties through processing techniques or introduction of anisotropy-inducing elements. Researchers have built composite materials with aligned fibers and voids to generate anisotropic hydrogels, in order to mimic hierarchically ordered biological soft matter. 3D printing, especially Fused Deposition Modeling, can introduce anisotropy into printed parts. This is due to the fact that FDM is designed to extrude and print layers of thermoplastic materials. This creates materials that are strong when tensile stress is applied in parallel to the layers and weak when the material is perpendicular to the layers.\nMicrofabrication.\nAnisotropic etching techniques (such as deep reactive-ion etching) are used in microfabrication processes to create well defined microscopic features with a high aspect ratio. These features are commonly used in MEMS (microelectromechanical systems) and microfluidic devices, where the anisotropy of the features is needed to impart desired optical, electrical, or physical properties to the device. Anisotropic etching can also refer to certain chemical etchants used to etch a certain material preferentially over certain crystallographic planes (e.g., KOH etching of silicon [100] produces pyramid-like structures)\nNeuroscience.\nDiffusion tensor imaging is an MRI technique that involves measuring the fractional anisotropy of the random motion (Brownian motion) of water molecules in the brain. Water molecules located in fiber tracts are more likely to move anisotropically, since they are restricted in their movement (they move more in the dimension parallel to the fiber tract rather than in the two dimensions orthogonal to it), whereas water molecules dispersed in the rest of the brain have less restricted movement and therefore display more isotropy. This difference in fractional anisotropy is exploited to create a map of the fiber tracts in the brains of the individual.\nRemote sensing and radiative transfer modeling.\nRadiance fields (see Bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF)) from a reflective surface are often not isotropic in nature. This makes calculations of the total energy being reflected from any scene a difficult quantity to calculate. In remote sensing applications, anisotropy functions can be derived for specific scenes, immensely simplifying the calculation of the net reflectance or (thereby) the net irradiance of a scene.\nFor example, let the BRDF be formula_13 where 'i' denotes incident direction and 'v' denotes viewing direction (as if from a satellite or other instrument). And let P be the Planar Albedo, which represents the total reflectance from the scene.\nformula_14\nformula_15\nIt is of interest because, with knowledge of the anisotropy function as defined, a measurement of the BRDF from a single viewing direction (say, formula_16) yields a measure of the total scene reflectance (planar albedo) for that specific incident geometry (say, formula_17).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1267", "revid": "16344749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1267", "title": "Alpha decay", "text": "Type of radioactive decay\nAlpha decay or \u03b1-decay is a type of radioactive decay in which an atomic nucleus emits an alpha particle (helium nucleus) and thereby transforms or 'decays' into a different atomic nucleus, with a mass number that is reduced by four and an atomic number that is reduced by two. An alpha particle is identical to the nucleus of a helium-4 atom, which consists of two protons and two neutrons. It has a charge of and a mass of . For example, uranium-238 decays to form thorium-234.\nWhile alpha particles have a charge , this is not usually shown because a nuclear equation describes a nuclear reaction without considering the electrons \u2013 a convention that does not imply that the nuclei necessarily occur in neutral atoms.\nAlpha decay typically occurs in the heaviest nuclides. Theoretically, it can occur only in nuclei somewhat heavier than nickel (element 28), where the overall binding energy per nucleon is no longer a maximum and the nuclides are therefore unstable toward spontaneous fission-type processes. In practice, this mode of decay has only been observed in nuclides considerably heavier than nickel, with the lightest known alpha emitters being the lightest isotopes (mass numbers 104\u2013109) of tellurium (element 52). Exceptionally, however, beryllium-8 decays to two alpha particles.\nAlpha decay is by far the most common form of cluster decay, where the parent atom ejects a defined daughter collection of nucleons, leaving another defined product behind. It is the most common form because of the combined extremely high nuclear binding energy and relatively small mass of the alpha particle. Like other cluster decays, alpha decay is fundamentally a quantum tunneling process. Unlike beta decay, it is governed by the interplay between both the strong nuclear force and the electromagnetic force.\nAlpha particles have a typical kinetic energy of 5\u00a0MeV (or \u2248\u00a00.13% of their total energy, 110\u00a0TJ/kg) and have a speed of about 15,000,000\u00a0m/s, or 5% of the speed of light. There is surprisingly small variation around this energy, due to the strong dependence of the half-life of this process on the energy produced. Because of their relatively large mass, the electric charge of and relatively low velocity, alpha particles are very likely to interact with other atoms and lose their energy, and their forward motion can be stopped by a few centimeters of air.\nApproximately 99% of the helium produced on Earth is the result of the alpha decay of underground deposits of minerals containing uranium or thorium. The helium is brought to the surface as a by-product of natural gas production.\nHistory.\nAlpha particles were first described in the investigations of radioactivity by Ernest Rutherford in 1899, and by 1907 they were identified as He2+ ions.\nBy 1928, George Gamow had solved the theory of alpha decay via tunneling. The alpha particle is trapped inside the nucleus by an attractive nuclear potential well \nand a repulsive electromagnetic potential barrier. Classically, it is forbidden to escape, but according to the (then) newly discovered principles of quantum mechanics, it has a tiny (but non-zero) probability of \"tunneling\" through the barrier and appearing on the other side to escape the nucleus. Gamow solved a model potential for the nucleus and derived, from first principles, a relationship between the half-life of the decay, and the energy of the emission, which had been previously discovered empirically and was known as the Geiger\u2013Nuttall law.\nMechanism.\nThe nuclear force holding an atomic nucleus together is very strong, in general much stronger than the repulsive electromagnetic forces between the protons. However, the nuclear force is also short-range, dropping quickly in strength beyond about 3 femtometers, while the electromagnetic force has an unlimited range. The strength of the attractive nuclear force keeping a nucleus together is thus proportional to the number of the nucleons, but the total disruptive electromagnetic force of proton-proton repulsion trying to break the nucleus apart is roughly proportional to the square of its atomic number. A nucleus with 210 or more nucleons is so large that the strong nuclear force holding it together can just barely counterbalance the electromagnetic repulsion between the protons it contains. Alpha decay occurs in such nuclei as a means of increasing stability by reducing size.\nOne curiosity is why alpha particles, helium nuclei, should be preferentially emitted as opposed to other particles like a single proton or neutron or other atomic nuclei. Part of the reason is the high binding energy of the alpha particle, which means that its mass is less than the sum of the masses of two free protons and two free neutrons. This increases the disintegration energy. Computing the total disintegration energy given by the equation\nformula_1\nwhere \"m\"i is the initial mass of the nucleus, \"m\"f is the mass of the nucleus after particle emission, and \"m\"p is the mass of the emitted (alpha-)particle, one finds that in certain cases it is positive and so alpha particle emission is possible, whereas other decay modes would require energy to be added. For example, performing the calculation for uranium-232 shows that alpha particle emission releases 5.4\u00a0MeV of energy, while a single proton emission would \"require\" 6.1\u00a0MeV. Most of the disintegration energy becomes the kinetic energy of the alpha particle, although to fulfill conservation of momentum, part of the energy goes to the recoil of the nucleus itself (see atomic recoil). However, since the mass numbers of most alpha-emitting radioisotopes exceed 210, far greater than the mass number of the alpha particle (4), the fraction of the energy going to the recoil of the nucleus is generally quite small, less than 2%. Nevertheless, the recoil energy (on the scale of keV) is still much larger than the strength of chemical bonds (on the scale of eV), so the daughter nuclide will break away from the chemical environment the parent was in. The energies and ratios of the alpha particles can be used to identify the radioactive parent via alpha spectrometry.\nThese disintegration energies, however, are substantially smaller than the repulsive potential barrier created by the interplay between the strong nuclear and the electromagnetic force, which prevents the alpha particle from escaping. The energy needed to bring an alpha particle from infinity to a point near the nucleus just outside the range of the nuclear force's influence is generally in the range of about 25\u00a0MeV. An alpha particle within the nucleus can be thought of as being inside a potential barrier whose walls are 25\u00a0MeV above the potential at infinity. However, decay alpha particles only have energies of around 4 to 9\u00a0MeV above the potential at infinity, far less than the energy needed to overcome the barrier and escape.\nQuantum mechanics, however, allows the alpha particle to escape via quantum tunneling. The quantum tunneling theory of alpha decay, independently developed by George Gamow and by Ronald Wilfred Gurney and Edward Condon in 1928, was hailed as a very striking confirmation of quantum theory. Essentially, the alpha particle escapes from the nucleus not by acquiring enough energy to pass over the wall confining it, but by tunneling through the wall. Gurney and Condon made the following observation in their paper on it:\nIt has hitherto been necessary to postulate some special arbitrary 'instability' of the nucleus, but in the following note, it is pointed out that disintegration is a natural consequence of the laws of quantum mechanics without any special hypothesis... Much has been written of the explosive violence with which the \u03b1-particle is hurled from its place in the nucleus. But from the process pictured above, one would rather say that the \u03b1-particle almost slips away unnoticed.\nThe theory supposes that the alpha particle can be considered an independent particle within a nucleus, that is in constant motion but held within the nucleus by strong interaction. At each collision with the repulsive potential barrier of the electromagnetic force, there is a small non-zero probability that it will tunnel its way out. An alpha particle with a speed of 1.5\u00d7107\u00a0m/s within a nuclear diameter of approximately 10\u221214\u00a0m will collide with the barrier more than 1021 times per second. However, if the probability of escape at each collision is very small, the half-life of the radioisotope will be very long, since it is the time required for the total probability of escape to reach 50%. As an extreme example, the half-life of the isotope bismuth-209 is .\nThe isotopes in beta-decay stable isobars that are also stable with regards to double beta decay with mass number \"A\"\u00a0=\u00a05, \"A\"\u00a0=\u00a08, 143\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"A\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0155, 160\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"A\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0162, and \"A\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0165 are theorized to undergo alpha decay. All other mass numbers (isobars) have exactly one theoretically stable nuclide. Those with mass 5 decay to helium-4 and a proton or a neutron, and those with mass 8 decay to two helium-4 nuclei; their half-lives (helium-5, lithium-5, and beryllium-8) are very short, unlike the half-lives for all other such nuclides with \"A\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0209, which are very long. (Such nuclides with \"A\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0209 are primordial nuclides except 146Sm.)\nWorking out the details of the theory leads to an equation relating the half-life of a radioisotope to the decay energy of its alpha particles, a theoretical derivation of the empirical Geiger\u2013Nuttall law.\nUses.\nAmericium-241, an alpha emitter, is used in smoke detectors. The alpha particles ionize air in an open ion chamber and a small current flows through the ionized air. Smoke particles from the fire that enter the chamber reduce the current, triggering the smoke detector's alarm.\nRadium-223 is also an alpha emitter. It is used in the treatment of skeletal metastases (cancers in the bones).\nAlpha decay can provide a safe power source for radioisotope thermoelectric generators used for space probes and were used for artificial heart pacemakers. Alpha decay is much more easily shielded against than other forms of radioactive decay.\nStatic eliminators typically use polonium-210, an alpha emitter, to ionize the air, allowing the 'static cling' to dissipate more rapidly.\nToxicity.\nHighly charged and heavy, alpha particles lose their several MeV of energy within a small volume of material, along with a very short mean free path. This increases the chance of double-strand breaks to the DNA in cases of internal contamination, when ingested, inhaled, injected or introduced through the skin. Otherwise, touching an alpha source is typically not harmful, as alpha particles are effectively shielded by a few centimeters of air, a piece of paper, or the thin layer of dead skin cells that make up the epidermis; however, many alpha sources are also accompanied by beta-emitting radio daughters, and both are often accompanied by gamma photon emission.\nRelative biological effectiveness (RBE) quantifies the ability of radiation to cause certain biological effects, notably either cancer or cell-death, for equivalent radiation exposure. Alpha radiation has a high linear energy transfer (LET) coefficient, which is about one ionization of a molecule/atom for every angstrom of travel by the alpha particle. The RBE has been set at the value of 20 for alpha radiation by various government regulations. The RBE is set at 10 for neutron irradiation, and at 1 for beta radiation and ionizing photons.\nHowever, the recoil of the parent nucleus (alpha recoil) gives it a significant amount of energy, which also causes ionization damage (see ionizing radiation). This energy is roughly the weight of the alpha (4\u00a0u) divided by the weight of the parent (typically about 200\u00a0u) times the total energy of the alpha. By some estimates, this might account for most of the internal radiation damage, as the recoil nucleus is part of an atom that is much larger than an alpha particle, and causes a very dense trail of ionization; the atom is typically a heavy metal, which preferentially collect on the chromosomes. In some studies, this has resulted in an RBE approaching 1,000 instead of the value used in governmental regulations.\nThe largest natural contributor to public radiation dose is radon, a naturally occurring, radioactive gas found in soil and rock. If the gas is inhaled, some of the radon particles may attach to the inner lining of the lung. These particles continue to decay, emitting alpha particles, which can damage cells in the lung tissue. The death of Marie Curie at age 66 from aplastic anemia was probably caused by prolonged exposure to high doses of ionizing radiation, but it is not clear if this was due to alpha radiation or X-rays. Curie worked extensively with radium, which decays into radon, along with other radioactive materials that emit beta and gamma rays. However, Curie also worked with unshielded X-ray tubes during World War I, and analysis of her skeleton during a reburial showed a relatively low level of radioisotope burden.\nThe Russian dissident Alexander Litvinenko's 2006 murder by radiation poisoning is thought to have been carried out with polonium-210, an alpha emitter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1268", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1268", "title": "AI", "text": ""}
{"id": "1270", "revid": "24323093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1270", "title": "Extreme poverty", "text": "Condition characterized by severe deprivation of basic human needs\nExtreme poverty is the most severe type of poverty, defined by the United Nations (UN) as \"a condition characterized by severe deprivation of basic human needs, including food, safe drinking water, sanitation facilities, health, shelter, education and information. It depends not only on income but also on access to services\". Historically, other definitions have been proposed within the United Nations.\nIn 2018, extreme poverty mainly refers to an income below the international poverty line of $1.90 per day (in 2011 prices, $ in 2022 dollars), set by the World Bank. In October 2017, the World Bank updated the international poverty line, a global absolute minimum, to $1.90 a day. This is the equivalent of $1.00 a day in 1996 US prices, hence the widely used expression \"living on less than a dollar a day\". The vast majority of those in extreme poverty reside in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. As of 2018, it is estimated that the country with the most people living in extreme poverty is Nigeria, at 86 million.\nIn the past, the vast majority of the world population lived in conditions of extreme poverty. \nThe percentage of the global population living in absolute poverty fell from over 80% in 1800 to under 20% by 2015. According to UN estimates, in 2015[ [update]] roughly 734 million people or 10% remained under those conditions. The number had previously been measured as 1.9 billion in 1990, and 1.2 billion in 2008. Despite the significant number of individuals still below the international poverty line, these figures represent significant progress for the international community, as they reflect a decrease of more than one billion people over 15 years.\nIn public opinion surveys around the globe, people surveyed tend to think that extreme poverty has not decreased.\nThe reduction of extreme poverty and hunger was the first Millennium Development Goal (MDG1), as set by the United Nations in 2000. Specifically, the target was to reduce the extreme poverty rate by half by 2015, a goal that was met five years ahead of schedule. In the Sustainable Development Goals, which succeeded the MDGs, the goal is to end extreme poverty in all its forms everywhere. With this declaration the international community, including the UN and the World Bank have adopted the target of ending extreme poverty by 2030.\nDefinition.\nPrevious definitions.\nIn July 1993, Leandro Despouy, the then UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights made use of a definition he adapted from a 1987 report to the French Economic and Social Council by Fr. Joseph Wresinski, founder of the International Movement ATD Fourth World, distinguishing \"lack of basic security\" (poverty) and \"chronic poverty\" (extreme poverty), linking the eradication of extreme poverty by allowing people currently experiencing it a real opportunity to exercise all their human rights:\n\"The lack of basic security connotes the absence of one or more factors enabling individuals and families to assume basic responsibilities and to enjoy fundamental rights. The situation may become widespread and result in more serious and permanent consequences. The lack of basic security leads to chronic poverty when it simultaneously affects several aspects of people's lives, when it is prolonged and when it severely compromises people's chances of regaining their rights and of reassuming their responsibilities in the foreseeable future.\"\nThis definition was mentioned previously, in June 1989, in the preliminary report on the realization of economic, social and cultural rights by the UN Special Rapporteur Danilo T\u00fcrk. It is still in use today, among others, in the current UN Guiding Principles on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights adopted by the UN Human Rights Council in September 2012\nConsumption-based definition.\nExtreme poverty is defined by the international community as living below $1.90 a day, as measured in 2011 international prices (equivalent to $2.12 in 2018). This number, also known as the international poverty line, is periodically updated to account for inflation and differences in the cost of living; it was originally defined at $1.00 a day in 1996. The updates are made according to new price data to portray the costs of basic food, health services, clothing, and shelter around the world as accurately as possible. The latest revision was made in 2015 when the World Bank increased the line to international- $1.90.\nBecause many of the world's poorest people do not have a monetary income, the poverty measurement is based on the monetary value of a person's \"consumption\". Otherwise the poverty measurement would be missing the home production of subsistence farmers that consume largely their own production.\nAlternative definitions.\nThe $1.90/day extreme poverty line remains the most widely used metric as it highlights the reality of those in the most severe conditions. Although widely used by most international organizations, it has come under scrutiny due to a variety of factors. For example, it does not account for how far below the line people are, referred to as the depth of poverty. For this purpose, the same institutions publish data on the poverty gap.\nThe international poverty line is designed to stay constant over time, to allow comparisons between different years. It is therefore a measure of absolute poverty and is not measuring relative poverty. It is also not designed to capture how people view their own financial situation (known as the socially subjective poverty line). Moreover, the calculation of the poverty line relies on information about consumer prices to calculate purchasing power parity, which are very hard to measure and are necessarily debatable. As with all other metrics, there may also be missing data from the poorest and most fragile countries.\nSeveral alternative instruments for measuring extreme poverty have been suggested which incorporate other factors such as malnutrition and lack of access to a basic education. The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), based on the Alkire-Foster Method, is published by the Oxford Poverty &amp; Human Development Initiative (OPHI): it measures deprivation in basic needs and can be broken down to reflect both the incidence and the intensity of poverty. For example, under conventional measures, in both Ethiopia and Uzbekistan about 40% of the population is considered extremely poor, but based on the MPI, 90% of Ethiopians but only 2% of Uzbeks are in multidimensional poverty.\nThe MPI is useful for development officials to determine the most likely causes of poverty within a region, using the M0 measure of the method (which is calculated by multiplying the fraction of people in poverty by the fraction of dimensions they are deprived in). For example, in the Gaza Strip of Palestine, using the M0 measure of the Alkire-Foster method reveals that poverty in the region is primarily caused by a lack of access to electricity, lack of access to drinking water, and widespread overcrowding. In contrast, data from the Chhukha District of Bhutan reveals that income is a much larger contributor to poverty as opposed to other dimensions within the region. However, the MPI only presents data from 105 countries, so it cannot be used for global measurements.\nShare of the population living in extreme poverty.\nPercent of extreme by region(2017)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Sub-Saharan Africa (62.1%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0South Asia (24.85%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0East Asia &amp; Pacific (4.19%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Middle East &amp; North Africa (3.47%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Latin America &amp; Caribbean (3.4%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Developed Countries (1.07%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Europe &amp; Central Asia (0.19%)\nCurrent trends.\nGetting to zero.\nUsing the World Bank definition of $1.90/day, as of 2021[ [update]], roughly 710 million people remained in extreme poverty (or roughly 1 in 10 people worldwide). Nearly half of them live in India and China, with more than 85% living in just 20 countries. Since the mid-1990s, there has been a steady decline in both the worldwide poverty rate and the total number of extreme poor. In 1990, the percentage of the global population living in extreme poverty was 43%, but in 2011, that percentage had dropped down to 21%. This halving of the extreme poverty rate falls in line with the first Millennium Development Goal (MDG1) proposed by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who called on the international community at the turn of the century to reduce the percentage of people in extreme poverty by half by 2015.\nThis reduction in extreme poverty took place most notably in China, Indonesia, India, Pakistan and Vietnam. These five countries accounted for the alleviation of 715 million people out of extreme poverty between 1990 and 2010\u00a0\u2013 more than the global net total of roughly 700 million. This statistical oddity can be explained by the fact that the number of people living in extreme poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa rose from 290 million to 414 million over the same period. However, there have been many positive signs for extensive, global poverty reduction as well. Since 1999, the total number of extreme poor has declined by an average of 50 million per year. Moreover, in 2005, for the first time in recorded history, poverty rates began to fall in every region of the world, including Africa.\nAs aforementioned, the number of people living in extreme poverty has reduced from 1.9 billion to 766 million over the span of the last decades. If we remain on our current trajectory, many economists predict we could reach global zero by 2030\u20132035, thus ending extreme poverty. Global zero entails a world in which fewer than 3% of the global population lives in extreme poverty (projected under most optimistic scenarios to be fewer than 200 million people). This zero figure is set at 3% in recognition of the fact that some amount of frictional (temporary) poverty will continue to exist, whether it is caused by political conflict or unexpected economic fluctuations, at least for the foreseeable future. However, the Brookings Institution notes that any projection about poverty more than a few years into the future runs the risk of being highly uncertain. This is because changes in consumption and distribution throughout the developing world over the next two decades could result in monumental shifts in global poverty, for better or worse.\nOthers are more pessimistic about this possibility, predicting a range of 193 million to 660 million people still living in extreme poverty by 2035. Additionally, some believe the rate of poverty reduction will slow down in the developing world, especially in Africa, and as such it will take closer to five decades to reach global zero. Despite these reservations, several prominent international and national organizations, including the UN, the World Bank and the United States Federal Government (via USAID), have set a target of reaching global zero by the end of 2030.\nExacerbating factors.\nThere are a variety of factors that may reinforce or instigate the existence of extreme poverty, such as weak institutions, cycles of violence and a low level of growth. Recent World Bank research shows that some countries can get caught in a \"fragility trap\", in which self-reinforcing factors prevent the poorest nations from emerging from low-level equilibrium in the long run. Moreover, most of the reduction in extreme poverty over the past twenty years has taken place in countries that have not experienced a civil conflict or have had governing institutions with a strong capacity to actually govern. Thus, to end extreme poverty, it is also important to focus on the interrelated problems of fragility and conflict.\nUSAID defines fragility as a government's lack of both legitimacy (the perception the government is adequate at doing its job) and effectiveness (how good the government is at maintaining law and order, in an equitable manner). As fragile nations are unable to equitably and effectively perform the functions of a state, these countries are much more prone to violent unrest and mass inequality. Additionally, in countries with high levels of inequality (a common problem in countries with inadequate governing institutions), much higher growth rates are needed to reduce the rate of poverty when compared with other nations. Additionally, if China and India are removed from the equation, up to 70% of the world's poor live in fragile states by some definitions of fragility. Some analysts project that extreme poverty will be increasingly concentrated in fragile, low-income states like Haiti, Yemen and the Central African Republic. However, some academics, such as Andy Sumner, say that extreme poverty will be increasingly concentrated in middle-income countries, creating a paradox where the world's poor do not actually live in the poorest countries.\nTo help low-income earners, fragile states make the transition towards peace and prosperity, the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, endorsed by roughly forty countries and multilateral institutions, was created in 2011. This represents an important step towards redressing the problem of fragility as it was originally articulated by self-identified fragile states who called on the international community to not only \"do things differently\", but to also \"do different things\".\nCivil conflict also remains a prime cause for the perpetuation of poverty throughout the developing world. Armed conflict can have severe effects on economic growth for many reasons such as the destruction of assets, destruction of livelihoods, creation of unwanted mass migration, and diversion of public resources towards war. Significantly, a country that experienced major violence during 1981\u20132005 had extreme poverty rates 21 percentage points higher than a country with no violence. On average, each civil conflict will cost a country roughly 30 years of GDP growth. Therefore, a renewed commitment from the international community to address the deteriorating situation in highly fragile states is necessary to both prevent the mass loss of life, but to also prevent the vicious cycle of extreme poverty.\nPopulation trends and dynamics (e.g. population growth) can also have a large impact on prospects for poverty reduction. According to the United Nations, \"in addition to improving general health and well-being, analysis shows that meeting the reproductive health and contraceptive needs of all women in the developing world more than pays for itself\").\nIn 2013, a prevalent finding in a report by the World Bank was that extreme poverty is most prevalent in low-income countries. In these countries, the World Bank found that progress in poverty reduction is the slowest, the poor live under the worst conditions, and the most affected persons are children age 12 and under.\nInternational initiatives.\nMillennium Summit and Millennium Development Goals.\nIn September 2000, world leaders gathered at the Millennium Summit held in New York, launching the United Nations Millennium Project suggested by then UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan. Prior to the launch of the conference, the office of Secretary-General Annan released a report entitled \"We The Peoples: The Role of the United Nations in the 21st Century\". In this document, now widely known as the Millennium Report, Kofi Annan called on the international community to reduce the proportion of people in extreme poverty by half by 2015, a target that would affect over 1 billion people. Citing the close correlation between economic growth and the reduction of poverty in poor countries, Annan urged international leaders to indiscriminately target the problem of extreme poverty across every region. In charge of managing the project was Jeffrey Sachs, a noted development economist, who in 2005 released a plan for action called \"Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals\". Thomas Pogge criticized the 2000 Millennium Declaration for being less ambitious than a previous declaration from the World Food Summit due to using 1990 as the benchmark rather than 1996.\nOverall, there has been significant progress towards reducing extreme poverty, with the MDG1 target of reducing extreme poverty rates by half being met five years early, representing 700 million people being lifted out of extreme poverty from 1990 to 2010, with 1.2 billion people still remaining under those conditions. The notable exception to this trend was in Sub-Saharan Africa, the only region where the number of people living in extreme poverty rose from 290 million in 1990 to 414 million in 2010, comprising more than a third of those living in extreme poverty worldwide.\n2005 World Summit.\nThe 2005 World Summit, held in September which was organized to measure international progress towards fulfilling the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Notably, the conference brought together more than 170 Heads of State. While world leaders at the summit were encouraged by the reduction of poverty in some nations, they were concerned by the uneven decline of poverty within and among different regions of the globe. However, at the end of the summit, the conference attendees reaffirmed the UN's commitment to achieve the MDGs by 2015 and urged all supranational, national and non-governmental organizations to follow suit.\nSustainable Development Goals.\nAs the expiration of the Millennium Development Goals approached in 2015, the UN convened a panel to advise on a Post-2015 Development Agenda, which led to a new set of 17 goals for 2030 titled the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The first goal (SDG 1) is to \"End poverty in all its forms everywhere.\"\nThe HLP report, entitled A New Global Partnership: Eradicate Poverty and Transform Economies Through Sustainable Development, was published in May 2013. In the report, the HLP wrote that:\n Ending extreme poverty is just the beginning, not the end. It is vital, but our vision must be broader: to start countries on the path of sustainable development\u00a0\u2013 building on the foundations established by the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro, and meeting a challenge that no country, developed or developing, has met so far. We recommend to the Secretary-General that deliberations on a new development agenda must be guided by the vision of eradicating extreme poverty once and for all, in the context of sustainable development.\nTherefore, the report determined that a central goal of the Post-Millennium Development agenda is to eradicate extreme poverty by 2030. However, the report also emphasized that the MDGs were not enough on their own, as they did not \"focus on the devastating effects of conflict and violence on development\u00a0... the importance to development of good governance and institution\u00a0... nor the need for inclusive growth...\" Consequently, there now exists synergy between the policy position papers put forward by the United States (through USAID), the World Bank and the UN itself in terms of viewing fragility and a lack of good governance as exacerbating extreme poverty. However, in a departure from the views of other organizations, the commission also proposed that the UN focus not only on extreme poverty (a line drawn at $1.25), but also on a higher target, such as $2. The report notes this change could be made to reflect the fact that escaping extreme poverty is only a first step.\nIn addition to the UN, a host of other supranational and national actors such as the European Union and the African Union have published their own positions or recommendations on what should be incorporated in the Post-2015 agenda. The European Commission's communication, published in A decent Life for all: from vision to collective action, affirmed the UN's commitment to \"eradicate extreme poverty in our lifetime and put the world on a sustainable path to ensure a decent life for all by 2030\". A unique vision of the report was the commission's environmental focus (in addition to a plethora of other goals such as combating hunger and gender inequality). Specifically, the Commission argued, \"long-term poverty reduction\u00a0... requires inclusive and sustainable growth. Growth should create decent jobs, take place with resource efficiency and within planetary boundaries, and should support efforts to mitigate climate change.\" The African Union's report, entitled Common African Position (CAP) on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, likewise encouraged the international community to focus on eradicating the twin problems of poverty and exclusion in our lifetime. Moreover, the CAP pledged that \"no person\u00a0\u2013 regardless of ethnicity, gender, geography, disability, race or other status\u00a0\u2013 is denied universal human rights and basic economic opportunities\".\nLeast developed country conferences.\nThe UN least developed country (LDC) conferences were a series of summits organized by the UN to promote the substantial and even development of the world's least developed countries.\nThe first UN LDC Conference was held between 1 and 14 September 1981, in Paris, the first UN LDC Conference was organized to finalize the UN's \"Substantial New Programme of Action\" for the 1980s in Least Developed Countries. This program, which was unanimously adopted by the conference attendees, argued for internal reforms in LDCs (meant to encourage economic growth) to be complemented by strong international measures. However, despite the major economic and policy reforms initiated many of these LDCs, in addition to strong international aid, the economic situation of these countries worsened as a whole in the 1980s. This prompted the organization of a 2nd UN LDC conference almost a decade later.\nThe second UN LDC Conference was held between 3 and 14 September 1990, once again in Paris, the second UN LDC Conference was convened to measure the progress made by the LDCs towards fulfilling their development goals during the 1980s. Recognizing the problems that plagued the LDCs over the past decade, the conference formulated a new set of national and international policies to accelerate the growth rates of the poorest nations. These new principles were embodied in the \"Paris Declaration and Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s\".\nThe fourth UN LDC Conference was the most recent conference. It was held in May 2011 in Istanbul, recognized that the nature of development had fundamentally changed since the 1st conference held almost 30 years earlier. In the 21st century, the capital flow into emerging economies has increasingly become dominated by foreign direct investment and remittances, as opposed to bilateral and multilateral assistance. Moreover, since the 1980s, significant structural changes have taken place on the international stage. With the creation of the G-20 conference of the largest economic powers, including many nations in the Global South, formerly undeveloped nations are now able to have a much larger say in international relations. Furthermore, the conference recognized that in the midst of a deep global recession, coupled with multiple crises (energy, climate, food, etc.), the international community would have fewer resources to aid the LDCs. Thus, the UN considered the participation of a wide range of stakeholders (not least the LDCs themselves), crucial to the formulation of the conference.\nOrganizations working to end extreme poverty.\nInternational organizations.\nWorld Bank.\nIn 2013, the Board of Governors of the World Bank Group (WBG) set two overriding goals for the WBG to commit itself to in the future. First, to end extreme poverty by 2030, an objective that echoes the sentiments of the UN and the Obama administration. Additionally, the WBG set an interim target of reducing extreme poverty to below 9% by 2020. Second, to focus on growth among the bottom 40% of people, as opposed to standard GDP growth. This commitment ensures that the growth of the developing world lifts people out of poverty, rather than exacerbating inequality.\nAs the World Bank's primary focus is on delivering economic growth to enable equitable prosperity, its developments programs are primarily commercial-based in nature, as opposed to the UN. Since the World Bank recognizes better jobs will result in higher income, and thus less poverty, the WBG seeks to support employment training initiatives, small business development programs and strong labor protection laws. However, since much of the growth in the developing world has been inequitable, the World Bank has also begun teaming with client states to map out trends in inequality and to propose public policy changes that can level the playing field.\nMoreover, the World Bank engages in a variety of nutritional, transfer payments and transport-based initiatives. Children who experience under-nutrition from conception to two years of age have a much higher risk of physical and mental disability. Thus, they are often trapped in poverty and are unable to make a full contribution to the social and economic development of their communities as adults. The WBG estimates that as much as 3% of GDP can be lost as a result of under-nutrition among the poorest nations. To combat undernutrition, the WBG has partnered with UNICEF and the WHO to ensure all small children are fully fed. The WBG also offers conditional cash transfers to poor households who meet certain requirements such as maintaining children's healthcare or ensuring school attendance. Finally, the WBG understands investment in public transportation and better roads is key to breaking rural isolation, improving access to healthcare and providing better job opportunities for the World's poor.\nUnited Nations.\nThe UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) works to synchronize the disparate international, national and non-governmental efforts to contest poverty. OCHA seeks to prevent \"confusion\" in relief operations and to ensure that the humanitarian response to disaster situations has greater accountability and predictability. To do so, OCHA has begun deploying Humanitarian Coordinators and Country Teams to provide a solid architecture for the international community to work through.\nThe United Nation's Children's Fund (UNICEF) was created by the UN to provide food, clothing and healthcare to European children facing famine and disease in the immediate aftermath of World War II. After the UN General Assembly extended UNICEF's mandate indefinitely in 1953, it actively worked to help children in extreme poverty in more than 190 countries and territories to overcome the obstacles that poverty, violence, disease and discrimination place in a child's path. Its current focus areas are 1) Child survival &amp; development 2) Basic education &amp; gender equality 3) Children and HIV/AIDS and 4) Child protection.\nThe UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) is mandated to lead and coordinate international action to protect refugees worldwide. Its primary purpose is to safeguard the rights of refugees by ensuring anyone can exercise the right to seek asylum in another state, with the option to return home voluntarily, integrate locally or resettle in a third country. The UNHCR operates in over 125 countries, helping approximately 33.9 million persons.\nThe World Food Programme (WFP) is the largest agency dedicated to fighting hunger worldwide. On average, the WFP brings food assistance to more than 90 million people in 75 countries. The WFP not only strives to prevent hunger in the present, but also in the future by developing stronger communities which will make food even more secure on their own. The WFP has a range of expertise from Food Security Analysis, Nutrition, Food Procurement and Logistics.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) is responsible for providing leadership on global health matters, shaping the health research agenda, articulating evidence-based policy decisions and combating diseases that are induced from poverty, such as HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. Moreover, the WHO deals with pressing issues ranging from managing water safety, to dealing with maternal and newborn health.\nGovernmental agencies.\nUSAID.\nThe US Agency for International Development (USAID) is the lead US government agency dedicated to ending extreme poverty. Currently the largest bilateral donor in the world, the United States channels the majority of its development assistance through USAID and the US Department of State. In President Obama's 2013 State of the Union address, he declared, \"So the United States will join with our allies to eradicate such extreme poverty in the next two decades\u00a0... which is within our reach.\" In response to Obama's call to action, USAID has made ending extreme poverty central to its mission statement. Under its New Model of Development, USAID seeks to eradicate extreme poverty through the use of innovation in science and technology, by putting a greater emphasis on evidence based decision-making, and through leveraging the ingenuity of the private sector and global citizens.\nA major initiative of the Obama Administration is Power Africa, which aims to bring energy to 20 million people in Sub-Saharan Africa. By reaching out to its international partners, whether commercial or public, the US has leveraged over $14 billion in outside commitments after investing only US$7 billion of its own. To ensure that Power Africa reaches the region's poorest, the initiative engages in a transaction based approach to create systematic change. This includes expanding access to electricity to more than 20,000 additional households which already live without power.\nIn terms of specific programming, USAID works in a variety of fields from preventing hunger, reducing HIV/AIDS, providing general health assistance and democracy assistance, as well as dealing with gender issues. To deal with food security, which affects roughly 842 million people (who go to bed hungry each night), USAID coordinates the Feed the Future Initiative (FtF). FtF aims to reduce poverty and under-nutrition each by 20% over five years. Because of the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and a variety of congruent actors, the incidence of AIDS and HIV, which used to ravage Africa, reduced in scope and intensity. Through PEPFAR, the United States has ensured over five million people have received life-saving antiviral drugs, a significant proportion of the eight million people receiving treatment in relatively poor nations.\nIn terms of general health assistance, USAID has worked to reduce maternal mortality by 30%, under-five child mortality by 35%, and has accomplished a host of other goals. USAID also supports the gamut of democratic initiatives, from promoting human rights and accountable, fair governance, to supporting free and fair elections and the rule of law. In pursuit of these goals, USAID has increased global political participation by training more than 9,800 domestic election observers and providing civic education to more than 6.5 million people. Since 2012, the Agency has begun integrating critical gender perspectives across all aspects of its programming to ensure all USAID initiatives work to eliminate gender disparities. To do so, USAID seeks to increase the capability of women and girls to realize their rights and determine their own life outcomes. Moreover, USAID supports additional programs to improve women's access to capital and markets, builds theirs skills in agriculture, and supports women's desire to own businesses.\nOthers.\nOther major government development agencies with annual aid programmes of more than $10 billion include: GIZ (Germany), FCDO (United Kingdom), JICA (Japan), European Union and AFD (France).\nNon-Governmental Organizations.\nA multitude of non-governmental organizations operate in the field of extreme poverty, actively working to alleviate the poorest of the poor of their deprivation. To name but a few notable organizations: Save the Children, the Overseas Development Institute, Concern Worldwide, ONE, Trickle Up and Oxfam have all done a considerable amount of work in extreme poverty.\nSave the Children is the leading international organization dedicated to helping the world's indigent children. In 2013, Save the Children reached over 143 million children through their work, including over 52 million children directly. Save the Children also recently released their own report titled \"Getting to Zero\", in which they argued the international community could feasibly do more than lift the world's poor above $1.25/day.\nThe Overseas Development Institute (ODI) is a UK based think tank on international development and humanitarian issues. ODI is dedicated to alleviating the suffering of the world's poor by providing high-quality research and practical policy advice to the World's development officials. ODI also recently released a paper entitled, \"The Chronic Poverty Report 2014\u20132015: The road to zero extreme poverty\", in which its authors assert that though the international communities' goal of ending extreme poverty by 2030 is laudable, much more targeted resources will be necessary to reach said target. The report states that \"To eradicate extreme poverty, massive global investment is required in social assistance, education and pro-poorest economic growth\".\nConcern Worldwide is an international humanitarian organization whose mission is to end extreme poverty by influencing decision makers at all levels of government (from local to international). Concern has also produced a report on extreme poverty in which they explain their own conception of extreme poverty from a NGO's standpoint. In this paper, named \"How Concern Understands Extreme Poverty\", the report's creators write that extreme poverty entails more than just living under $1.25/day, it also includes having a small number of assets and being vulnerable to severe negative shocks (whether natural or man made).\nONE, the organization co-founded by Bono, is a non-profit organization funded almost entirely by foundations, individual philanthropists and corporations. ONE's goals include raising public awareness and working with political leaders to fight preventable diseases, increase government accountability and increase investment in nutrition. Finally, trickleUp is a micro-enterprise development program targeted at those living on under $1.25/day, which provides the indigent with resources to build a sustainable livelihood through both direct financing and considerable training efforts.\nOxfam is a non-governmental organization that works prominently in Africa; their mission is to improve local community organizations and it works to reduce impediments to the development of the country. Oxfam helps families suffering from poverty receive food and healthcare to survive. There are many children in Africa experiencing growth stunting, and this is one example of an issue that Oxfam targets and aims to resolve.\nCash transfers appear to be an effective intervention for reducing extreme poverty, while at the same time improving health and education outcomes.&lt;ref name=\"doi10.1002/14651858.CD011135.pub2\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; &lt;ref name=\"doi10.1002/14651858.CD011135.pub3\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1271", "revid": "46026720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1271", "title": "Analytical engine", "text": "Proposed mechanical general-purpose computer\nThe analytical engine was a proposed mechanical general-purpose computer designed by English mathematician and computer pioneer Charles Babbage. It was first described in 1837 as the successor to Babbage's difference engine, which was a design for a simpler mechanical calculator.\nThe analytical engine incorporated an arithmetic logic unit, control flow in the form of conditional branching and loops, and integrated memory, making it the first design for a general-purpose computer that could be described in modern terms as Turing-complete. In other words, the structure of the analytical engine was essentially the same as that which has dominated computer design in the electronic era. The analytical engine is one of the most successful achievements of Charles Babbage.\nBabbage was never able to complete construction of any of his machines due to conflicts with his chief engineer and inadequate funding. It was not until 1941 that Konrad Zuse built the first general-purpose computer, Z3, more than a century after Babbage had proposed the pioneering analytical engine in 1837.\nDesign.\nBabbage's first attempt at a mechanical computing device, the Difference Engine, was a special-purpose machine designed to tabulate logarithms and trigonometric functions by evaluating finite differences to create approximating polynomials. Construction of this machine was never completed; Babbage had conflicts with his chief engineer, Joseph Clement, and ultimately the British government withdrew its funding for the project.\nDuring this project, Babbage realised that a much more general design, the analytical engine, was possible. The work on the design of the analytical engine started around 1833.\nThe input, consisting of programs (\"formulae\") and data, was to be provided to the machine via punched cards, a method being used at the time to direct mechanical looms such as the Jacquard loom. For output, the machine would have a printer, a curve plotter, and a bell. The machine would also be able to punch numbers onto cards to be read in later. It employed ordinary base-10 fixed-point arithmetic.\nThere was to be a store (that is, a memory) capable of holding 1,000 numbers of 50 decimal digits each (ca. 16.6 kB). An arithmetic unit (the \"mill\") would be able to perform all four arithmetic operations, plus comparisons and optionally square roots. Initially (1838) it was conceived as a difference engine curved back upon itself, in a generally circular layout, with the long store exiting off to one side. Later drawings (1858) depict a regularised grid layout. Like the central processing unit (CPU) in a modern computer, the mill would rely upon its own internal procedures, to be stored in the form of pegs inserted into rotating drums called \"barrels\", to carry out some of the more complex instructions the user's program might specify.\nThe programming language to be employed by users was akin to modern day assembly languages. Loops and conditional branching were possible, and so the language as conceived would have been Turing-complete as later defined by Alan Turing. Three different types of punch cards were used: one for arithmetical operations, one for numerical constants, and one for load and store operations, transferring numbers from the store to the arithmetical unit or back. There were three separate readers for the three types of cards. Babbage developed some two dozen programs for the analytical engine between 1837 and 1840, and one program later. These programs treat polynomials, iterative formulas, Gaussian elimination, and Bernoulli numbers.\nIn 1842, the Italian mathematician Luigi Federico Menabrea published a description of the engine in French, based on lectures Babbage gave when he visited Turin in 1840. In 1843, the description was translated into English and extensively annotated by Ada Lovelace, who had become interested in the engine eight years earlier. In recognition of her additions to Menabrea's paper, which included a way to calculate Bernoulli numbers using the machine (widely considered to be the first complete computer program), she has been described as the first computer programmer.\nConstruction.\nLate in his life, Babbage sought ways to build a simplified version of the machine, and assembled a small part of it before his death in 1871.\nIn 1878, a committee of the British Association for the Advancement of Science described the analytical engine as \"a marvel of mechanical ingenuity\", but recommended against constructing it. The committee acknowledged the usefulness and value of the machine, but could not estimate the cost of building it, and were unsure whether the machine would function correctly after being built.\nIntermittently from 1880 to 1910, Babbage's son Henry Prevost Babbage was constructing a part of the mill and the printing apparatus. In 1910, it was able to calculate a (faulty) list of multiples of pi. This constituted only a small part of the whole engine; it was not programmable and had no storage. (Popular images of this section have sometimes been mislabelled, implying that it was the entire mill or even the entire engine.) Henry Babbage's \"analytical engine mill\" is on display at the Science Museum in London. Henry also proposed building a demonstration version of the full engine, with a smaller storage capacity: \"perhaps for a first machine ten (columns) would do, with fifteen wheels in each\". Such a version could manipulate 20\u00a0numbers of 25\u00a0digits each, and what it could be told to do with those numbers could still be impressive. \"It is only a question of cards and time\", wrote Henry Babbage in 1888, \"... and there is no reason why (twenty thousand) cards should not be used if necessary, in an analytical engine for the purposes of the mathematician\".\nIn 1991, the London Science Museum built a complete and working specimen of Babbage's Difference Engine No. 2, a design that incorporated refinements Babbage discovered during the development of the analytical engine. This machine was built using materials and engineering tolerances that would have been available to Babbage, quelling the suggestion that Babbage's designs could not have been produced using the manufacturing technology of his time.\nIn October 2010, John Graham-Cumming started a \"Plan 28\" campaign to raise funds by \"public subscription\" to enable serious historical and academic study of Babbage's plans, with a view to then build and test a fully working virtual design which will then in turn enable construction of the physical analytical engine. As of May 2016, actual construction had not been attempted, since no consistent understanding could yet be obtained from Babbage's original design drawings. In particular it was unclear whether it could handle the indexed variables which were required for Lovelace's Bernoulli program. By 2017, the \"Plan 28\" effort reported that a searchable database of all catalogued material was available, and an initial review of Babbage's voluminous Scribbling Books had been completed.\nMany of Babbage's original drawings have been digitised and are publicly available online.\nInstruction set.\nBabbage is not known to have written down an explicit set of instructions for the engine in the manner of a modern processor manual. Instead he showed his programs as lists of states during their execution, showing what operator was run at each step with little indication of how the control flow would be guided.\nAllan G. Bromley has assumed that the card deck could be read in forwards and backwards directions as a function of conditional branching after testing for conditions, which would make the engine Turing-complete:\n...the cards could be ordered to move forward and reverse (and hence to loop)...\nThe introduction for the first time, in 1845, of user operations for a variety of service functions including, most importantly, an effective system for user control of looping in user programs.\nThere is no indication how the direction of turning of the operation and variable cards is specified. In the absence of other evidence I have had to adopt the minimal default assumption that both the operation and variable cards can only be turned backward as is necessary to implement the loops used in Babbage's sample programs. There would be no mechanical or microprogramming difficulty in placing the direction of motion under the control of the user.\nIn their emulator of the engine, Fourmilab say:\nThe Engine's Card Reader is not constrained to simply process the cards in a chain one after another from start to finish. It can, in addition, directed by the very cards it reads and advised by whether the Mill's run-up lever is activated, either advance the card chain forward, skipping the intervening cards, or backward, causing previously-read cards to be processed once again.\nThis emulator does provide a written symbolic instruction set, though this has been constructed by its authors rather than based on Babbage's original works. For example, a factorial program would be written as:\n N0 6\n N1 1\n N2 1\n L1\n L0\n S1\n L0\n L2\n S0\n L2\n L0\n CB?11\nwhere the CB is the conditional branch instruction or \"combination card\" used to make the control flow jump, in this case backward by 11 cards.\nInfluence.\nPredicted influence.\nBabbage understood that the existence of an automatic computer would kindle interest in the field now known as algorithmic efficiency, writing in his \"Passages from the Life of a Philosopher\", \"As soon as an analytical engine exists, it will necessarily guide the future course of the science. Whenever any result is sought by its aid, the question will then arise\u2014By what course of calculation can these results be arrived at by the machine in the \"shortest time\"?\"\nComputer science.\nFrom 1872 Henry continued diligently with his father's work and then intermittently in retirement in 1875.\nPercy Ludgate wrote about the engine in 1914 and published his own design for an analytical engine in 1909. It was drawn up in detail, but never built, and the drawings have never been found. Ludgate's engine would be much smaller (about , which corresponds to cube of side length ) than Babbage's, and hypothetically would be capable of multiplying two 20-decimal-digit numbers in about six seconds.\nIn his \"Essays on Automatics\" (1913) Leonardo Torres Quevedo, inspired by Babbage, designed a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also contains the idea of floating-point arithmetic. In 1920, to demonstrate his concepts, Torres built an electromechanical calculator that could automatically perform all four arithmetic operations.\nVannevar Bush's paper \"Instrumental Analysis\" (1936) included several references to Babbage's work. In the same year he started the Rapid Arithmetical Machine project to investigate the problems of constructing an electronic digital computer.\nDespite this groundwork, Babbage's work fell into historical obscurity, and the analytical engine was unknown to builders of electromechanical and electronic computing machines in the 1930s and 1940s when they began their work, resulting in the need to re-invent many of the architectural innovations Babbage had proposed. Howard Aiken, who built the quickly-obsoleted electromechanical calculator, the Harvard Mark I, between 1937 and 1945, praised Babbage's work likely as a way of enhancing his own stature, but knew nothing of the analytical engine's architecture during the construction of the Mark I, and considered his visit to the constructed portion of the analytical engine \"the greatest disappointment of my life\". The Mark I showed no influence from the analytical engine and lacked the analytical engine's most prescient architectural feature, conditional branching. J. Presper Eckert and John W. Mauchly similarly were not aware of the details of Babbage's analytical engine work prior to the completion of their design for the first electronic general-purpose computer, the ENIAC.\nComparison to other early computers.\nIf the analytical engine had been built, it would have been digital, programmable and Turing-complete. It would, however, have been very slow. Luigi Federico Menabrea reported in \"Sketch of the Analytical Engine\": \"Mr. Babbage believes he can, by his engine, form the product of two numbers, each containing twenty figures, in three minutes\".\nBy comparison the Harvard Mark I could perform the same task in just six seconds. A modern CPU could do the same thing in under a billionth of a second.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1273", "revid": "33438184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1273", "title": "Augustus", "text": "First Roman emperor from 27 BC to AD 14\nCaesar Augustus (born Gaius Octavius; 23 September 63 BC \u2013 19 August AD 14), also known as Octavian, was the first Roman emperor; he reigned from 27\u00a0BC until his death in AD\u00a014. He is known for being the founder of the Roman Empire, and is considered one of the most successful leaders in human history. The reign of Augustus initiated an imperial cult as well as an era associated with imperial peace, the \"Pax Romana\" or \"Pax Augusta\", in which the Roman world was largely free of armed conflict aside from expansionary wars and the Year of the Four Emperors. The Principate system of imperial rule established by Augustus lasted until the Crisis of the Third Century, after which it evolved into a more bureaucratic regime known as the Dominate under Diocletian and subsequent emperors.\nOriginally named Gaius Octavius, he was born into an old and wealthy equestrian branch of the plebeian \"gens\" Octavia. His maternal great-uncle Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC, and Octavius was named in Caesar's will as his adopted son and heir; as a result, he inherited Caesar's name, estate, and the loyalty of his legions. He, Mark Antony and Marcus Lepidus formed the Second Triumvirate to defeat the assassins of Caesar. Following their victory at the Battle of Philippi (42 BC), the Triumvirate divided the Roman Republic among themselves and ruled as \"de facto\" dictators. The Triumvirate was eventually torn apart by the competing ambitions of its members; Lepidus was exiled in 36 BC, and Antony was defeated by Octavian at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC. Antony and his wife Cleopatra, the Ptolemaic queen of Egypt, killed themselves during Octavian's invasion of Egypt, which then became a Roman province.\nAfter the demise of the Second Triumvirate, Augustus restored the outward fa\u00e7ade of the free republic, with governmental power vested in the Roman Senate, the executive magistrates and the legislative assemblies, yet he maintained autocratic authority by having the Senate grant him lifetime tenure as commander-in-chief, tribune and censor. A similar ambiguity is seen in his chosen names, the implied rejection of monarchical titles whereby he called himself \"Princeps Civitatis\" (First Citizen) juxtaposed with his adoption of the title augustus.\nAugustus dramatically enlarged the empire, annexing Egypt, Dalmatia, Pannonia, Noricum and Raetia, expanding possessions in Africa, and completing the conquest of Hispania, but he suffered a major setback in Germania. Beyond the frontiers, he secured the empire with a buffer region of client states and made peace with the Parthian Empire through diplomacy. He reformed the Roman system of taxation, developed networks of roads with an official courier system, established a standing army, established the Praetorian Guard as well as official police and fire-fighting services for Rome, and rebuilt much of the city during his reign. Augustus died in AD 14 at age 75, probably from natural causes. Persistent rumors, substantiated somewhat by deaths in the imperial family, have claimed his wife Livia poisoned him. He was succeeded as emperor by his adopted son Tiberius, Livia's son and also former husband of Augustus' only biological daughter Julia.\nName.\nAs a consequence of Roman customs, society, and personal preference, Augustus ( ) was known by many names throughout his life:\nEarly life.\nWhile his paternal family was from the Volscian town of Velletri, approximately south-east of Rome, Augustus was born in Rome on 23 September 63\u00a0BC. He was born at Ox Head, a small property on the Palatine Hill, very close to the Roman Forum. He was given the name Gaius Octavius, and in his childhood he received the cognomen Thurinus, possibly commemorating his father's victory at Thurii over a rebellious band of slaves which occurred a few years after his birth. Suetonius wrote: \"There are many indications that the Octavian family was in days of old a distinguished one at Velitrae; for not only was a street in the most frequented part of town long ago called Octavian, but an altar was shown there besides, consecrated by an Octavius. This man was leader in a war with a neighbouring town ...\"\nDue to the crowded nature of Rome at the time, Octavius was taken to his father's home village at Velletri to be raised. Octavius mentions his father's equestrian family only briefly in his memoirs. His paternal great-grandfather Gaius Octavius was a military tribune in Sicily during the Second Punic War. His grandfather had served in several local political offices. His father, also named Gaius Octavius, had been governor of Macedonia. His mother, Atia, was the niece of Julius Caesar.\nHis father died in 59\u00a0BC when he was four years old. His mother married a former governor of Syria, Lucius Marcius Philippus. Philippus claimed descent from Alexander the Great and was elected consul in 56\u00a0BC. Philippus never had much of an interest in young Octavius. Because of this, Octavius was raised by his grandmother, Julia, the sister of Julius Caesar. Julia died in 52 or 51\u00a0BC, and Octavius delivered the funeral oration for his grandmother. From this point, his mother and stepfather took a more active role in raising him. He donned the \"toga virilis\" (\"toga of manhood\") four years later and was elected to the College of Pontiffs in 47\u00a0BC. The following year he was put in charge of the Greek games that were staged in honor of the Temple of Venus Genetrix, built by Julius Caesar.\nAccording to Nicolaus of Damascus, Octavius wished to join Caesar's staff for his campaign in Africa but gave way when his mother protested. In 46\u00a0BC, she consented for him to join Caesar in Hispania, where he planned to fight the forces of Pompey, Caesar's late enemy, but Octavius fell ill and was unable to travel. When he had recovered, he sailed to the front but was shipwrecked. After coming ashore with a handful of companions, he crossed hostile territory to Caesar's camp, which impressed his great-uncle considerably. Velleius Paterculus reports that after that time, Caesar allowed the young man to share his carriage. When back in Rome, Caesar deposited a new will with the Vestal Virgins, naming Octavius as the prime beneficiary.\nRise to power.\nHeir to Caesar.\nOctavius was studying and undergoing military training in Apollonia, Illyria, when Julius Caesar was assassinated on the Ides of March (15 March) 44\u00a0BC. He rejected the advice of some army officers to take refuge with the troops in Macedonia and sailed to Italy to ascertain whether he had any potential political fortunes or security. Caesar had no living legitimate children under Roman law and so had adopted Octavius, his grand-nephew, making him his primary heir. Mark Antony later charged that Octavian had earned his adoption by Caesar through sexual favours, though Suetonius describes Antony's accusation as political slander. This form of slander was popular during this time in the Roman Republic to demean and discredit political opponents by accusing them of having an inappropriate sexual affair. After landing at Lupiae near Brundisium, Octavius learned the contents of Caesar's will, and only then did he decide to become Caesar's political heir as well as heir to two-thirds of his estate.\nUpon his adoption, Octavius assumed his great-uncle's name Gaius Julius Caesar. Roman citizens adopted into a new family usually retained their old nomen in cognomen form (e.g., \"Octavianus\" for one who had been an Octavius, \"Aemilianus\" for one who had been an Aemilius, etc.). However, though some of his contemporaries did, there is no evidence that Octavius officially used the name \"Octavianus\", as it would have made his modest origins too obvious. Historians usually refer to the new Caesar as \"Octavian\" during the time between his adoption and his assumption of the name Augustus in 27\u00a0BC in order to avoid confusing the dead dictator with his heir.\nOctavian could not rely on his limited funds to make a successful entry into the upper echelons of the Roman political hierarchy. After a warm welcome by Caesar's soldiers at Brundisium, Octavian demanded a portion of the funds that were allotted by Caesar for the intended war against the Parthian Empire in the Middle East. This amounted to 700\u00a0million sesterces stored at Brundisium, the staging ground in Italy for military operations in the east. A later senatorial investigation into the disappearance of the public funds took no action against Octavian since he subsequently used that money to raise troops against the Senate's arch enemy Mark Antony. Octavian made another bold move in 44\u00a0BC when, without official permission, he appropriated the annual tribute that had been sent from Rome's Near Eastern province to Italy.\nOctavian began to bolster his personal forces with Caesar's veteran legionaries and with troops designated for the Parthian war, gathering support by emphasizing his status as heir to Caesar. On his march to Rome through Italy, Octavian's presence and newly acquired funds attracted many, winning over Caesar's former veterans stationed in Campania. By June, he had gathered an army of 3,000 loyal veterans, paying each a salary of 500 denarii.\nGrowing tensions.\nArriving in Rome on 6 May 44\u00a0BC, Octavian found consul Mark Antony, Caesar's former colleague, in an uneasy truce with the dictator's assassins. They had been granted a general amnesty on 17 March, yet Antony had succeeded in driving most of them out of Rome with an inflammatory eulogy at Caesar's funeral, mounting public opinion against the assassins.\nMark Antony was amassing political support, but Octavian still had the opportunity to rival him as the leading member of the faction supporting Caesar. Antony had lost the support of many Romans and supporters of Caesar when he initially opposed the motion to elevate Caesar to divine status. It is alleged that Antony refused to handover the money due Octavian as Caesar's adopted heir, possibly on grounds that it would take time to disentangle it from state funds. During the summer, Octavian won the support of Caesarian veterans and also made common cause with those senators \u2013 many of which were themselves former Caesarians \u2013 who perceived Antony as a threat to the state. After an abortive attempt to reconcile Octavian and Antony by the veterans, Antony's bellicose edicts against Brutus and Cassius alienated him from the moderate Caesarians in the senate, who feared a renewed civil war. In September, Marcus Tullius Cicero began to attack Antony in a series of speeches portraying him as a threat to the republican order.\nFirst conflict with Antony.\nWith opinion in Rome turning against him and his year of consular power nearing its end, Antony attempted to pass laws that would assign him the province of Cisalpine Gaul. Octavian meanwhile built up a private army in Italy by recruiting Caesarian veterans, and on 28 November he won over two of Antony's legions with the enticing offer of monetary gain.\nIn the face of Octavian's large and capable force, Antony saw the danger of staying in Rome and, to the relief of the Senate, he left Rome for Cisalpine Gaul, which was to be handed to him on 1 January. However, the province had earlier been assigned to Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus, one of Caesar's assassins, who now refused to yield to Antony. Antony besieged him at Mutina and rejected the resolutions passed by the Senate to stop the fighting. The Senate had no army to enforce their resolutions. This provided an opportunity for Octavian, who already was known to have armed forces. Cicero also defended Octavian against Antony's taunts about Octavian's lack of noble lineage and aping of Julius Caesar's name, stating \"we have no more brilliant example of traditional piety among our youth.\"\nAt the urging of Cicero, the Senate inducted Octavian as senator on 1 January 43\u00a0BC, yet he also was given the power to vote alongside the former consuls. In addition, Octavian was granted \"imperium pro praetore\" (commanding power) which legalized his command of troops, sending him to relieve the siege along with Hirtius and Pansa (the consuls for 43\u00a0BC). He assumed the \"fasces\" on 7 January, a date that he would later commemorate as the beginning of his public career. Antony's forces were defeated at the battles of Forum Gallorum (14 April) and Mutina (21 April), forcing Antony to retreat to Transalpine Gaul. Both consuls were killed, however, leaving Octavian in sole command of their armies.\nThe Senate heaped many more rewards on Decimus Brutus than on Octavian for defeating Antony, then attempted to give command of the consular legions to Decimus Brutus. In response, Octavian stayed in the Po Valley and refused to aid any further offensive against Antony. In July, an embassy of centurions sent by Octavian entered Rome and demanded the consulship left vacant by Hirtius and Pansa and also that the decree should be rescinded which declared Antony a public enemy. When this was refused, he marched on the city with eight legions. He encountered no military opposition in Rome and on 19 August 43\u00a0BC was elected consul with his relative Quintus Pedius as co-consul. Meanwhile, Antony formed an alliance with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, another leading Caesarian.\nSecond Triumvirate.\nProscriptions.\nIn a meeting near Bologna in October 43\u00a0BC, Octavian, Antony, and Lepidus formed the Second Triumvirate. Their powers were officialized by the Senate on 27 November. This explicit arrogation of special powers lasting five years was then legalised by law passed by the plebs, unlike the unofficial First Triumvirate formed by Pompey, Julius Caesar, and Marcus Licinius Crassus. The triumvirs then set in motion proscriptions, in which between 130 and 300 senators and 2,000 \"equites\" were branded as outlaws and deprived of their property and, for those who failed to escape, their lives. This decree issued by the triumvirate was motivated in part by a need to raise money to pay the salaries of their troops for the upcoming conflict against Caesar's assassins, Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus. Rewards for their arrest gave incentive for Romans to capture those proscribed, while the assets and properties of those arrested were seized by the triumvirs.\nContemporary Roman historians provide conflicting reports as to which triumvir was most responsible for the proscriptions and killing. However, the sources agree that enacting the proscriptions was a means by all three factions to eliminate political enemies. Marcus Velleius Paterculus asserted that Octavian tried to avoid proscribing officials whereas Lepidus and Antony were to blame for initiating them. Cassius Dio defended Octavian as trying to spare as many as possible, whereas Antony and Lepidus, being older and involved in politics longer, had many more enemies to deal with. This claim was rejected by Appian, who maintained that Octavian shared an equal interest with Lepidus and Antony in eradicating his enemies. Suetonius said that Octavian was reluctant to proscribe officials but did pursue his enemies with more vigor than the other triumvirs. Plutarch described the proscriptions as a ruthless and cutthroat swapping of friends and family among Antony, Lepidus, and Octavian. For example, Octavian allowed the proscription of his ally Cicero, Antony the proscription of his maternal uncle Lucius Julius Caesar (the consul of 64 BC), and Lepidus his brother Paullus.\nBattle of Philippi and division of territory.\nOn 1 January 42\u00a0BC, the Senate posthumously recognized Julius Caesar as a divinity of the Roman state, \"divus Iulius\". Octavian was able to further his cause by emphasizing the fact that he was \"divi filius\", \"Son of the Divine\". Antony and Octavian then sent 28 legions by sea to face the armies of Brutus and Cassius, who had built their base of power in Greece. After two battles at Philippi in Macedonia in October 42, the Caesarian army was victorious and Brutus and Cassius committed suicide. Mark Antony later used the examples of these battles as a means to belittle Octavian, as both battles were decisively won with the use of Antony's forces. In addition to claiming responsibility for both victories, Antony branded Octavian as a coward for handing over his direct military control to Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa instead.\nAfter Philippi, a new territorial arrangement was made among the members of the Second Triumvirate. Gaul and the province of Hispania were placed in the hands of Octavian. Antony traveled east to Egypt where he allied himself with Queen Cleopatra, the former lover of Julius Caesar and mother of Caesar's son Caesarion. Lepidus was left with the province of Africa, stymied by Antony, who conceded Hispania to Octavian instead.\nOctavian was left to decide where in Italy to settle the tens of thousands of veterans of the Macedonian campaign, whom the triumvirs had promised to discharge. The tens of thousands who had fought on the republican side with Brutus and Cassius could easily ally with a political opponent of Octavian if not appeased, and they also required land. There was no more government-controlled land to allot as settlements for their soldiers, so Octavian had to choose one of two options: alienating many Roman citizens by confiscating their land, or alienating many Roman soldiers who could mount a considerable opposition against him in the Roman heartland. Octavian chose the former. There were as many as eighteen Roman towns affected by the new settlements, with entire populations driven out or at least given partial evictions.\nRebellion and marriage alliances.\nThere was widespread dissatisfaction with Octavian over these settlements of his soldiers, and this encouraged many to rally at the side of Lucius Antonius, who was brother of Mark Antony and supported by a majority in the Senate. Meanwhile, Octavian asked for a divorce from Claudia, the daughter of Fulvia (Antony's wife) and her first husband Publius Clodius Pulcher. He returned Claudia to her mother, claiming that their marriage had never been consummated. Fulvia decided to take action. Together with Lucius Antonius, she raised an army in Italy to fight for Antony's rights against Octavian. Lucius and Fulvia took a political and martial gamble in opposing Octavian however, since the Roman army still depended on the triumvirs for their salaries. Lucius and his allies ended up in a defensive siege at Perusia, where Octavian forced them into surrender in early 40\u00a0BC.\nLucius and his army were spared because of his kinship with Antony, the strongman of the East, while Fulvia was exiled to Sicyon. Octavian showed no mercy, however, for the mass of allies loyal to Lucius. On 15 March, the anniversary of Julius Caesar's assassination, he had 300 Roman senators and equestrians executed for allying with Lucius. Perusia also was pillaged and burned as a warning for others. This bloody event sullied Octavian's reputation and was criticized by many, such as Augustan poet Sextus Propertius.\nSextus Pompeius, the son of Pompey and still a renegade general, following Julius Caesar's victory over his father, had established himself in Sicily and Sardinia as part of an agreement reached with the Second Triumvirate in 39\u00a0BC. Both Antony and Octavian were vying for an alliance with Pompeius. Octavian succeeded in a temporary alliance in 40\u00a0BC when he married Scribonia, a sister (or daughter) of Pompeius's father-in-law Lucius Scribonius Libo. Scribonia gave birth to Octavian's only natural child, Julia, the same day that he divorced her to marry Livia Drusilla, little more than a year after their marriage.\nWhile in Egypt, Antony had been engaged in an affair with Cleopatra and had fathered three children with her. Aware of his deteriorating relationship with Octavian, Antony left Cleopatra; he sailed to Italy in 40\u00a0BC with a large force to oppose Octavian, laying siege to Brundisium. This new conflict proved untenable for both Octavian and Antony, however. Their centurions, who had become important figures politically, refused to fight because of their Caesarian cause, while the legions under their command followed suit. Meanwhile, in Sicyon, Antony's wife Fulvia died of a sudden illness while Antony was \"en route\" to meet her. Fulvia's death and the mutiny of their centurions allowed the two remaining triumvirs to effect a reconciliation.\nIn the autumn of 40, Octavian and Antony approved the Treaty of Brundisium, by which Lepidus would remain in Africa, Antony in the East, Octavian in the West. The Italian Peninsula was left open to all for the recruitment of soldiers, but in reality this provision was useless for Antony in the East. To further cement relations of alliance with Antony, Octavian gave his sister, Octavia Minor, in marriage to Antony in late 40\u00a0BC.\nWar with Sextus Pompeius.\nSextus Pompeius threatened Octavian in Italy by denying shipments of grain through the Mediterranean Sea to the peninsula. Pompeius's own son was put in charge as naval commander in the effort to cause widespread famine in Italy. Pompeius's control over the sea prompted him to take on the name \"Neptuni filius\", \"son of Neptune\". A temporary peace agreement was reached in 39\u00a0BC with the Pact of Misenum; the blockade on Italy was lifted once Octavian granted Pompeius Sardinia, Corsica, Sicily, and the Peloponnese, and ensured him a future position as consul for 35\u00a0BC.\nThe territorial agreement between the triumvirate and Sextus Pompeius began to crumble once Octavian divorced Scribonia and married Livia on 17 January 38\u00a0BC. One of Pompeius's naval commanders betrayed him and handed over Corsica and Sardinia to Octavian. Octavian lacked the resources to confront Pompeius alone, so an agreement was reached with the Second Triumvirate's extension for another five-year period beginning in 37\u00a0BC.\nIn supporting Octavian, Antony expected to gain support for his own campaign against the Parthian Empire, desiring to avenge Rome's defeat at Carrhae in 53\u00a0BC. In an agreement reached at Tarentum, Antony provided 120 ships for Octavian to use against Pompeius, while Octavian was to send 20,000 legionaries to Antony for use against Parthia. Octavian sent only a tenth of those promised, which Antony viewed as an intentional provocation.\nOctavian and Lepidus launched a joint operation against Sextus in Sicily in 36\u00a0BC. Despite setbacks for Octavian, the naval fleet of Sextus Pompeius was almost entirely destroyed on 3 September by General Agrippa at the naval battle of Naulochus. Sextus fled to the east with his remaining forces, where he was captured and executed in Miletus by one of Antony's generals the following year. As Lepidus and Octavian accepted the surrender of Pompeius's troops, Lepidus attempted to claim Sicily for himself, ordering Octavian to leave. Lepidus's troops deserted him, however, and defected to Octavian since they were weary of fighting and were enticed by Octavian's promises of money.\nLepidus surrendered to Octavian and was permitted to retain the office of \"pontifex maximus\" (head of the college of priests) but was ejected from the Triumvirate. His public career at an end, he effectively was exiled to a villa at Cape Circei in Italy. The Roman dominions were divided between Octavian in the West and Antony in the East. Octavian ensured Rome's citizens of their rights to property in order to maintain peace and stability in his portion of the empire. This time, he settled his discharged soldiers outside of Italy, while also returning 30,000 slaves to their former Roman owners\u2014slaves who had fled to join Pompeius's army and navy. Octavian had the Senate grant him, his wife, and his sister tribunal immunity, or \"sacrosanctitas\", in order to ensure his own safety and that of Livia and Octavia once he returned to Rome.\nWar with Antony and Cleopatra.\nMeanwhile, Antony's campaign turned disastrous against Parthia, tarnishing his image as a leader, and the mere 2,000 legionaries sent by Octavian to Antony were hardly enough to replenish his forces. On the other hand, Cleopatra could restore his army to full strength; he already was engaged in a romantic affair with her, so he decided to send Octavia back to Rome. Octavian used this to spread propaganda implying that Antony was becoming less than Roman because he rejected a legitimate Roman spouse for an \"Oriental paramour\". In 36\u00a0BC, Octavian used a political ploy to make himself look less autocratic and Antony more the villain by proclaiming that the civil wars were coming to an end and that he would step down as triumvir\u2014if only Antony would do the same. Antony refused.\nRoman troops captured the Kingdom of Armenia in 34\u00a0BC, and Antony made his son Alexander Helios the ruler of Armenia. He also awarded the title \"Queen of Kings\" to Cleopatra, acts that Octavian used to convince the Roman Senate that Antony had ambitions to diminish the preeminence of Rome. Octavian became consul once again on 1 January 33\u00a0BC, and he opened the following session in the Senate with a vehement attack on Antony's grants of titles and territories to his relatives and to his queen.\nThe breach between Antony and Octavian prompted a large portion of the senators, as well as both of that year's consuls, to leave Rome and defect to Antony. However, Octavian received two key deserters from Antony in the autumn of 32\u00a0BC: Munatius Plancus and Marcus Titius. These defectors gave Octavian the information that he needed to confirm with the Senate all the accusations that he made against Antony. Octavian forcibly entered the temple of the Vestal Virgins and seized Antony's secret will, which he promptly publicized. The will would have given away Roman-conquered territories as kingdoms for his sons to rule and designated Alexandria as the site for a tomb for him and his queen. In late 32\u00a0BC, the Senate officially revoked Antony's powers as consul and declared war on Cleopatra's regime in Egypt.\nIn early 31\u00a0BC, Antony and Cleopatra were temporarily stationed in Greece when Octavian gained a preliminary victory: the navy successfully ferried troops across the Adriatic Sea under the command of Agrippa. Agrippa cut off Antony and Cleopatra's main force from their supply routes at sea, while Octavian landed on the mainland opposite the island of Corcyra (modern Corfu) and marched south. Trapped on land and sea, deserters of Antony's army fled to Octavian's side daily while Octavian's forces were comfortable enough to make preparations.\nAntony's fleet sailed through the bay of Actium on the western coast of Greece in a desperate attempt to break free of the naval blockade. It was there that Antony's fleet faced the much larger fleet of smaller, more maneuverable ships under commanders Agrippa and Gaius Sosius in the Battle of Actium on 2 September 31\u00a0BC. Antony and his remaining forces were spared by a last-ditch effort from Cleopatra's fleet that had been waiting nearby.\nOctavian pursued them and defeated their forces in Alexandria on 1 August 30\u00a0BC\u2014after which Antony and Cleopatra committed suicide. Antony fell on his own sword and was taken by his soldiers back to Alexandria where he died in Cleopatra's arms. Cleopatra died soon after, reputedly by the venomous bite of an asp or by poison. Octavian had exploited his position as Caesar's heir to further his own political career, and he was well aware of the dangers in allowing another person to do the same. He therefore followed the advice of Arius Didymus that \"two Caesars are one too many\", ordering Caesarion killed while sparing Cleopatra's children by Antony, with the exception of Antony's older son. Octavian had previously shown little mercy to surrendered enemies and acted in ways that had proven unpopular with the Roman people, yet he was given credit for pardoning many of his opponents after the Battle of Actium.\nSole ruler of Rome.\nAfter Actium and the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra, Octavian was in a position to rule the entire republic under an unofficial principate\u2014but he had to achieve this through incremental power gains. He did so by courting the Senate and the people while upholding the republican traditions of Rome, appearing that he was not aspiring to dictatorship or monarchy. Marching into Rome, Octavian and Agrippa were elected as consuls by the Senate.\nYears of civil war had left Rome in a state of near lawlessness, but the republic was not prepared to accept the control of Octavian as a despot. At the same time, Octavian could not give up his authority without risking further civil wars among the Roman generals, and even if he desired no position of authority his position demanded that he look to the well-being of the city of Rome and the Roman provinces. Octavian's aims from this point forward were to return Rome to a state of stability, traditional legality, and civility by lifting the overt political pressure imposed on the courts of law and ensuring free elections\u2014in name at least.\nFirst settlement.\nOn 13 January 27 BC, Octavian made a show of returning full power to the Roman Senate and relinquishing his control of the Roman provinces and their armies. Under his consulship, however, the Senate had little power in initiating legislation by introducing bills for senatorial debate. Octavian was no longer in direct control of the provinces and their armies, but he retained the loyalty of active duty soldiers and veterans alike. The careers of many clients and adherents depended on his patronage, as his financial power was unrivaled in the Roman Republic. Historian Werner Eck states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The sum of his power derived first of all from various powers of office delegated to him by the Senate and people, secondly from his immense private fortune, and thirdly from numerous patron-client relationships he established with individuals and groups throughout the Empire. All of them taken together formed the basis of his \"auctoritas\", which he himself emphasized as the foundation of his political actions.\nTo a large extent, the public was aware of the vast financial resources that Octavian commanded. He failed to encourage enough senators to finance the building and maintenance of networks of roads in Italy in 20 BC, but he undertook direct responsibility for them. This was publicized on the Roman currency issued in 16 BC, after he donated vast amounts of money to the \"aerarium Saturni\", the public treasury.\nAccording to historian H. H. Scullard, however, Octavian's power was based on the exercise of \"a predominant military power and\u00a0... the ultimate sanction of his authority was force, however much the fact was disguised.\" The Senate proposed to Octavian, the victor of Rome's civil wars, that he once again assume command of the provinces. The Senate's proposal was a ratification of Octavian's extra-constitutional power. Through the Senate, Octavian was able to continue the appearance of a still-functional constitution. Feigning reluctance, he accepted a ten-year responsibility of overseeing provinces that were considered chaotic. The provinces ceded to Augustus for that ten-year period comprised much of the conquered Roman world, including all of Hispania and Gaul, Syria, Cilicia, Cyprus, and Egypt. Moreover, command of these provinces provided Octavian with control over the majority of Rome's legions.\nWhile Octavian acted as consul in Rome, he dispatched senators to the provinces under his command as his representatives to manage provincial affairs and ensure that his orders were carried out. The provinces not under Octavian's control were overseen by governors chosen by the Roman Senate. Octavian became the most powerful political figure in the city of Rome and in most of its provinces, but he did not have a monopoly on political and martial power. The Senate still controlled North Africa, an important regional producer of grain, as well as Illyria and Macedonia, two strategic regions with several legions. However, the Senate had control of only five or six legions distributed among three senatorial proconsuls, compared to the twenty legions under the control of Octavian, and their control of these regions did not amount to any political or military challenge to Octavian. The Senate's control over some of the Roman provinces helped maintain a republican fa\u00e7ade for the autocratic principate. Also, Octavian's control of entire provinces followed republican-era precedents for the objective of securing peace and creating stability, in which such prominent Romans as Pompey had been granted similar military powers in times of crisis and instability.\nChange to Augustus.\nOn 16 January 27\u00a0BC the Senate gave Octavian the titles of \"augustus\" and \"princeps\". \"Augustus\" is from the Latin word \"augere\" (meaning to increase) and can be translated as \"the illustrious one\". It was a title of religious authority rather than political authority. His name of Augustus was also more favorable than \"Romulus\", the previous one which he styled for himself in reference to the story of the legendary founder of Rome, which symbolized a second founding of Rome. The title of \"Romulus\" was associated too strongly with notions of monarchy and kingship, an image that Octavian tried to avoid. The title \"princeps senatus\" originally meant the member of the Senate with the highest precedence, but in this case it became an almost regnal title for a leader who was first in charge. The name \"augustus\" was inherited by all future emperors, eventually becoming, at least in practice, the main title of the emperor. As a result, modern historians usually regard this event as the beginning of Augustus' reign as \"emperor\". Augustus also styled himself as \"Imperator Caesar divi filius\", \"Commander Caesar son of the deified one\". With this title, he boasted his familial link to deified Julius Caesar, and the use of \"imperator\" signified a permanent link to the Roman tradition of victory. He transformed \"Caesar\", a cognomen for one branch of the Julian family, into a new family line that began with him.\nAugustus was granted the right to hang the \"corona civica\" (civic crown) above his door and to have laurels drape his doorposts. However, he renounced flaunting insignia of power such as holding a scepter, wearing a diadem, or wearing the golden crown and purple toga of his predecessor Julius Caesar. If he refused to symbolize his power by donning and bearing these items on his person, the Senate nonetheless awarded him with a golden shield displayed in the meeting hall of the Curia, bearing the inscription \"virtus\", \"pietas\", \"clementia\", \"iustitia\"\u2014\"valor, piety, clemency, and justice.\"\nSecond settlement.\nBy 23\u00a0BC, some of the un-republican implications were becoming apparent concerning the settlement of 27\u00a0BC. Augustus's retention of an annual consulate drew attention to his \"de facto\" dominance over the Roman political system and cut in half the opportunities for others to achieve what was still nominally the preeminent position in the Roman state. Further, he was causing political problems by desiring to have his nephew Marcus Claudius Marcellus follow in his footsteps and eventually assume the principate in his turn, alienating his three greatest supporters: Agrippa, Maecenas, and Livia. He appointed noted republican Calpurnius Piso (who had fought against Julius Caesar and supported Cassius and Brutus) as co-consul in 23\u00a0BC, after his choice Aulus Terentius Varro Murena died unexpectedly.\nIn the late spring Augustus had a severe illness and on his supposed deathbed made arrangements that would ensure the continuation of the principate in some form, while allaying senators' suspicions of his anti-republicanism. Augustus prepared to hand down his signet ring to his favored general Agrippa. However, Augustus handed over to his co-consul Piso all of his official documents, an account of public finances, and authority over listed troops in the provinces while Augustus's supposedly favored nephew Marcellus came away empty-handed. This was a surprise to many who believed Augustus would have named an heir to his position as an unofficial emperor.\nAugustus bestowed only properties and possessions to his designated heirs, as an obvious system of institutionalized imperial inheritance would have provoked resistance and hostility among the republican-minded Romans fearful of monarchy. With regards to the principate, it was obvious to Augustus that Marcellus was not ready to take on his position; nonetheless, by giving his signet ring to Agrippa, Augustus intended to signal to the legions that Agrippa was to be his successor and that they should continue to obey Agrippa, constitutional procedure notwithstanding.\nSoon after his bout of illness subsided, Augustus gave up his consulship. The only other times Augustus would serve as consul would be in the years 5 and 2\u00a0BC, both times to introduce his grandsons into public life. This was a clever ploy by Augustus; ceasing to serve as one of two annually elected consuls allowed aspiring senators a better chance to attain the consular position while allowing Augustus to exercise wider patronage within the senatorial class. Although Augustus had resigned as consul, he desired to retain his consular \"imperium\" not just in his provinces but throughout the empire. This desire, as well as the Marcus Primus affair, led to a second compromise between him and the Senate known as the second settlement.\nThe primary reasons for the second settlement were as follows. First, after Augustus relinquished the annual consulship, he was no longer in an official position to rule the state, yet his dominant position remained unchanged over his Roman, 'imperial' provinces where he was still a proconsul. When he annually held the office of consul, he had the power to intervene with the affairs of the other provincial proconsuls appointed by the Senate throughout the empire, when he deemed necessary.\nA second problem later arose showing the need for the second settlement in what became known as the \"Marcus Primus affair\". In late 24 or early 23\u00a0BC, charges were brought against Marcus Primus, the former proconsul (governor) of Macedonia, for waging a war without prior approval of the Senate on the Odrysian kingdom of Thrace, whose king was a Roman ally. He was defended by Lucius Licinius Varro Murena who told the trial that his client had received specific instructions from Augustus ordering him to attack the client state. Later, Primus testified that the orders came from the recently deceased Marcellus. Such orders, had they been given, would have been considered a breach of the Senate's prerogative under the constitutional settlement of 27 BC and its aftermath\u2014i.e., before Augustus was granted \"imperium proconsulare maius\"\u2014as Macedonia was a senatorial province under the Senate's jurisdiction, not an imperial province under the authority of Augustus. Such an action would have ripped away the veneer of republican restoration as promoted by Augustus, and exposed his fraud of merely being the first citizen, a first among equals. Even worse, the involvement of Marcellus provided some measure of proof that Augustus's policy was to have the youth take his place as princeps, instituting a form of monarchy\u00a0\u2013 accusations that had already played out.\nThe situation was so serious that Augustus appeared at the trial even though he had not been called as a witness. Under oath, Augustus declared that he gave no such order. Murena disbelieved Augustus's testimony and resented his attempt to subvert the trial by using his \"auctoritas\". He rudely demanded to know why Augustus had turned up to a trial to which he had not been called; Augustus replied that he came in the public interest. Although Primus was found guilty, some jurors voted to acquit, meaning that not everybody believed Augustus's testimony, an insult to the 'August One'.\nThe second settlement was completed in part to allay confusion and formalize Augustus's legal authority to intervene in senatorial provinces. The Senate granted Augustus a form of general \"imperium proconsulare\", or proconsular imperium (power) that applied throughout the empire, not solely to his provinces. Moreover, the Senate augmented Augustus's proconsular imperium into \"imperium proconsulare maius\", or proconsular imperium applicable throughout the empire that was more (maius) or greater than that held by the other proconsuls. This in effect gave Augustus constitutional power superior to all other proconsuls in the empire. Augustus stayed in Rome during the renewal process and provided veterans with lavish donations to gain their support, thereby ensuring that his status of proconsular imperium maius was renewed in 13\u00a0BC.\nAdditional powers.\nDuring the second settlement, Augustus was also granted the power of a tribune (\"tribunicia potestas\") for life, though not the official title of tribune. For some years, Augustus had been awarded \"tribunicia sacrosanctitas\", the immunity given to a tribune of the plebs. Now he decided to assume the full powers of the magistracy, renewed annually, in perpetuity. Legally, it was closed to patricians, a status that Augustus had acquired some years earlier when adopted by Julius Caesar. This power allowed him to convene the Senate and people at will and lay business before them, to veto the actions of either the Assembly or the Senate, to preside over elections, and to speak first at any meeting. Also included in Augustus's tribunician authority were powers usually reserved for the Roman censor; these included the right to supervise public morals and scrutinize laws to ensure that they were in the public interest, as well as the ability to hold a census and determine the membership of the Senate.\nWith the powers of a censor, Augustus appealed to virtues of Roman patriotism by banning all attire but the classic toga while entering the Forum. There was no precedent within the Roman system for combining the powers of the tribune and the censor into a single position, nor was Augustus ever elected to the office of censor. Julius Caesar had been granted similar powers, wherein he was charged with supervising the morals of the state. However, this position did not extend to the censor's ability to hold a census and determine the Senate's roster. The office of the \"tribunus plebis\" began to lose its prestige due to Augustus's amassing of tribunal powers, so he revived its importance by making it a mandatory appointment for any plebeian desiring the praetorship.\nAugustus was granted sole \"imperium\" within the city of Rome in addition to being granted proconsular \"imperium maius\" and tribunician authority for life. Traditionally, proconsuls (Roman province governors) lost their proconsular \"imperium\" when they crossed the Pomerium\u2014the sacred boundary of Rome\u2014and entered the city. In these situations, Augustus would have power as part of his tribunician authority, but his constitutional imperium within the Pomerium would be less than that of a serving consul, which meant that when he was in the city he might not be the constitutional magistrate with the most authority. Thanks to his prestige or \"auctoritas\", his wishes would usually be obeyed, but there might be some difficulty. To fill this power vacuum, the Senate voted that Augustus's \"imperium proconsulare maius\" (superior proconsular power) should not lapse when he was inside the city walls. All armed forces in the city had formerly been under the control of the urban praetors and consuls, but this situation now placed them under the sole authority of Augustus.\nIn addition, the credit was given to Augustus for each subsequent Roman military victory after this time, because the majority of Rome's armies were stationed in imperial provinces commanded by Augustus through the legatus who were deputies of the princeps in the provinces. Moreover, if a battle was fought in a senatorial province, Augustus's proconsular \"imperium maius\" allowed him to take command of (or credit for) any major military victory. This meant that Augustus was the only individual able to receive a triumph, a tradition that began with Romulus, Rome's first king and first triumphant general. Tiberius, Augustus's eldest stepson by Livia, was the only other general to receive a triumph\u2014for victories in Germania in 7\u00a0BC.\nNormally during republican times, the powers Augustus held even after the second settlement would have been split between several people, who would each exercise them with the assistance of a colleague and for a specific period of time. Augustus held them all at once by himself and with no time limits; even those that nominally had time limits were automatically renewed whenever they lapsed.\nConspiracy.\nMany of the political subtleties of the second settlement seem to have evaded the comprehension of the plebeian class, who were Augustus's greatest supporters and clientele. This caused them to insist upon Augustus's participation in imperial affairs from time to time. Augustus failed to stand for election as consul in 22\u00a0BC, and fears arose once again that he was being forced from power by the aristocratic Senate. In 22, 21, and 19\u00a0BC, the people rioted in response and only allowed a single consul to be elected for each of those years, ostensibly to leave the other position open for Augustus.\nLikewise, there was a food shortage in Rome in 22\u00a0BC which sparked panic, while many urban plebs called for Augustus to take on dictatorial powers to personally oversee the crisis. After a theatrical display of refusal before the Senate, Augustus finally accepted authority over Rome's grain supply \"by virtue of his proconsular \"imperium\"\", and ended the crisis almost immediately. It was not until AD 8 that a food crisis of this sort prompted Augustus to establish a \"praefectus annonae\", a permanent prefect who was in charge of procuring food supplies for Rome.\nThere were some who were concerned by the expansion of powers granted to Augustus by the second settlement, and this came to a head with the apparent conspiracy of Fannius Caepio. Some time prior to 1 September 22 BC, a certain Castricius provided Augustus with information about a conspiracy led by Fannius Caepio. Murena, the outspoken consul who defended Primus in the Marcus Primus affair, was named among the conspirators. The conspirators were tried in absentia with Tiberius acting as prosecutor; the jury found them guilty, but it was not a unanimous verdict. All the accused were sentenced to death for treason and executed as soon as they were captured\u2014without ever giving testimony in their defence. Augustus ensured that the facade of Republican government continued with an effective cover-up of the events.\nIn 19\u00a0BC, the Senate granted Augustus a form of \"general consular imperium\", which was probably \"imperium consulare maius\", like the proconsular powers that he received in 23 BC. Like his tribune authority, the consular powers were another instance of gaining power from offices that he did not actually hold. In addition, Augustus was allowed to wear the consul's insignia in public and before the Senate, as well as to sit in the symbolic chair between the two consuls and hold the fasces, an emblem of consular authority. This seems to have assuaged the populace; regardless of whether or not Augustus was a consul, the importance was that he both appeared as one before the people and could exercise consular power if necessary. On 6 March 12\u00a0BC, after the death of Lepidus, he additionally took up the position of \"pontifex maximus\", the high priest of the college of the pontiffs, the most important position in Roman religion. On 5 February 2\u00a0BC, Augustus was also given the title \"pater patriae\", or \"father of the country\".\nStability and staying power.\nA final reason for the second settlement was to give the principate constitutional stability and staying power in case something happened to Princeps Augustus. His illness of early 23 BC and the Caepio conspiracy showed that the regime's existence hung by the thin thread of the life of one man, Augustus himself, who had several severe and dangerous illnesses throughout his life. If he were to die from natural causes or fall victim to assassination, Rome could be subjected to another round of civil war. The memories of Pharsalus, the Ides of March, the proscriptions, Philippi, and Actium, barely twenty-five years distant, were still vivid in the minds of many citizens. Proconsular imperium was conferred upon Agrippa for five years, similar to Augustus's power, in order to accomplish this constitutional stability. The exact nature of the grant is uncertain but it probably covered Augustus's imperial provinces, east and west, perhaps lacking authority over the provinces of the Senate. That came later, as did the jealously guarded tribunicia potestas. Augustus's accumulation of powers was now complete.\nWar and expansion.\nAugustus chose \"Imperator\" (\"victorious commander\") to be his first name, since he wanted to make an emphatically clear connection between himself and the notion of victory, and consequently became known as \"Imperator Caesar Divi Filius Augustus\". By AD 13, Augustus boasted 21 occasions where his troops proclaimed \"imperator\" as his title after a successful battle. Almost the entire fourth chapter in his publicly released memoirs of achievements known as the \"Res Gestae\" is devoted to his military victories and honors.\nAugustus also promoted the ideal of a superior Roman civilization with a task of ruling the world (to the extent to which the Romans knew it), a sentiment embodied in words that the contemporary poet Virgil attributes to a legendary ancestor of Augustus: \"tu regere imperio populos, Romane, memento\"\u2014\"Roman, remember by your strength to rule the Earth's peoples!\" The impulse for expansionism was apparently prominent among all classes at Rome, and it is accorded divine sanction by Virgil's Jupiter in Book 1 of the \"Aeneid\", where Jupiter promises Rome \"imperium sine fine\", \"sovereignty without end\".\nBy the end of his reign, the armies of Augustus had conquered northern Hispania (modern Spain and Portugal) and the Alpine regions of Raetia and Noricum (modern Switzerland, Bavaria, Austria, Slovenia), Illyricum and Pannonia (modern Albania, Croatia, Hungary, Serbia, etc.), and had extended the borders of Africa Proconsularis to the east and south. Judea was added to the province of Syria when Augustus deposed Herod Archelaus, successor to client king Herod the Great. Syria (like Egypt after Antony) was governed by a high prefect of the equestrian class rather than by a proconsul or legate of Augustus.\nAgain, no military effort was needed in 25\u00a0BC when Galatia (modern Turkey) was converted to a Roman province shortly after Amyntas of Galatia was killed by an avenging widow of a slain prince from Homonada. The rebellious tribes of Asturias and Cantabria in modern-day Spain were finally quelled in 19\u00a0BC, and the territory fell under the provinces of Hispania and Lusitania. This region proved to be a major asset in funding Augustus's future military campaigns, as it was rich in mineral deposits that could be fostered in Roman mining projects, especially the very rich gold deposits at Las M\u00e9dulas.\nConquering the peoples of the Alps in 16\u00a0BC was another important victory for Rome, since it provided a large territorial buffer between the Roman citizens of Italy and Rome's enemies in Germania to the north. Horace dedicated an ode to the victory, while the monumental Trophy of Augustus near Monaco was built to honor the occasion. The capture of the Alpine region also served the next offensive in 12\u00a0BC, when Tiberius began the offensive against the Pannonian tribes of Illyricum, and his brother Nero Claudius Drusus moved against the Germanic tribes of the eastern Rhineland. Both campaigns were successful, as Drusus's forces reached the Elbe River by 9\u00a0BC\u2014though he died shortly after by falling off his horse. It was recorded that the pious Tiberius walked in front of his brother's body all the way back to Rome.\nTo protect Rome's eastern territories from the Parthian Empire, Augustus relied on the client states of the east to act as territorial buffers and areas that could raise their own troops for defense. To ensure security of the empire's eastern flank, Augustus stationed a Roman army in Syria, while his skilled stepson Tiberius negotiated with the Parthians as Rome's diplomat to the East. Tiberius was responsible for restoring Tigranes V to the throne of the Kingdom of Armenia.\nArguably his greatest diplomatic achievement was negotiating with Phraates IV of Parthia (37\u20132\u00a0BC) in 20\u00a0BC for the return of the battle standards lost by Crassus in the Battle of Carrhae, a symbolic victory and great boost of morale for Rome. Werner Eck claims that this was a great disappointment for Romans seeking to avenge Crassus's defeat by military means. However, Maria Brosius explains that Augustus used the return of the standards as propaganda symbolizing the submission of Parthia to Rome. The event was celebrated in art such as the breastplate design on the statue Augustus of Prima Porta and in monuments such as the Temple of Mars Ultor ('Mars the Avenger') built to house the standards. Parthia had always posed a threat to Rome in the east, but the real battlefront was along the Rhine and Danube rivers. Before the final fight with Antony, Octavian's campaigns against the tribes in Dalmatia were the first step in expanding Roman dominions to the Danube. Victory in battle was not always a permanent success, as newly conquered territories were constantly retaken by Rome's enemies in Germania.\nA prime example of Roman loss in battle was the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in AD 9, where three entire legions led by Publius Quinctilius Varus were destroyed by Arminius, leader of the Cherusci, an apparent Roman ally. Augustus retaliated by dispatching Tiberius and Drusus to the Rhineland to pacify it, which had some success although the battle brought the end to Roman expansion into Germany. Roman general Germanicus took advantage of a Cherusci civil war between Arminius and Segestes; at the Battle of Idistaviso in AD 16, they defeated Arminius.\nDeath and succession.\nThe illness of Augustus in 23\u00a0BC brought the problem of succession to the forefront of political issues and the public. To ensure stability, he needed to designate an heir to his unique position in Roman society and government. This was to be achieved in small, undramatic and incremental ways that did not stir senatorial fears of monarchy. If someone was to succeed to Augustus's unofficial position of power, he would have to earn it through his own publicly proven merits.\nSome Augustan historians argue that indications pointed toward his sister's son Marcellus, who had been quickly married to Augustus's daughter Julia the Elder. Other historians dispute this since Augustus's will was read aloud to the Senate while he was seriously ill in 23\u00a0BC, indicating a preference for Marcus Agrippa, who was Augustus's second in charge and arguably the only one of his associates who could have controlled the legions and held the empire together.\nAfter the death of Marcellus in 23\u00a0BC, Augustus married his daughter to Agrippa. This union produced five children, three sons and two daughters: Gaius Caesar, Lucius Caesar, Vipsania Julia, Agrippina, and Agrippa Postumus, so named because he was born after Marcus Agrippa died. Shortly after the second settlement, Agrippa was granted a five-year term of administering the eastern half of the empire with the \"imperium\" of a proconsul and the same \"tribunicia potestas\" granted to Augustus (although not trumping Augustus's authority), his seat of governance stationed at Samos in the eastern Aegean. This granting of power showed Augustus's favor for Agrippa, but it was also a measure to please members of his Caesarian party by allowing one of their members to share a considerable amount of power with him.\nAugustus's intent became apparent to make Gaius and Lucius Caesar his heirs when he adopted them as his own children. He took the consulship in 5 and 2\u00a0BC so that he could personally usher them into their political careers, and they were nominated for the consulships of AD 1 and 4. Augustus also showed favor to his stepsons, Livia's children from her first marriage Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (henceforth referred to as Drusus) and Tiberius Claudius (henceforth Tiberius), granting them military commands and public office, though seeming to favor Drusus. After Agrippa died in 12\u00a0BC, Tiberius was ordered to divorce his own wife Vipsania Agrippina and marry Agrippa's widow, Augustus's daughter Julia\u2014as soon as a period of mourning for Agrippa had ended. Drusus's marriage to Augustus's niece Antonia was considered an unbreakable affair, whereas Vipsania was \"only\" the daughter of the late Agrippa from his first marriage.\nTiberius shared in Augustus's tribune powers as of 6\u00a0BC but shortly thereafter went into retirement, reportedly wanting no further role in politics while he exiled himself to Rhodes. No specific reason is known for his departure, though it could have been a combination of reasons, including a failing marriage with Julia as well as a sense of envy and exclusion over Augustus's apparent favouring of his young grandchildren-turned-sons Gaius and Lucius. (Gaius and Lucius joined the college of priests at an early age, were presented to spectators in a more favorable light, and were introduced to the army in Gaul.)\nAfter the deaths of both Lucius and Gaius in AD 2 and 4 respectively, and the earlier death of his brother Drusus (9\u00a0BC), Tiberius was recalled to Rome in June AD 4, where he was adopted by Augustus on the condition that he, in turn, adopt his nephew Germanicus. This continued the tradition of presenting at least two generations of heirs. In that year, Tiberius was also granted the powers of a tribune and proconsul, emissaries from foreign kings had to pay their respects to him and by AD 13 was awarded with his second triumph and equal level of \"imperium\" with that of Augustus.\nThe only other possible claimant as heir was Agrippa Postumus, who had been exiled by Augustus in AD 7, his banishment made permanent by senatorial decree, and Augustus officially disowned him. He certainly fell out of Augustus's favor as an heir; the historian Erich S. Gruen notes various contemporary sources that state Agrippa Postumus was a \"vulgar young man, brutal and brutish, and of depraved character\".\nOn 19 August AD 14, Augustus died while visiting Nola where his father had died. Both Tacitus and Cassius Dio wrote that Livia was rumored to have brought about Augustus's death by poisoning fresh figs. This element features in many modern works of historical fiction pertaining to Augustus's life, but some historians view it as likely to have been a salacious fabrication made by those who had favoured Postumus as heir, or other of Tiberius's political enemies. Livia had long been the target of similar rumors of poisoning on the behalf of her son, most or all of which are unlikely to have been true. Alternatively, it is possible that Livia did supply a poisoned fig (she did cultivate a variety of fig named for her that Augustus is said to have enjoyed), but did so as a means of assisted suicide rather than murder. Augustus's health had been in decline in the months immediately before his death, and he had made significant preparations for a smooth transition in power, having at last reluctantly settled on Tiberius as his choice of heir. It is likely that Augustus was not expected to return alive from Nola, but it seems that his health improved once there; it has therefore been speculated that Augustus and Livia conspired to end his life at the anticipated time, having committed all political process to accepting Tiberius, in order to not endanger that transition.\nAugustus's famous last words were, \"Have I played the part well? Then applaud as I exit\" ()\u2014referring to the play-acting and regal authority that he had put on as emperor. Publicly, though, his last words were, \"Behold, I found Rome of clay, and leave her to you of marble\" (). An enormous funerary procession of mourners traveled with Augustus's body from Nola to Rome, and all public and private businesses closed on the day of his burial. Tiberius and his son Drusus delivered the eulogy while standing atop two \"rostra\". Augustus's body was coffin-bound and cremated on a pyre close to his mausoleum. It was proclaimed that Augustus joined the company of the gods as a member of the Roman pantheon.\nHistorian D. C. A. Shotter states that Augustus's policy of favoring the Julian family line over the Claudian might have afforded Tiberius sufficient cause to show open disdain for Augustus after the latter's death; instead, Tiberius was always quick to rebuke those who criticized Augustus. Shotter suggests that Augustus's deification obliged Tiberius to suppress any open resentment that he might have harbored, coupled with Tiberius's \"extremely conservative\" attitude towards religion. Also, historian R. Shaw-Smith points to letters of Augustus to Tiberius which display affection towards Tiberius and high regard for his military merits. Shotter states that Tiberius focused his anger and criticism on Gaius Asinius Gallus (for marrying Vipsania after Augustus forced Tiberius to divorce her), as well as toward the two young Caesars, Gaius and Lucius\u2014instead of Augustus, the real architect of his divorce and imperial demotion.\nLegacy.\nAugustus created a regime which maintained peace and prosperity in the Roman west and the Greek east for two centuries. Its dominance also laid the foundations of a concept of universal empire in the Byzantine Empire and the Holy Roman Empires down to their dissolutions in 1453 and 1806, respectively. Both his adoptive surname, Caesar, and his title \"Augustus\" became the permanent titles of the rulers of the Roman Empire for fourteen centuries after his death, in use both at Old Rome and at New Rome. In many languages, \"Caesar\" became the word for \"emperor\", as in the German \"Kaiser\" and in the Bulgarian and subsequently Russian \"Tsar\" (sometimes \"Csar\" or \"Czar\"). The cult of \"Divus Augustus\" continued until the state religion of the empire was changed to Christianity in 391 by Theodosius I. Consequently, there are many excellent statues and busts of the first emperor. He had composed an account of his achievements, the \"Res Gestae Divi Augusti\", to be inscribed in bronze in front of his mausoleum. Copies of the text were inscribed throughout the empire upon his death. The inscriptions in Latin featured translations in Greek beside it and were inscribed on many public edifices, such as the temple in Ankara dubbed the \"Monumentum Ancyranum\", called the \"queen of inscriptions\" by historian Theodor Mommsen.\nThe \"Res Gestae\" is the only work to have survived from antiquity, though Augustus is also known to have composed poems entitled \"Sicily\", \"Epiphanus\", and \"Ajax\", an autobiography of 13 books, a philosophical treatise, and a written rebuttal to Brutus's \"Eulogy of Cato\". Historians are able to analyze excerpts of letters penned by Augustus, preserved in other works, to others for additional facts or clues about his personal life.\nMany consider Augustus to be Rome's greatest emperor; his policies certainly extended the empire's life span and initiated the celebrated \"Pax Romana\" or \"Pax Augusta\". The Roman Senate wished subsequent emperors to \"be more fortunate than Augustus and better than Trajan\". Augustus was intelligent, decisive, and a shrewd politician, but he was not perhaps as charismatic as Julius Caesar and was influenced on occasion by Livia (sometimes for the worse). Nevertheless, his legacy proved more enduring. The city of Rome was utterly transformed under Augustus, with Rome's first institutionalized police force, firefighting force, and the establishment of the municipal prefect as a permanent office. The police force was divided into cohorts of 500 men each, while the units of firemen ranged from 500 to 1,000 men each, with 7 units assigned to 14 divided city sectors.\nA \"praefectus vigilum\", or \"Prefect of the Watch\" was put in charge of the vigiles, Rome's fire brigade and police. With Rome's civil wars at an end, Augustus was also able to create a standing army for the Roman Empire, fixed at a size of 28 legions of about 170,000 soldiers. This was supported by numerous auxiliary units of 500 non-citizen soldiers each, often recruited from recently conquered areas.\nWith his finances securing the maintenance of roads throughout Italy, Augustus installed an official courier system of relay stations overseen by a military officer known as the \"praefectus vehiculorum\". Besides the advent of swifter communication among Italian polities, his extensive building of roads throughout Italy also allowed Rome's armies to march swiftly and at an unprecedented pace across the country. In the year 6 Augustus established the \"aerarium militare\", donating 170\u00a0million sesterces to the new military treasury that provided for both active and retired soldiers.\nOne of the most enduring institutions of Augustus was the establishment of the Praetorian Guard in 27\u00a0BC, originally a personal bodyguard unit on the battlefield that evolved into an imperial guard as well as an important political force in Rome. They had the power to intimidate the Senate, install new emperors, and depose ones they disliked; the last emperor they served was Maxentius, as it was Constantine I who disbanded them in the early 4th century and destroyed their barracks, the Castra Praetoria.\nAlthough the most powerful individual in the Roman Empire, Augustus wished to embody the spirit of Republican virtue and norms. He also wanted to relate to and connect with the concerns of the plebs and lay people. He achieved this through various means of generosity and a cutting back of lavish excess. In the year 29\u00a0BC, Augustus gave 400 sesterces (equal to 1/10 of a Roman pound of gold) each to 250,000 citizens, 1,000 sesterces each to 120,000 veterans in the colonies, and spent 700\u00a0million sesterces in purchasing land for his soldiers to settle upon. He also restored 82 different temples to display his care for the Roman pantheon of deities. In 28\u00a0BC, he melted down 80 silver statues erected in his likeness and in honor of him, an attempt of his to appear frugal and modest.\nThe longevity of Augustus's reign and its legacy to the Roman world should not be overlooked as a key factor in its success. As Tacitus wrote, the younger generations alive in AD 14 had never known any form of government other than the principate. Had Augustus died earlier, matters might have turned out differently. The attrition of the civil wars on the old Republican oligarchy and the longevity of Augustus, therefore, must be seen as major contributing factors in the transformation of the Roman state into a \"de facto\" monarchy in these years. Augustus's own experience, his patience, his tact, and his political acumen also played their parts. He directed the future of the empire down many lasting paths, from the existence of a standing professional army stationed at or near the frontiers, to the dynastic principle so often employed in the imperial succession, to the embellishment of the capital at the emperor's expense. Augustus's ultimate legacy was the peace and prosperity the Empire enjoyed for the next two centuries under the system he initiated. His memory was enshrined in the political ethos of the Imperial age as a paradigm of the good emperor. Every emperor of Rome adopted his name, Caesar Augustus, which gradually lost its character as a name and eventually became a title. The Augustan era poets Virgil and Horace praised Augustus as a defender of Rome, an upholder of moral justice, and an individual who bore the brunt of responsibility in maintaining the empire.\nHowever, for his rule of Rome and establishing the principate, Augustus has also been subjected to criticism throughout the ages. The contemporary Roman jurist Marcus Antistius Labeo, fond of the days of pre-Augustan republican liberty in which he had been born, openly criticized the Augustan regime. In the beginning of his \"Annals\", Tacitus wrote that Augustus had cunningly subverted Republican Rome into a position of slavery. He continued to say that, with Augustus's death and swearing of loyalty to Tiberius, the people of Rome traded one slaveholder for another. Tacitus, however, records two contradictory but common views of Augustus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Intelligent people praised or criticized him in varying ways. One opinion was as follows. Filial duty and a national emergency, in which there was no place for law-abiding conduct, had driven him to civil war\u2014and this can neither be initiated nor maintained by decent methods. He had made many concessions to Anthony and to Lepidus for the sake of vengeance on his father's murderers. When Lepidus grew old and lazy, and Anthony's self-indulgence got the better of him, the only possible cure for the distracted country had been government by one man. However, Augustus had put the state in order not by making himself king or dictator, but by creating the Principate. The Empire's frontiers were on the ocean, or distant rivers. Armies, provinces, fleets, the whole system was interrelated. Roman citizens were protected by the law. Provincials were decently treated. Rome itself had been lavishly beautified. Force had been sparingly used\u2014merely to preserve peace for the majority.\nAccording to the second opposing opinion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;filial duty and national crisis had been merely pretexts. In actual fact, the motive of Octavian, the future Augustus, was lust for power\u00a0... There had certainly been peace, but it was a blood-stained peace of disasters and assassinations.\nIn a 2006 biography on Augustus, Anthony Everitt asserts that through the centuries, judgments on Augustus's reign have oscillated between these two extremes but stresses that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Opposites do not have to be mutually exclusive, and we are not obliged to choose one or the other. The story of his career shows that Augustus was indeed ruthless, cruel, and ambitious for himself. This was only in part a personal trait, for upper-class Romans were educated to compete with one another and to excel. However, he combined an overriding concern for his personal interests with a deep-seated patriotism, based on a nostalgia of Rome's antique virtues. In his capacity as \"princeps\", selfishness and selflessness coexisted in his mind. While fighting for dominance, he paid little attention to legality or to the normal civilities of political life. He was devious, untrustworthy, and bloodthirsty. But once he had established his authority, he governed efficiently and justly, generally allowed freedom of speech, and promoted the rule of law. He was immensely hardworking and tried as hard as any democratic parliamentarian to treat his senatorial colleagues with respect and sensitivity. He suffered from no delusions of grandeur.\nTacitus was of the belief that Nerva (r. 96\u201398) successfully \"mingled two formerly alien ideas, principate and liberty\". The 3rd-century historian Cassius Dio acknowledged Augustus as a benign, moderate ruler, yet like most other historians after the death of Augustus, Dio viewed Augustus as an autocrat. The poet Marcus Annaeus Lucanus (AD 39\u201365) was of the opinion that Caesar's victory over Pompey and the fall of Cato the Younger (95 BC\u201346\u00a0BC) marked the end of traditional liberty in Rome; historian Chester Starr writes of his avoidance of criticizing Augustus, \"perhaps Augustus was too sacred a figure to accuse directly.\"\nThe Anglo-Irish writer Jonathan Swift (1667\u20131745), in his \"Discourse on the Contests and Dissentions in Athens and Rome\", criticized Augustus for installing tyranny over Rome, and likened what he believed Great Britain's virtuous constitutional monarchy to Rome's moral Republic of the 2nd century BC. In his criticism of Augustus, the admiral and historian Thomas Gordon (1658\u20131741) compared Augustus to the puritanical tyrant Oliver Cromwell (1599\u20131658). Thomas Gordon and the French political philosopher Montesquieu (1689\u20131755) both remarked that Augustus was a coward in battle. In his \"Memoirs of the Court of Augustus\", the Scottish scholar Thomas Blackwell (1701\u20131757) deemed Augustus a Machiavellian ruler, \"a bloodthirsty vindicative usurper\", \"wicked and worthless\", \"a mean spirit\", and a \"tyrant\".\nRevenue reforms.\nAugustus's public revenue reforms had a great impact on the subsequent success of the Empire. Augustus brought a far greater portion of the Empire's expanded land base under consistent, direct taxation from Rome, instead of exacting varying, intermittent, and somewhat arbitrary tributes from each local province as Augustus's predecessors had done. This reform greatly increased Rome's net revenue from its territorial acquisitions, stabilized its flow, and regularized the financial relationship between Rome and the provinces, rather than provoking fresh resentments with each new arbitrary exaction of tribute.\nThe measures of taxation in the reign of Augustus were determined by population census, with fixed quotas for each province. Citizens of Rome and Italy paid indirect taxes, while direct taxes were exacted from the provinces. Indirect taxes included a 4% tax on the price of slaves, a 1% tax on goods sold at auction, and a 5% tax on the inheritance of estates valued at over 100,000 sesterces by persons other than the next of kin.\nAn equally important reform was the abolition of private tax farming, which was replaced by salaried civil service tax collectors. Private contractors who collected taxes for the State were the norm in the Republican era. Some of them were powerful enough to influence the number of votes for men running for offices in Rome. These tax farmers called publicans were infamous for their depredations, great private wealth, and the right to tax local areas.\nThe use of Egypt's immense land rents to finance the Empire's operations resulted from Augustus's conquest of Egypt and the shift to a Roman form of government. As it was effectively considered Augustus's private property rather than a province of the Empire, it became part of each succeeding emperor's patrimonium.\nInstead of a legate or proconsul, Augustus installed a prefect from the equestrian class to administer Egypt and maintain its lucrative seaports; this position became the highest political achievement for any equestrian besides becoming Prefect of the Praetorian Guard. The highly productive agricultural land of Egypt yielded enormous revenues that were available to Augustus and his successors to pay for public works and military expeditions.\nMonth of August.\nThe month of August (Latin: \"Augustus\") is named after Augustus; until his time it was called Sextilis (named so because it had been the sixth month of the original Roman calendar and the Latin word for six is \"sex\"). Commonly repeated lore has it that August has 31 days because Augustus wanted his month to match the length of Julius Caesar's July, but this is an invention of the 13th century scholar Johannes de Sacrobosco. Sextilis in fact had 31 days before it was renamed, and it was not chosen for its length (see Julian calendar).\nAccording to a \"senatus consultum\" quoted by Macrobius, Sextilis was renamed to honor Augustus because several of the most significant events in his rise to power, culminating in the fall of Alexandria, fell in that month.\nCreation of \"Italia\".\nRoman Italy was established by Augustus in 7 BC with the Latin name \"Italia\". This was the first time that the Italian peninsula was united administratively and politically under the same name. Due to this act, Augustus was called the \"Father of Italy\" by Italian historians such as G. Giannelli.\nBuilding projects.\nOn his deathbed, Augustus boasted \"I found a Rome of bricks; I leave to you one of marble.\" Although there is some truth in the literal meaning of this, Cassius Dio asserts that it was a metaphor for the Empire's strength. Marble could be found in buildings of Rome before Augustus, but it was not extensively used as a building material until the reign of Augustus.\nAlthough this did not apply to the Subura slums, which were still as rickety and fire-prone as ever, he did leave a mark on the monumental topography of the centre and of the Campus Martius, with the Ara Pacis (Altar of Peace) and monumental sundial, whose central gnomon was an obelisk taken from Egypt. The relief sculptures decorating the Ara Pacis visually augmented the written record of Augustus's triumphs in the \"Res Gestae\". Its reliefs depicted the imperial pageants of the praetorians, the Vestals, and the citizenry of Rome.\nHe also built the Temple of Caesar, the Baths of Agrippa, and the Forum of Augustus with its Temple of Mars Ultor. Other projects were either encouraged by him, such as the Theatre of Balbus, and Agrippa's construction of the Pantheon, or funded by him in the name of others, often relations (e.g. Portico of Octavia, Theatre of Marcellus). Even his Mausoleum of Augustus was built before his death to house members of his family. To celebrate his victory at the Battle of Actium, the Arch of Augustus was built in 29\u00a0BC near the entrance of the Temple of Castor and Pollux, and widened in 19\u00a0BC to include a triple-arch design.\nAfter the death of Agrippa in 12\u00a0BC, a solution had to be found in maintaining Rome's water supply system. This came about because it was overseen by Agrippa when he served as aedile, and was even funded by him afterwards when he was a private citizen paying at his own expense. In that year, Augustus arranged a system where the Senate designated three of its members as prime commissioners in charge of the water supply and to ensure that Rome's aqueducts did not fall into disrepair.\nIn the late Augustan era, the commission of five senators called the \"curatores locorum publicorum iudicandorum\" (translated as \"Supervisors of Public Property\") was put in charge of maintaining public buildings and temples of the state cult. Augustus created the senatorial group of the \"curatores viarum\" (translated as \"Supervisors for Roads\") for the upkeep of roads; this senatorial commission worked with local officials and contractors to organize regular repairs.\nThe Corinthian order of architectural style originating from ancient Greece was the dominant architectural style in the age of Augustus and the imperial phase of Rome. Suetonius once commented that Rome was unworthy of its status as an imperial capital, yet Augustus and Agrippa set out to dismantle this sentiment by transforming the appearance of Rome upon the classical Greek model.\nResidences.\nThe official residence of Augustus was the \"Domus Augusti\" on the Palatine which he made into a palace after buying it in 41/40 BC. He had other residences such as the \"horti maecenati\" in Rome where Augustus preferred to stay whenever he became ill and which Maecenas left to him in his will in 8 BC. The great villa of Vedius Pollio at Posilipo near Naples was beqeathed (probably forced) to him in 15 BC.\nAugustus built the Palazzo a Mare palace on Capri. He also built the immense Villa Giulia on the island of Ventotene as a summer residence early in his reign. The family home of Augustus was probably the villa at Somma Vesuviana, Nola. This was the location where he died and where his father also died.\nPhysical appearance and official images.\nHis biographer Suetonius, writing about a century after Augustus's death, described his appearance as: \"...\u00a0unusually handsome and exceedingly graceful at all periods of his life, though he cared nothing for personal adornment. He was so far from being particular about the dressing of his hair, that he would have several barbers working in a hurry at the same time, and as for his beard he now had it clipped and now shaved, while at the very same time he would either be reading or writing something\u00a0... He had clear, bright eyes\u00a0... His teeth were wide apart, small, and ill-kept; his hair was slightly curly and inclined to golden; his eyebrows met. His ears were of moderate size, and his nose projected a little at the top and then bent ever so slightly inward. His complexion was between dark and fair. He was short of stature, although Julius Marathus, his freedman and keeper of his records, says that he was five feet and nine inches (just under 5 ft. 7 in., or 1.70 meters, in modern height measurements), but this was concealed by the fine proportion and symmetry of his figure, and was noticeable only by comparison with some taller person standing beside him...\", adding that \"his shoes [were] somewhat high-soled, to make him look taller than he really was\". Scientific analysis of traces of paint found in his official statues show that he most likely had light brown hair and eyes (his hair and eyes were depicted as the same color).\nHis official images were very tightly controlled and idealized, drawing from a tradition of Hellenistic portraiture rather than the tradition of realism in Roman portraiture. He first appeared on coins at the age of 19, and from about 29 BC \"the explosion in the number of Augustan portraits attests a concerted propaganda campaign aimed at dominating all aspects of civil, religious, economic and military life with Augustus's person.\" The early images did indeed depict a young man, but although there were gradual changes his images remained youthful until he died in his seventies, by which time they had \"a distanced air of ageless majesty\". Among the best known of many surviving portraits are the Augustus of Prima Porta, the image on the Ara Pacis, and the Via Labicana Augustus, which depicts him in his role as \"pontifex maximus\". Several cameo portraits include the Blacas Cameo and \"Gemma Augustea\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1274", "revid": "37482880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1274", "title": "Geography of Antarctica", "text": "Geographic features of Antarctica\nThe geography of Antarctica is dominated by its south polar location and, thus, by ice. The Antarctic continent, located in the Earth's southern hemisphere, is centered asymmetrically around the South Pole and largely south of the Antarctic Circle. It is washed by the Southern (or Antarctic) Ocean or, depending on definition, the southern Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans. It has an area of more than 14 million\u00a0km2. Antarctica is the largest ice desert in the world.\nSome 98% of Antarctica is covered by the Antarctic ice sheet, the world's largest ice sheet and also its largest reservoir of fresh water. Averaging at least 1.6\u00a0km thick, the ice is so massive that it has depressed the continental bedrock in some areas more than 2.5\u00a0km below sea level; subglacial lakes of liquid water also occur (e.g., Lake Vostok). Ice shelves and rises populate the ice sheet on the periphery. The present Antarctic ice sheet accounts for 90 percent of Earth's total ice volume and 70 percent of its fresh water. It houses enough water to raise global sea level by 200\u00a0ft.\nIn September 2018, researchers at the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency released a high resolution terrain map (detail down to the size of a car, and less in some areas) of Antarctica, named the \"Reference Elevation Model of Antarctica\" (REMA).\nRegions.\nPhysically, Antarctica is divided in two by the Transantarctic Mountains, close to the neck between the Ross Sea and the Weddell Sea. Western Antarctica and Eastern Antarctica correspond roughly to the western and eastern hemispheres relative to the Greenwich meridian.\nWest Antarctica is covered by the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. There has been some concern about this ice sheet, because there is a small chance that it will collapse. If it does, ocean levels would rise by a few metres in a very short period of time.\nVolcanoes.\nVolcanoes that occur underneath glacial ice sheets are known by the term \"Glaciovolcanism\", or subglacial volcanoes. An article published in 2017 claims that researchers from Edinburgh University recently discovered 91 new volcanoes below the Antarctic ice sheet, adding to the 47 volcanoes that were already known. As of today, there have been 138 possible volcanoes identified in West Antarctica. There is limited knowledge about West Antarctic Volcanoes due to the presence of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, which heavily covers the West Antarctic Rift System\u2014a likely hub for volcanic activity. Researchers find it difficult to properly identify volcanic activity due to the comprehensive ice covering.\nEast Antarctica is significantly larger than West Antarctica, and similarly remains widely unexplored in terms of its volcanic potential. While there are some indications that there is volcanic activity under the East Antarctic Ice Sheet, there is not a significant amount of present information on the subject.\nMount Erebus is one of the most notable sites in the study of Antarctic Volcanism, in that it is the southernmost historically active volcanic site on the planet.\nDeception Island is another active Antarctic volcano. It is one of the most protected areas in the Antarctic, given its situation between the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula. As the most active volcano in the Antarctic peninsula, it has been studied closely since its initial discovery in 1820.\nThere are four volcanoes on the mainland of Antarctica that are\nconsidered to be active on the basis of observed fumarolic activity or \n\"recent\" tephra deposits: \nMount Melbourne (2,730 m) (74\u00b021'S., 164\u00b042'E.), a stratovolcano; \nMount Berlin (3,500 m) (76\u00b003'S., 135\u00b052'W.), a stratovolcano; \nMount Kauffman (2,365 m) (75\u00b037'S., 132\u00b025'W.), a stratovolcano; and \nMount Hampton (3,325 m) (76\u00b029'S., 125\u00b048'W.), a volcanic caldera.\nMount Rittmann (2,600 m) (73.45\u00b0S 165.5\u00b0 E), a volcanic caldera.\nSeveral volcanoes on offshore islands have records of historic activity.\nMount Erebus (3,795 m), a stratovolcano on\nRoss Island with 10 known eruptions and 1 suspected eruption.\nOn the opposite side of the continent, \nDeception Island\n(62\u00b057'S., 60\u00b038'W.), a volcanic caldera with 10 known\nand 4 suspected eruptions, have been the most active.\nBuckle Island in the Balleny Islands (66\u00b050'S., 163\u00b012'E.), \nPenguin Island (62\u00b006'S., 57\u00b054'W.), \nPaulet Island (63\u00b035'S., 55\u00b047'W.), and \nLindenberg Island (64\u00b055'S., 59\u00b040'W.) are also \nconsidered to be active. In 2017, the researchers of Edinburgh University discovered 91 underwater volcanoes under West Antarctica.\nGlaciovolcanism.\nThe definition of Glaciovolcanism is \u201cthe interactions of magma with ice in all its forms, including snow, firn and any meltwater.\u201d It defines a special field of volcanic that is specifically centered around ice and ice melt. This field of science is less than 100 years old, and thus continuously makes new discoveries. Glaciovolcanism is characterized by three kinds of eruptions: sub-glacial eruptions, supraglacial volcanism, and ice-marginal volcanism.\nThe study of glaciovolcanism is vital to the understanding of ice sheet formation. It is also a valuable tool to predict volcanic hazards, such as the ash hazard following the Eyjafjallaj\u00f6kull eruption in Iceland.\nMarie Byrd Land.\nThe Marie Byrd Land is an incredibly large portion of West Antarctica, consisting of the Area below the Antarctic Peninsula. The Marie Byrd land is a large formation of volcanic rock, characterized by 18 exposed and subglacial volcanoes. 16 of the 18 volcanoes are entirely covered by the antarctic ice sheet. There have been no eruptions recorded from any of the volcanoes in this area, however scientists believe that some of the volcanoes may be potentially active.\nActivity.\nScientists and researchers debate whether or not the 138 identified possible volcanoes are active or dormant. It is very hard to definitively say, given that many of these volcanic structures are buried underneath several kilometers of ice. However, ash layers within the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, as well as deformations in the ice surface indicate that the West Antarctic Rift System could be active and contain erupting volcanoes. Additionally, seismic activity in the region hints at magma movement beneath the crust, a sign of volcanic activity. Despite this, however, there is not yet definitive evidence of presently active volcanoes.\nSubglacial volcanism is often characterized by ice melt and subglacial water. Though there are other sources of subglacial water, such as geothermal heat, it almost always is a condition of volcanism. Scientists remain uncertain about the presence of water underneath the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, with some claiming to have found evidence indicating the existence.\nConditions of Formation.\nIn West Antarctica's Marie Byrd Land, volcanoes are typically composed of alkaline and basaltic lava. Sometimes, the volcanoes are entirely basaltic in composition. Due to the geographic similarity of the Marie Byrd Land, it is believed that the volcanoes in the West Antarctic Rift System are also composed of basalt.\nAbove-ice basaltic volcanoes, also known as subaerial basaltic volcanoes, generally form in tall, broad cone shapes. Since they are formed from repeated piling of liquid magma sourced from the center, they spread widely and grow upwards relatively slowly. However, West Antarctic Volcanoes form underneath ice sheets, and are thus categorized as subglacial volcanoes. Subglacial volcanoes that are monogenetic are far more narrow, steeper, flat topped structures. Polygenetic subglacial volcanoes have a wider variety of shapes and sizes due to being made up of many different eruptions. Often, they look more cone shaped, like stratovolcanoes.\nHazards.\nHazardous ash.\nLittle has been studied about the implications of volcanic ash from eruptions within the Antarctic Circle. It is likely that an eruption at lower latitudes would cause global health and aviation hazards due to ash disbursement. The clockwise air circulation around the low pressure system at the South Pole forces air upwards, hypothetically sending ash upwards towards the Stratospheric jet streams, and thus quickly dispersing it throughout the globe.\nMelting ice.\nRecently, in 2017, a study found evidence of subglacial volcanic activity within the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. This activity poses a threat to the stability of the Ice Sheet, as volcanic activity leads to increased melting. This could possibly plunge the West Antarctic Ice Sheet into a positive feedback loop of rising temperatures and increased melting.\nCanyons.\nThere are three vast canyons that run for hundreds of kilometers, cutting through tall mountains. None of the canyons are visible at the snow-covered surface of the continent since they are buried under hundreds of meters of ice. The largest of the canyons is called Foundation Trough and is over 350\u00a0km long and 35\u00a0km wide. The Patuxent Trough is more than 300\u00a0km long and over 15\u00a0km wide, while the Offset Rift Basin is 150\u00a0km long and 30\u00a0km wide. These three troughs all lie under and cross the so-called \"ice divide\" - the high ice ridge that runs all the way from the South Pole out towards the coast of West Antarctica.\nWest Antarctica.\nWest Antarctica is the smaller part of the continent, , divided into:\nIce shelves.\nLarger ice shelves are:\nFor all ice shelves see List of Antarctic ice shelves.\nIslands.\nFor a list of all Antarctic islands see List of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic islands.\nEast Antarctica.\nEast Antarctica is the larger part of the continent, , both the South Magnetic Pole and geographic South Pole are situated here. Divided into:\nIce shelves.\nLarger ice shelves are:\nFor all ice shelves see List of Antarctic ice shelves.\nIslands.\nFor a list of all Antarctic islands see List of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic islands.\nTerritorial landclaims.\nSeven nations have made official Territorial claims in Antarctica.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1276", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1276", "title": "Economy of Antarctica", "text": ""}
{"id": "1277", "revid": "406359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1277", "title": "Government of Antarctica", "text": ""}
{"id": "1279", "revid": "37482880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1279", "title": "Transport in Antarctica", "text": "Transportation methods in Antarctica\nTransport in Antarctica has transformed from explorers crossing the isolated remote area of Antarctica by foot to a more open era due to human technologies enabling more convenient and faster transport, predominantly by air and water, but also by land as well. \nTransportation technologies on a remote area like Antarctica need to be able to deal with extremely low temperatures and continuous winds to ensure the travelers' safety. Due to the fragility of the Antarctic environment, only a limited amount of transport movements can take place and sustainable transportation technologies have to be used to reduce the ecological footprint.\nThe infrastructure of land, water and air transport needs to be safe and sustainable. \nCurrently thousands of tourists and hundreds of scientists a year depend on the Antarctic transportation system.\nLand transport.\nRoads.\nWinds continuously blow snow on roads in Antarctica.\nThe South Pole Traverse (McMurdo\u2013South Pole highway) is approximately long and links the United States McMurdo Station on the coast to the Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station. It was constructed by leveling snow and in crevasses, but is not paved. There are flags to mark the road.\nAlso, the United States Antarctic Program maintains two ice roads during the austral summer. One provides access to Pegasus Field on the Ross Ice Shelf. The ice road between Pegasus Field and McMurdo Station is about . The other road provides access to the Ice Runway, which is on sea ice. The road between the Ice Runway and McMurdo Station varies in length from year to year depending on many factors, including ice stability. These roads are critical for resupplying McMurdo Station, Scott Base, and Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station.\nVehicles.\nThe scarcity and poor quality of road infrastructure limits land transportation by conventional vehicles.\nA normal car on tires has very limited capability in Antarctic conditions. Scientific bases are often built on snow-free areas (oases) close to the\nocean. Around these stations and on a hard packed snow or ice, tire based vehicles can drive but on deeper and softer snow, a normal tire-based vehicle cannot travel. Due to these limitations, vehicles on belts have been the preferred option in Antarctica. In 1997, two specialized cars with very large tires running tire pressure as low as travelled onto the high Antarctica Plateau, giving strong indication that tire based vehicles could be an option for efficient travelling in Antarctica.\nMawson Station started using classic Volkswagen Beetles, the first production cars to be used in Antarctica. The first of these was named \"Antarctica 1\".\nIn December 1997 into February 1998 two AT44, 4x4 cars (built in Iceland by Arctic Trucks with tire size of 44-inch tall) joined an expedition by the Swedish Polar Institution (SWEA). The cars got used to transport people and supplies from the Ice shelf to WASA station, to perform scanning of the snow and support a drilling expedition to on the Antarctica Plateau 76\u00b0S 8\u00b003'W. This is the first time tire based vehicles successfully travel on the Antarctica high plateau.\nIn 2005, a team of six people took part in the Ice Challenger Expedition. Travelling in a specially designed six wheel drive vehicle, the team completed the journey from the Antarctic coast at Patriot Hills to the geographic South Pole in 69 hours. In doing so they easily beat the previous record of 24 days. They arrived at the South Pole on December 12, 2005.\nThe team members on that expedition were Andrew Regan, Jason De Carteret, Andrew Moon, Richard Griffiths, Gunnar Egilsson and Andrew Miles. The expedition successfully showed that wheeled transport on the continent is not only possible but also often more practical. The expedition also hoped to raise awareness about global warming and climate change.\nFrom start of December 2008 into February 2009, four AT44, 4x4 cars were used to support a ski race by Amundsen Omega 3, from S82\u00b0 41' E17\u00b0 43' to South Pole. A film was made of this race by BBC called \"On Thin Ice\" with Ben Fogle and James Cracknell. The cars started from Novo airbase at S70\u00b0 49' E11\u00b0 38', establish a route onto the plateau through the crevasse areas in the Shcherbakov Mountain Range driving nearly to the start line of the ski race. For the return journey each car covered between with one fuel depot on the way.\nFrom 2008 to date (Dec 2015) tire based cars, AT44 4x4 and AT44 6x6 have been used every season to support various NGO and scientific expedition/projects, supporting flights, fuel drops, filming, skiers, biker, a tractor, collecting snow samples and more. The combined distance covered on the Antarctica Plateau is over and even though towing capacity is much lower than for most belt based vehicles, the tire based cars multiply the travel speed and use only a fraction of the fuel making this an option for some expeditions/projects.\nA second expedition led by Andrew Regan and Andrew Moon departed in November 2010. The Moon-Regan Trans Antarctic Expedition this time traversed the entire continent twice, using two six-wheel-drive vehicles and a Concept Ice Vehicle designed by Lotus. This time the team used the expedition to raise awareness about the global environmental importance of the Antarctic region and to show that biofuel can be a viable and environmentally friendly option.\nWater transport.\nAntarctica's only harbour is at McMurdo Station. Most coastal stations have offshore anchorages, and supplies are transferred from ship to shore by small boats, barges, and helicopters. A few stations have a basic wharf facility. All ships at port are subject to inspection in accordance with Article 7, Antarctic Treaty. Offshore anchorage is sparse and intermittent, but poses no problem to sailboats designed for the ice, typically with lifting keels and long shorelines.\nMcMurdo Station (), Palmer Station (); government use only except by permit (see Permit Office under \"Legal System\"). A number of tour boats, ranging from large motorized vessels to small sailing yachts, visit the Antarctic Peninsula during the summer months (January\u2013March). Most are based in Ushuaia, Argentina.\nAir transport.\nTransport in Antarctica takes place by air, using fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters.\nRunways and helicopter pads have to be kept snow-free to ensure safe take off and landing conditions.\nAntarctica has 20 airports, but there are no developed public-access airports or landing facilities. Thirty stations, operated by 16 national governments party to the Antarctic Treaty, have landing facilities for either helicopters and/or fixed-wing aircraft; commercial enterprises operate two additional air facilities.\nHelicopter pads are available at 27 stations; runways at 15 locations are gravel, sea-ice, blue-ice, or compacted snow suitable for landing wheeled, fixed-wing aircraft; of these, one is greater than in length, six are between in length, three are between in length, three are less than in length, and two are of unknown length; snow surface skiways, limited to use by ski-equipped, fixed-wing aircraft, are available at another 15 locations; of these, four are greater than 3\u00a0km in length, three are between 2\u00a0km and 3\u00a0km in length, two are between 1\u00a0km and 2\u00a0km in length, two are less than 1\u00a0km in length, and data is unavailable for the remaining four.\nAntarctic airports are subject to severe restrictions and limitations resulting from extreme seasonal and geographic conditions; they do not meet ICAO standards, and advance approval from the respective governmental or nongovernmental operating organization is required for landing (1999 est.) Flights to the continent in the permanent darkness of the winter are normally only undertaken in an emergency, with burning barrels of fuel to outline a runway. On September 11, 2008, a United States Air Force C-17 Globemaster III successfully completed the first landing in Antarctica using night-vision goggles at Pegasus Field.\nIn April 2001 an emergency evacuation of Dr. Ronald Shemenski was needed from Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station when he contracted pancreatitis. Three C-130 Hercules were called back before their final leg because of weather. Organizers then called on Kenn Borek Air based in Calgary, Alberta. Two de Havilland Twin Otters were dispatched out of Calgary with one being back-up. Twin Otters are specifically designed for the Canadian north and Kenn Borek Air's motto is \"Anywhere, Anytime, World-Wide\". The mission was a success but not without difficulties and drawbacks. Ground crews needed to create a runway with tracked equipment not designed to operate in the low temperatures at that time of year, the aircraft controls had to be \"jerry-rigged\" when the flaps were frozen in position after landing, and instruments were not reliable because of the cold. When they saw a \"faint pink line on the horizon\" they knew they were going in the right direction. This was the first rescue from the South Pole during winter. Canada honoured the Otter crew for bravery.\nIn 2021, an Airbus A340 aeroplane operated by Portuguese charter airline Hi Fly landed in Antarctica for the first time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1280", "revid": "415269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1280", "title": "Military of Antarctica", "text": ""}
{"id": "1285", "revid": "1150619277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1285", "title": "Geography of Alabama", "text": "Geographical features of Alabama\nThe geography of Alabama describes a state in the Southeastern United States in North America. It extends from high mountains to low valleys and sandy beaches. \nAlabama is 30th in size and borders four U.S. states: Mississippi, Tennessee, Georgia, and Florida. It also borders the Gulf of Mexico.\nPhysical features.\nExtending entirely across the state of Alabama for about northern boundary, and in the middle stretching farther north, is the Cumberland Plateau, or Tennessee Valley region, broken into broad tablelands by the dissection of rivers. In the northern part of this plateau, west of Jackson county, there are about of level highlands from above sea level. South of these highlands, occupying a narrow strip on each side of the Tennessee River, is a country of gentle rolling lowlands varying in elevation from . To the northeast of these highlands and lowlands is a rugged section with steep mountain-sides, deep narrow coves and valleys, and flat mountain-tops. Its elevations range from . In the remainder of this region, the southern portion, the most prominent feature is \"Little Mountain\", extending about from east to west between two valleys, and rising precipitously on the north side above them or above the sea.\nAdjoining the Cumberland Plateau region on the southeast is the Appalachian Valley (locally known as Coosa Valley) region, which is the southern extremity of the Appalachian Mountains, and occupies an area within the state of about . This is a limestone belt with parallel hard rock ridges left standing by erosion to form mountains. Although the general direction of the mountains, ridges, and valleys is northeast and southwest, irregularity is one of the most prominent characteristics. In the northeast are several flat-topped mountains, of which Raccoon and Lookout are the most prominent, having a maximum elevation near the Georgia line of little more than and gradually decreasing in height toward the southwest, where Sand Mountain is a continuation of Raccoon. South of these the mountains are marked by steep northwest sides, sharp crests and gently sloping southeast sides.\nSoutheast of the Appalachian Valley region, the Piedmont Plateau also crosses the Alabama border from the N.E. and occupies a small triangular-shaped section of which Randolph and Clay counties, together with the northern part of Tallapoosa and Chambers, form the principal portion. Its surface is gently undulating and has an elevation of about above sea level. The Piedmont Plateau is a lowland worn down by erosion on hard crystalline rocks, then uplifted to form a plateau.\nThe remainder of the state is occupied by the \"Coastal Plain\". This is crossed by foothills and rolling prairies in the central part of the state, where it has a mean elevation of about , becomes lower and more level toward the southwest, and in the extreme south is flat and but slightly elevated above the sea.\nThe Cumberland Plateau region is drained to the west-northwest by the Tennessee River and its tributaries; all other parts of the state are drained to the southwest. In the Appalachian Valley region the Coosa River is the principal river; and in the Piedmont Plateau, the Tallapoosa River. In the Coastal Plain are the Tombigbee River in the west, the Alabama River (formed by the Coosa and Tallapoosa) in the western central, and in the east the Chattahoochee River, which forms almost half of the Georgia boundary. The Tombigbee and Alabama rivers unite near the southwest corner of the state, their waters discharging into Mobile Bay by the Mobile and Tensas rivers. The Black Warrior River is a considerable stream which joins the Tombigbee from the east.\nThe valleys in the north and northeast are usually deep and narrow, but in the Coastal Plain they are broad and in most cases rise in three successive terraces above the stream. The harbour of Mobile was formed by the drowning of the lower part of the valley of the Alabama and Tombigbee rivers as a result of the sinking of the land here, such sinking having occurred on other parts of the Gulf coast.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe fauna and flora of Alabama are similar to those of the Gulf states in general and have no distinctive characteristics. However, the Mobile River system has a high incidence of endemism among freshwater mollusks and biodiversity is high.\nIn Alabama, vast forests of pine constitute the largest proportion of the state's forest growth. There is also an abundance of cypress, hickory, oak, populus, and eastern redcedar trees. In other areas, hemlock growths in the north and southern white cedar in the southwest. Other native trees include ash, hackberry, and holly. In the Gulf region of the state grow various species of palmetto and palm. In Alabama there are more than 150 shrubs, including mountain laurel and rhododendron. Among cultivated plants are wisteria and camellia.\nWhile in the past the state enjoyed a variety of mammals such as plains bison, eastern elk, North American cougar, bear, and deer, only the white-tailed deer remains abundant. Still fairly common are the bobcat, American beaver, muskrat, raccoon, Virginia opossum, rabbit, squirrel, red and gray foxes, and long-tailed weasel. Coypu and nine-banded armadillo have been introduced to the state and now also common.\nAlabama's birds include golden and bald eagles, osprey and other hawks, yellow-shafted flickers, and black-and-white warblers. Game birds include bobwhite quail, duck, wild turkey, and goose. Freshwater fish such as bream, shad, bass, and sucker are common. Along the Gulf Coast there are seasonal runs of tarpon, pompano, red drum, and bonito.\nThe U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service lists as endangered 99 animals, fish, and birds, and 18 plant species. The endangered animals include the Alabama beach mouse, gray bat, Alabama red-bellied turtle, fin and humpback whales, bald eagle, and wood stork.\nAmerican black bear, racking horse, yellow-shafted flicker, wild turkey, Atlantic tarpon, largemouth bass, southern longleaf pine, eastern tiger swallowtail, monarch butterfly, Alabama red-bellied turtle, Red Hills salamander, camellia, oak-leaf hydrangea, peach, pecan, and blackberry are Alabama's state symbols.\nClimate and soil.\nThe climate of Alabama is humid subtropical.\nThe heat of summer is tempered in the south by the winds from the Gulf of Mexico, and in the north by the elevation above the sea. The average annual temperature is highest in the southwest along the coast, and lowest in the northeast among the highlands. Thus at Mobile the annual mean is , the mean for the summer , and for the winter ; and at Valley Head, in De Kalb county, the annual mean is , the mean for the summer , and for the winter . At Montgomery, in the central region, the average annual temperature is , with a winter average of , and a summer average of . The average winter minimum for the entire state is , and there is an average of 35 days in each year in which the thermometer falls below the freezing-point. At extremely rare intervals the thermometer has fallen below zero (-18\u00a0\u00b0C), as was the case in the remarkable cold wave of the 12th-13 February 1899, when an absolute minimum of was registered at Valley Head. The highest temperature ever recorded was in Talladega county in 1902.\nThe amount of precipitation is greatest along the coast (62\u00a0inches/1,574\u00a0mm) and evenly distributed through the rest of the state (about 52\u00a0inches/1,320\u00a0mm). During each winter there is usually one fall of snow in the south and two in the north; but the snow quickly disappears, and sometimes, during an entire winter, the ground is not covered with snow. Heavy snowfall can occur, such as during the New Year's Eve 1963 snowstorm and the 1993 Storm of the Century. Hailstorms occur occasionally in the spring and summer, but are seldom destructive. Heavy fogs are rare, and are confined chiefly to the coast. Thunderstorms occur throughout the year - they are most common in the summer, but most severe in the spring and fall, when destructive winds and tornadoes occasionally occur. The prevailing winds are from the news. Hurricanes are quite common in the state, especially in the southern part, and major hurricanes occasionally strike the coast which can be very destructive.\nAs regards its soil, Alabama may be divided into four regions. Extending from the Gulf northward for about is the outer belt of the Coastal Plain, also called the \"Timber Belt,\" whose soil is sandy and poor, but responds well to fertilization. North of this is the inner lowland of the Coastal Plain, or the \"Black Prairie,\" which includes some and seventeen counties. It receives its name from its soil (weathered from the weak underlying limestone), which is black in colour, almost destitute of sand and loam, and rich in limestone and marl formations, especially adapted to the production of cotton; hence the region is also called the \"Cotton Belt.\" Between the \"Cotton Belt\" and the Tennessee Valley is the mineral region, the \"Old Land\" area\u2014a region of resistant rocks\u2014whose soils, also derived from weathering in silu, are of varied fertility, the best coming from the granites, sandstones and limestones, the poorest from the gneisses, schists and slates. North of the mineral region is the \"Cereal Belt,\" embracing the Tennessee Valley and the counties beyond, whose richest soils are the red clays and dark loams of the river valley; north of which are less fertile soils, produced by siliceous and sandstone formations.\nWetumpka Meteor Crater.\nWetumpka is the home of \"Alabama's greatest natural disaster.\" A -wide meteorite hit the area about 80 million years ago. The hills just east of downtown showcase the eroded remains of the wide impact crater that was blasted into the bedrock, with the area labeled the Wetumpka crater or astrobleme (\"star-wound\") for the concentric rings of fractures and zones of shattered rock can be found beneath the surface. In 2002, Christian Koeberl with the Institute of Geochemistry University of Vienna published evidence and established the site as an internationally recognized impact crater.\nPublic lands.\nAlabama includes several types of public use lands. These include four national forests and one national preserve within state borders that provide over 25% of the state's public recreation land.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1286", "revid": "40482852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1286", "title": "List of governors of Alabama", "text": "The governor of Alabama is the head of government of the U.S. state of Alabama. The governor is the head of the executive branch of Alabama's state government and is charged with enforcing state laws.\nThere have officially been 54 governors of the state of Alabama; this official numbering skips acting and military governors. The first governor, William Wyatt Bibb, served as the only governor of the Alabama Territory. Five people have served as acting governor, bringing the total number of people serving as governor to 59, spread over 63 distinct terms. Four governors have served multiple non-consecutive terms: Bibb Graves, Jim Folsom, and Fob James each served two, and George Wallace served three non-consecutive periods. Officially, these non-consecutive terms are numbered only with the number of their first term. William D. Jelks also served non-consecutive terms, but his first term was in an acting capacity.\nThe longest-serving governor was George Wallace, who served 16 years over four terms. The shortest term for a non-acting governor was that of Hugh McVay, who served four and a half months after replacing the resigning Clement Comer Clay. Lurleen Wallace, wife of George Wallace, was the first woman to serve as governor of Alabama, and the third woman to serve as governor of any state. The current governor is Republican Kay Ivey, who took office on April 10, 2017 following Robert J. Bentley's resignation amidst a corruption scandal. She is the second female governor of Alabama.\nGovernors.\nGovernor of the Territory of Alabama.\nAlabama Territory was formed on March 3, 1817, from Mississippi Territory. It had only one governor appointed by the President of the United States before it became a state; he became the first state governor.\nGovernors of the State of Alabama.\nAlabama was admitted to the Union on December 14, 1819. It seceded from the Union on January 11, 1861, and was a founding member of the Confederate States of America on February 4, 1861. Following the end of the American Civil War, Alabama during Reconstruction was part of the Third Military District, which exerted some control over governor appointments and elections. Alabama was readmitted to the Union on July 14, 1868.\nThe first Alabama Constitution, ratified in 1819, provided that a governor be elected every two years, limited to serve no more than 4 out of every 6 years. This limit remained in place until the constitution of 1868, which simply allowed governors to serve terms of two years. The current constitution of 1901 increased terms to four years, but prohibited governors from succeeding themselves. Amendment 282 to the constitution, passed in 1968, allowed governors to succeed themselves once; a governor serving two consecutive terms can run again after waiting out the next term. The constitution had no set date for the commencement of a governor's term until 1901, when it was set at the first Monday after the second Tuesday in the January following an election. However, the Alabama Supreme Court ruled in 1911 that a governor's term ends at midnight at the end of Monday, and the next governor's term begins the next day, regardless of if they were sworn in on Monday.\nThe office of lieutenant governor was created in 1868, abolished in 1875, and recreated in 1901. According to the current constitution, should the governor be out of the state for more than 20 days, the lieutenant governor becomes acting governor, and if the office of governor becomes vacant the lieutenant governor ascends to the governorship. Earlier constitutions said the powers of the governor devolved upon the successor, rather than them necessarily becoming governor, but the official listing includes these as full governors. The governor and lieutenant governor are not elected on the same ticket.\nAlabama was a strongly Democratic state before the Civil War, electing only candidates from the Democratic-Republican and Democratic parties. It had two Republican governors following Reconstruction, but after the Democratic Party re-established control, 112 years passed before voters chose another Republican.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1288", "revid": "543434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1288", "title": "Apocrypha", "text": "Works of unknown authorship or of doubtful origin\nApocrypha are written works, often of unknown authorship or doubtful origin. In Christianity, the word \"apocryphal\" (\u1f00\u03c0\u03cc\u03ba\u03c1\u03c5\u03c6\u03bf\u03c2) was first applied to writings which were to be read privately rather than in the public context of church services\u2014edifying Christian works which were not considered canonical Scripture. In the wake of the Protestant Reformation, the word \"apocrypha\" came to mean \"false, spurious, bad, or heretical\".\nFrom a Protestant point of view, Biblical apocrypha are a set of texts included in the Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate, but not in the Hebrew Bible. While Catholic tradition considers some of these texts to be deuterocanonical, and the Orthodox Churches consider them all to be canonical, Protestants consider them apocryphal, that is, non-canonical books that are useful for instruction. Luther's Bible placed them in a separate section in between the Old Testament and New Testament called the Apocrypha, a convention followed by subsequent Protestant Bibles. Other non-canonical apocryphal texts are generally called pseudepigrapha, a term that means \"false attribution\".\nEtymology.\nThe word's origin is the Medieval Latin adjective (secret, or non-canonical) from the Greek adjective , , (private) from the verb , (to hide away).\nIt comes from Greek and is formed from the combination of (away) and (hide or conceal).\nThe word \"apocrypha\" has undergone a major change in meaning throughout the centuries. The word \"apocrypha\" in its ancient Christian usage originally meant a text read in private, rather than in public church settings. In English, it later came to have a sense of the esoteric, suspicious, or heretical, largely because of the Protestant interpretation of the usefulness of non-canonical texts.\nEsoteric writings and objects.\nThe word \"apocryphal\" () was first applied to writings which were kept secret because they were the vehicles of esoteric knowledge considered too profound or too sacred to be disclosed to anyone other than the initiated. For example, the disciples of the Gnostic Prodicus boasted that they possessed the secret () books of Zoroaster. The term in general enjoyed high consideration among the Gnostics (see Acts of Thomas, pp.\u00a010, 27, 44).\nSinologist Anna Seidel refers to texts and even items produced by ancient Chinese sages as apocryphal and studied their uses during Six Dynasties China (A.D. 220 to 589). These artifacts were used as symbols legitimizing and guaranteeing the Emperor's Heavenly Mandate. Examples of these include talismans, charts, writs, tallies, and registers. The first examples were stones, jade pieces, bronze vessels and weapons, but came to include talismans and magic diagrams.\nFrom their roots in Zhou era China (1066 to 256 BC), these items came to be surpassed in value by texts by the Han dynasty (206 BC to AD 220). Most of these texts have been destroyed as Emperors, particularly during the Han dynasty, collected these legitimizing objects and proscribed, forbade and burnt nearly all of them to prevent them from falling into the hands of political rivals.\nWritings of questionable value.\n\"Apocrypha\" was also applied to writings that were hidden not because of their divinity but because of their questionable value to the church. The early Christian theologian Origen, in his \"Commentaries on Matthew\", distinguishes between writings which were read by the churches and apocryphal writings: (\"writing not found in the common and published books on one hand [and] actually found in the secret ones on the other\"). The meaning of is here practically equivalent to \"excluded from the public use of the church\" and prepares the way for an even less favourable use of the word.\nSpurious writings.\nIn general use, the word \"apocrypha\" came to mean \"of doubtful authenticity\". This meaning also appears in Origen's prologue to his commentary on the Song of Songs, of which only the Latin translation survives:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nThe Gelasian Decree (generally held now as being the work of an anonymous scholar between 519 and 553) refers to religious works by church fathers Eusebius, Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria as apocrypha. Augustine defined the word as meaning simply \"obscurity of origin\", implying that any book of unknown authorship or questionable authenticity would be considered apocryphal. Jerome in \"Prologus Galeatus\" declared that all books outside the Hebrew canon were apocryphal. In practice, Jerome treated some books outside the Hebrew canon as if they were canonical, and the Western Church did not accept Jerome's definition of apocrypha, instead retaining the word's prior meaning. As a result, various church authorities labeled different books as apocrypha, treating them with varying levels of regard.\nOrigen stated that \"the canonical books, as the Hebrews have handed them down, are twenty-two\". Clement and others cited some apocryphal books as \"scripture,\" \"divine scripture,\" \"inspired,\" and the like. Teachers connected with Palestine and familiar with the Hebrew canon (the protocanon) excluded from the canon all of the Old Testament not found there. This view is reflected in the canon of Melito of Sardis, and in the prefaces and letters of Jerome. A third view was that the books were not as valuable as the canonical scriptures of the Hebrew collection, but were of value for moral uses, as introductory texts for new converts from paganism, and to be read in congregations. They were referred to as \"ecclesiastical\" works by Rufinus.\nIn 1546, the Catholic Council of Trent reconfirmed the canon of Augustine, dating to the second and third centuries, declaring \"He is also to be anathema who does not receive these entire books, with all their parts, as they have been accustomed to be read in the Catholic Church, and are found in the ancient editions of the Latin Vulgate, as sacred and canonical.\" The whole of the books in question, with the exception of 1 Esdras and 2 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh, were declared canonical at Trent.\nThe Protestants, in comparison, were diverse in their opinion of the deuterocanon early on. Some considered them divinely inspired, others rejected them. Lutherans and Anglicans retained the books as Christian intertestamental readings and a part of the Bible (in a section called \"Apocrypha\"), but no doctrine should be based on them. John Wycliffe, a 14th-century Christian Humanist, had declared in his biblical translation that \"whatever book is in the Old Testament besides these twenty-five shall be set among the apocrypha, that is, without authority or belief.\" Nevertheless, his translation of the Bible included the apocrypha and the Epistle of the Laodiceans.\nMartin Luther did not class apocryphal books as being scripture, but in the German Luther Bible (1534) the apocrypha are published in a separate section from the other books, although the Lutheran and Anglican lists are different. Anabaptists use the Luther Bible, which contains the intertestamental books; Amish wedding ceremonies include \"the retelling of the marriage of Tobias and Sarah in the Apocrypha\". The fathers of Anabaptism, such as Menno Simmons, quoted \"them [the Apocrypha] with the same authority and nearly the same frequency as books of the Hebrew Bible\" and the texts regarding the martyrdoms under Antiochus IV in 1 Maccabees and 2 Maccabees are held in high esteem by the Anabaptists, who faced persecution in their history.\nIn Reformed editions (like the Westminster), readers were warned that these books were not \"to be any otherwise approved or made use of than other human writings\". A milder distinction was expressed elsewhere, such as in the \"argument\" introducing them in the Geneva Bible, and in the Sixth Article of the Church of England, where it is said that \"the other books the church doth read for example of life and instruction of manners,\" though not to establish doctrine. Among some Nonconformists, the term \"apocryphal\" began to take on extra or altered connotations: not just of dubious authenticity, but having spurious or false content, Protestants, being diverse in theological views, were not unanimous in adopting those meanings.\nGenerally, Anabaptists and magisterial Protestants recognize the fourteen books of the Apocrypha as being non-canonical, but useful for reading \"for example of life and instruction of manners\": a view that continues today throughout the Lutheran Church, the worldwide Anglican Communion, among many other denominations, such as the Methodist Churches and Quaker Yearly Meetings. Liturgically, the Catholic, Methodist and Anglican churches have a scripture reading from the Book of Tobit in services of Holy Matrimony.\nAccording to the Orthodox Anglican Church:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the other hand, the Anglican Communion emphatically maintains that the Apocrypha is part of the Bible and is to be read with respect by her members. Two of the hymns used in the American Prayer Book office of Morning Prayer, the Benedictus es and Benedicite, are taken from the Apocrypha. One of the offertory sentences in Holy Communion comes from an apocryphal book (Tob. 4: 8\u20139). Lessons from the Apocrypha are regularly appointed to be read in the daily, Sunday, and special services of Morning and Evening Prayer. There are altogether 111 such lessons in the latest revised American Prayer Book Lectionary [The books used are: II Esdras, Tobit, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, Three Holy Children, and I Maccabees.] The position of the Church is best summarized in the words of Article Six of the Thirty-nine Articles: \"In the name of Holy Scripture we do understand those canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose authority there was never any doubt in the Church... And the other Books (as Hierome [St. Jerome] saith) the Church doth read for example of life and instruction of manners; but yet doth it not apply them to establish any doctrine.\nThough Protestant Bibles historically include 80 books, 66 of these form the Protestant canon (such as listed in the Westminster Confession of 1646), which has been well established for centuries, with many today supporting the use of the Apocrypha and others contending against the Apocrypha using various arguments.\nMetaphorical usage.\nThe adjective \"apocryphal\" is commonly used in modern English to refer to any text or story considered to be of dubious veracity or authority, although it may contain some moral truth. In this broader metaphorical sense, the word suggests a claim that is in the nature of folklore, factoid or urban legend.\nBuddhism.\nApocryphal Jatakas of the P\u0101li Canon, such as those belonging to the Pa\u00f1\u00f1\u0101saj\u0101taka collection, have been adapted to fit local culture in certain Southeast Asian countries and have been retold with amendments to the plots to better reflect Buddhist morals.\nWithin the Pali tradition, the apocryphal Jatakas of later composition (some dated even to the 19th century) are treated as a separate category of literature from the \"official\" Jataka stories that have been more-or-less formally canonized from at least the 5th century\u2014as attested to in ample epigraphic and archaeological evidence, such as extant illustrations in bas relief from ancient temple walls.\nJudaism.\nThe Jewish apocrypha, known in Hebrew as \u05d4\u05e1\u05e4\u05e8\u05d9\u05dd \u05d4\u05d7\u05d9\u05e6\u05d5\u05e0\u05d9\u05dd (\"Sefarim Hachizonim:\" \"the external books\"), are books written in large part by Jews, especially during the Second Temple period, not accepted as sacred manuscripts when the Hebrew Bible was canonized. Some of these books are considered sacred by some Christians, and are included in their versions of the Old Testament. The Jewish apocrypha is distinctive from the New Testament apocrypha and biblical apocrypha as it is the only one of these collections which works within a Jewish theological framework.\nAlthough Orthodox Jews believe in the exclusive canonization of the current 24 books in the Hebrew Bible, they also consider the Oral Torah, which they believe was handed down from Moses, to be authoritative. Some argue that the Sadducees, unlike the Pharisees but like the Samaritans, seem to have maintained an earlier and smaller number of texts as canonical, preferring to hold to only what was written in the Law of Moses (the Torah), making most of the presently accepted canon, both Jewish and Christian, apocryphal in their eyes. Others believe that it is often mistakenly asserted that the Sadducees only accepted the Pentateuch (Torah). The Essenes in Judea and the Therapeutae in Egypt were said to have a secret literature (see Dead Sea scrolls).\nOther traditions maintained different customs regarding canonicity. The Ethiopian Jews, for instance, seem to have retained a spread of canonical texts similar to the Ethiopian Orthodox Christians.\nChristianity.\nIntertestamental books.\nDuring the Apostolic Age many Jewish texts of Hellenistic origin existed within Judaism and were frequently used by Christians. Patristic authorities frequently recognized these books as important to the emergence of Christianity, but the inspired authority and value of the apocrypha remained widely disputed. Christians included several of these books in the canons of the Christian Bibles, calling them the \"apocrypha\" or the \"hidden books\".\nIn the sixteenth century, during the Protestant Reformation, the canonical validity of the intertestamental books was challenged and fourteen books were classed in 80 book Protestant Bibles as an intertestamental section called the Apocrypha, which straddles the Old Testament and New Testament. Prior to 1629, all English-language Protestant Bibles included the Old Testament, Apocrypha, and New Testament; examples include the \"Matthew's Bible (1537), the Great Bible (1539), the Geneva Bible (1560), the Bishop's Bible (1568), and the King James Bible (1611)\".\nFourteen out of eighty biblical books comprise the Protestant Apocrypha, first published as such in Luther's Bible (1534). Many of these texts are considered canonical Old Testament books by the Catholic Church, affirmed by the Council of Rome (AD 382) and later reaffirmed by the Council of Trent (1545\u201363); all of the books of the Protestant Apocrypha are considered canonical by the Eastern Orthodox Church and are referred to as \"anagignoskomena\" per the Synod of Jerusalem (1672). To this date, scripture readings from the Apocrypha are included in the lectionaries of the Lutheran Churches and the Anglican Churches.\nAnabaptists use the Luther Bible, which contains the intertestamental books; Amish wedding ceremonies include \"the retelling of the marriage of Tobias and Sarah in the Apocrypha\". The Anglican Communion accepts the Protestant Apocrypha \"for instruction in life and manners, but not for the establishment of doctrine (Article VI in the Thirty-Nine Articles)\", and many \"lectionary readings in The Book of Common Prayer are taken from the Apocrypha\", with these lessons being \"read in the same ways as those from the Old Testament\".\nThe first Methodist liturgical book, \"The Sunday Service of the Methodists\", employs verses from the Apocrypha, such as in the Eucharistic liturgy. The Protestant Apocrypha contains three books (1 Esdras, 2 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh) that are accepted by many Eastern Orthodox Churches and Oriental Orthodox Churches as canonical, but are regarded as non-canonical by the Catholic Church and are therefore not included in modern Catholic Bibles.\nIn the 1800s, the British and Foreign Bible Society did not regularly publish the intertestamental section in its Bibles, citing the cost of printing the Apocrypha in addition to the Old Testament and New Testament as a major factor; this legacy came to characterize English-language Bibles in Great Britain and the Americas, unlike in Europe where Protestant Bibles are printed with 80 books in three sections: the Old Testament, Apocrypha, and New Testament.\nIn the present-day, \"English Bibles with the Apocrypha are becoming more popular again\", usually being printed as intertestamental books. The Revised Common Lectionary, in use by most mainline Protestants including Methodists and Moravians, lists readings from the Apocrypha in the liturgical calendar, although alternate Old Testament scripture lessons are provided.\nThe status of the deuterocanonicals remains unchanged in Catholic and Orthodox Christianity, though there is a difference in number of these books between these two branches of Christianity. Some authorities began using term \"deuterocanonical\" to refer to this traditional intertestamental collection as books of \"the second canon\". These books are often seen as helping to explain the theological and cultural transitions which took place between the Old and New Testaments. They are also sometimes called \"intertestamental\" by religious groups who do not recognize Hellenistic Judaism as belonging with either Jewish or Christian testaments.\nSlightly varying collections of apocryphal, deuterocanonical or intertestamental books of the Bible form part of the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox canons. The deuterocanonical or intertestamental books of the Catholic Church include Tobit, Judith, Baruch, Sirach, 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees, Wisdom and additions to Esther, Daniel, and Baruch.\nThe Book of Enoch is included in the biblical canon of the Oriental Orthodox churches of Ethiopia and Eritrea. The Epistle of Jude alludes to a story in the book of Enoch, and some believe the use of this book also appears in the four gospels and 1 Peter. However, while Jesus and his disciples sometimes used phrases also featured in some of the Apocryphal books, the Book of Enoch was never referenced by Jesus. The genuineness and inspiration of Enoch were believed in by the writer of the Epistle of Barnabas, Irenaeus, Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria and many others of the early church. The Epistles of Paul and the Gospels also show influences from the Book of Jubilees, which is part of the Ethiopian canon, as well as the Assumption of Moses and the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, which are included in no biblical canon.\nCanonicity.\nThe establishment of a largely settled uniform canon was a process of centuries, and what the term \"canon\" (as well as \"apocrypha\") precisely meant also saw development. The canonical process took place with believers recognizing writings as being inspired by God from known or accepted origins, subsequently being followed by official affirmation of what had become largely established through the study and debate of the writings.\nThe first ecclesiastical decree on the Catholic Church's canonical books of the Sacred Scriptures is attributed to the Council of Rome (382), and is correspondent to that of Trent. Martin Luther, like Jerome, favored the Masoretic canon for the Old Testament, excluding apocryphal books in the Luther Bible as unworthy to be properly called scripture, but included most of them in a separate section. Luther did not include the deuterocanonical books in his Old Testament, terming them \"Apocrypha, that are books which are not considered equal to the Holy Scriptures, but are useful and good to read.\"\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church accepts four other books into its canon than what are contained in the Catholic canon: Psalm 151, the Prayer of Manasseh, 3 Maccabees, and 1 Esdras.\nDisputes.\nThe status of the books which the Catholic Church terms \"Deuterocanonicals\" (second canon) and Protestantism refers to as \"Apocrypha\" has been an issue of disagreement which preceded the Reformation. Many believe that the pre-Christian-era Jewish translation (into Greek) of holy scriptures known as the Septuagint, a Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures originally compiled around 280 BC, originally included the apocryphal writings in dispute, with little distinction made between them and the rest of the Old Testament. Others argue that the Septuagint of the first century did not contain these books but they were added later by Christians.\nThe earliest extant manuscripts of the Septuagint are from the fourth century, and suffer greatly from a lack of uniformity as regards containing apocryphal books, and some also contain books classed as pseudepigrapha, from which texts were cited by some early writers in the second and later centuries as being scripture.\nWhile a few scholars conclude that the Jewish canon was the achievement of the Hasmonean dynasty, it is generally considered not to have been finalized until about 100 AD or somewhat later, at which time considerations of Greek language and beginnings of Christian acceptance of the Septuagint weighed against some of the texts. Some were not accepted by the Jews as part of the Hebrew Bible canon and the Apocrypha is not part of the historical Jewish canon.\nEarly church fathers such as Athanasius, Melito, Origen, and Cyril of Jerusalem, spoke against the canonicity of much or all of the apocrypha, but the most weighty opposition was the fourth century Catholic scholar Jerome who preferred the Hebrew canon, whereas Augustine and others preferred the wider (Greek) canon, with both having followers in the generations that followed. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" states as regards the Middle Ages,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the Latin Church, all through the Middle Ages [5th century to the 15th century] we find evidence of hesitation about the character of the deuterocanonicals. There is a current friendly to them, another one distinctly unfavourable to their authority and sacredness, while wavering between the two are a number of writers whose veneration for these books is tempered by some perplexity as to their exact standing, and among those we note St. Thomas Aquinas. Few are found to unequivocally acknowledge their canonicity.\nThe prevailing attitude of Western medieval authors is substantially that of the Greek Fathers.\nThe wider Christian canon accepted by Augustine became the more established canon in the western Church after being promulgated for use in the Easter Letter of Athanasius (circa 372 A.D.), the Synod of Rome (382 A.D., but its Decretum Gelasianum is generally considered to be a much later addition ) and the local councils of Carthage and Hippo in north Africa (391 and 393 A.D). Athanasius called canonical all books of the Hebrew Bible including Baruch, while excluding Esther. He adds that \"there are certain books which the Fathers had appointed to be read to catechumens for edification and instruction; these are the Wisdom of Solomon, the Wisdom of Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), Esther, Judith, Tobias, the Didache, or Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Shepherd of Hermas. All others are apocrypha and the inventions of heretics (Festal Epistle for 367)\".\nNevertheless, none of these constituted indisputable definitions, and significant scholarly doubts and disagreements about the nature of the Apocrypha continued for centuries and even into Trent, which provided the first infallible definition of the Catholic canon in 1546. This canon came to see appropriately 1,000 years of nearly uniform use by the majority, even after the 11th-century schism that separated the church into the branches known as the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches.\nIn the 16th century, the Protestant reformers challenged the canonicity of the books and partial-books found in the surviving Septuagint but not in the Masoretic Text. In response to this challenge, after the death of Martin Luther (February 8, 1546) the ecumenical Council of Trent officially (\"infallibly\") declared these books (called \"deuterocanonical\" by Catholics) to be part of the canon in April, 1546 A.D. While the Protestant Reformers rejected the parts of the canon that were not part of the Hebrew Bible, they included the four New Testament books Luther considered of doubtful canonicity along with the Apocrypha in his non-binding Luther's canon (although most were separately included in his Bible, as they were in some editions of the KJV bible until 1947).\nProtestantism therefore established a 66 book canon with the 39 books based on the ancient Hebrew canon, along with the traditional 27 books of the New Testament. Protestants also rejected the Catholic term \"deuterocanonical\" for these writings, preferring to apply the term \"apocryphal\" which was already in use for other early and disputed writings. As today (but along with other reasons), various reformers argued that those books contained doctrinal or other errors and thus should not have been added to the canon for that reason. The differences between canons can be seen under Biblical canon and Development of the Christian biblical canon.\nExplaining the Eastern Orthodox Church's canon is made difficult because of differences of perspective with the Roman Catholic church in the interpretation of how it was done. Those differences (in matters of jurisdictional authority) were contributing factors in the separation of the Roman Catholics and Orthodox around 1054, but the formation of the canon which Trent would later officially definitively settle was largely complete by the fifth century, if not settled, six centuries before the separation. In the eastern part of the church, it took much of the fifth century also to come to agreement, but in the end it was accomplished. The canonical books thus established by the undivided church became the predominant canon for what was later to become Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox alike.\nThe East already differed from the West in not considering every question of canon yet settled, and it subsequently adopted a few more books into its Old Testament. It also allowed consideration of yet a few more to continue not fully decided, which led in some cases to adoption in one or more jurisdictions, but not all. Thus, there are today a few remaining differences of canon among Orthodox, and all Orthodox accept a few more books than appear in the Catholic canon. The Psalms of Solomon, 3 Maccabees, 4 Maccabees, the Epistle of Jeremiah the Book of Odes, the Prayer of Manasseh and Psalm 151 are included in some copies of the Septuagint, some of which are accepted as canonical by Eastern Orthodox and some other churches. Protestants accept none of these additional books as canon, but see them having roughly the same status as the other Apocrypha.\nEastern Orthodoxy uses a different definition than the Roman Catholic Church does for the books of its canon that it calls deuterocanonical, referring to them as a class of books with less authority than other books of the Old Testament. In contrast, the Catholic Church uses this term to refer to a class of books that were added to its canon later than the other books in its Old Testament canon, considering them all of equal authority.\nNew Testament apocrypha.\nNew Testament apocrypha\u2014books similar to those in the New Testament but almost universally rejected by Catholics, Orthodox and Protestants\u2014include several gospels and lives of apostles. Some were written by early Jewish Christians (see the Gospel according to the Hebrews). Others of these were produced by Gnostic authors or members of other groups later defined as heterodox. Many texts believed lost for centuries were unearthed in the 19th and 20th centuries, producing lively speculation about their importance in early Christianity among religious scholars, while many others survive only in the form of quotations from them in other writings; for some, no more than the title is known. Artists and theologians have drawn upon the New Testament apocrypha for such matters as the names of Dismas and Gestas and details about the Three Wise Men. The first explicit mention of the perpetual virginity of Mary is found in the pseudepigraphical Infancy Gospel of James.\nBefore the fifth century, the Christian writings that were then under discussion for inclusion in the canon but had not yet been accepted were classified in a group known as the ancient antilegomenae. These were all candidates for the New Testament and included several books which were eventually accepted, such as: The Epistle to the Hebrews, 2 Peter, 3 John and the Revelation of John (Apocalypse). None of those accepted books can be considered Apocryphal now, since all Christendom accepts them as canonical. Of the uncanonized ones, the Early Church considered some heretical but viewed others quite well.\nSome Christians, in an extension of the meaning, might also consider the non-heretical books to be \"apocryphal\" along the manner of Martin Luther: not canon, but useful to read. This category includes books such as the Epistle of Barnabas, the Didache, and The Shepherd of Hermas which are sometimes referred to as the Apostolic Fathers. The Gnostic tradition was a prolific source of apocryphal gospels.\nWhile these writings borrowed the characteristic poetic features of apocalyptic literature from Judaism, Gnostic sects largely insisted on allegorical interpretations based on a secret apostolic tradition. With them, these apocryphal books were highly esteemed. A well-known Gnostic apocryphal book is the Gospel of Thomas, the only complete text of which was found in the Egyptian town of Nag Hammadi in 1945. The Gospel of Judas, a Gnostic gospel, also received much media attention when it was reconstructed in 2006.\nRoman Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, and Protestants all agree on the canon of the New Testament. The Ethiopian Orthodox have in the past also included I &amp; II Clement and Shepherd of Hermas in their New Testament canon.\nList of Sixty.\nThe List of Sixty, dating to around the 7th century, lists the sixty books of the Bible. The unknown author also lists several apocryphal books that are not included amongst the sixty. These books are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTaoism.\nProphetic texts called the \"Ch'an-wei\" were written by Han Dynasty (206 BC to AD 220) Taoist priests to legitimize as well as curb imperial power. They deal with treasure objects that were part of the Zhou (1066 to 256 BC) royal treasures. Emerging from the instability of the Warring States period (476\u2013221 BC), ancient Chinese scholars saw the centralized rule of the Zhou as an ideal model for the new Han empire to emulate.\nThe \"Ch'an-wei\" are texts written by Han scholars about the Zhou royal treasures, only they were not written to record history for its own sake, but for legitimizing the current imperial reign. These texts took the form of stories about texts and objects being conferred upon the Emperors by Heaven and comprising these ancient sage-king's (this is how the Zhou emperors were referred to by this time, about 500 years after their peak) royal regalia. The desired effect was to confirm the Han emperor's Heavenly Mandate through the continuity offered by his possession of these same sacred talismans.\nIt is because of this politicized recording of their history that it is difficult to retrace the exact origins of these objects. What is known is that these texts were most likely produced by a class of literati called the \"fangshi\". These were a class of nobles who were not part of the state administration; they were considered specialists or occultists, for example diviners, astrologers, alchemists or healers. It is from this class of nobles that the first Taoist priests are believed to have emerged. Seidel points out however that the scarcity of sources relating to the formation of early Taoism make the exact link between the apocryphal texts and the Taoist beliefs unclear.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1290", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1290", "title": "Antartic Treaty", "text": ""}
{"id": "1291", "revid": "6532386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1291", "title": "Antarctic Treaty System", "text": "International treaties concerning Antarctica\nThe Antarctic Treaty and related agreements, collectively known as the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), regulate international relations with respect to Antarctica, Earth's only continent without a native human population. It was the first arms control agreement established during the Cold War, setting aside the continent as a scientific preserve, establishing freedom of scientific investigation, and banning military activity; for the purposes of the treaty system, Antarctica is defined as all the land and ice shelves south of 60\u00b0S latitude. Since September 2004, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, which implements the treaty system, is headquartered in Buenos Aires, Argentina.\nThe main treaty was opened for signature on 1 December 1959, and officially entered into force on 23 June 1961. The original signatories were the 12 countries active in Antarctica during the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957\u201358: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States. These countries had established over 55 Antarctic research stations for the IGY, and the subsequent promulgation of the treaty was seen as a diplomatic expression of the operational and scientific cooperation that had been achieved. As of 2023[ [update]], the treaty has 56 parties.\nHistory.\n1940s.\nAfter World War II, the U.S. considered establishing a claim in Antarctica. From 26 August 1946, and until the beginning of 1947, it carried out Operation Highjump, the largest military expeditionary force that the United States had ever sent to Antarctica, consisting of 13 ships, 4,700 men, and numerous aerial devices. Its goals were to train military personnel and to test material in conditions of extreme cold for a hypothetical war in the Antarctic.\nOn 2 September 1947, the quadrant of Antarctica in which the United States was interested (between 24\u00b0 W and 90\u00b0 W) was included as part of the security zone of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, committing its members to defend it in case of external aggression.\nIn August 1948, the United States proposed that Antarctica be under the guardianship of the United Nations, as a trust territory administered by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, the United States, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand. This idea was rejected by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, and Norway. Before the rejection, on 28 August 1948, the United States proposed to the claimant countries some form of internationalization of Antarctica, and the United Kingdom supported this. Chile responded by presenting a plan to suspend all Antarctic claims for five to ten years while negotiating a final solution, but this did not find acceptance.\nIn 1950, the interest of the United States to keep the Soviet Union away from Antarctica was frustrated, when the Soviets informed the claimant states that they would not accept any Antarctic agreement in which they were not represented. The fear that the USSR would react by making a territorial claim, bringing the Cold War to Antarctica, led the United States to make none.\nInternational conflicts.\nVarious international conflicts motivated the creation of an agreement for the Antarctic.\nSome incidents had occurred during the Second World War, and a new one occurred in Hope Bay on 1 February 1952, when the Argentine military fired warning shots at a group of Britons. The response of the United Kingdom was to send a warship that landed marines at the scene on 4 February. In 1949, Argentina, Chile, and the United Kingdom signed a Tripartite Naval Declaration committing not to send warships south of the 60th parallel south, which was renewed annually until 1961 when it was deemed unnecessary when the treaty entered into force. This tripartite declaration was signed after the tension generated when Argentina sent a fleet of eight warships to Antarctica in February 1948.\nOn 17 January 1953, Argentina reopened the Lieutenant Lasala refuge on Deception Island, leaving a sergeant and a corporal in the Argentine Navy. On 15 February, in the incident on Deception Island, 32 royal marines landed from the British frigate HMS \"Snipe\" armed with Sten machine guns, rifles, and tear gas capturing the two Argentine sailors. The Argentine refuge and a nearby uninhabited Chilean shelter were destroyed, and the Argentine sailors were delivered to a ship from that country on 18 February near South Georgia. A British detachment remained three months on the island while the frigate patrolled its waters until April.\nOn 4 May 1955, the United Kingdom filed two lawsuits, against Argentina and Chile respectively, before the International Court of Justice to declare the invalidity of the claims of the sovereignty of the two countries over Antarctic and sub-Antarctic areas. On 15 July 1955, the Chilean government rejected the jurisdiction of the court in that case, and on 1 August, the Argentine government also did so, so on 16 March 1956, the claims were closed.\nIn 1956 and 1958, India tried unsuccessfully to bring the Antarctic issue to the United Nations General Assembly.\nInternational Geophysical Year.\nIn 1950, the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) had discussed the possibility of holding a third International Polar Year. At the suggestion of the World Meteorological Organization, the idea of the International Polar Year was extended to the entire planet, thus creating the International Geophysical Year that took place between 1 July 1957, and 31 December 1958. In this event, 66 countries participated. At the ICSU meeting in Stockholm from 9 to 11 September 1957, the creation of a Special Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR) was approved, inviting the twelve countries conducting Antarctic investigations to send delegates to integrate the committee, with the purpose of exchanging scientific information among its members regarding Antarctica. The SCAR was later renamed to the Scientific Committee for Research in Antarctica.\nBoth Argentina and Chile stated that research carried out on the continent during the International Geophysical Year would not give any territorial rights to the participants, and that the facilities that were erected during that year should be dismantled at the end of it. However, in February 1958, the United States proposed that the Antarctic investigations should be extended for another year, and the Soviet Union reported that it would maintain its scientific bases until the studies being carried out had been completed.\nNegotiation of the treaty.\nScientific bases increased international tension concerning Antarctica. The danger of the Cold War spreading to that continent caused the President of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, to convene an Antarctic Conference of the twelve countries active in Antarctica during the International Geophysical Year, to sign a treaty. In the first phase, representatives of the twelve nations met in Washington, who met in sixty sessions between June 1958 and October 1959 to define a basic negotiating framework. However, no consensus was reached on a preliminary draft. In the second phase, a conference at the highest diplomatic level was held from 15 October to 1 December 1959, when the Treaty was signed.\nThe Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959 by 12 nations and came into effect in the mid-1960s. The central ideas with full acceptance were the freedom of scientific research in Antarctica and the peaceful use of the continent. There was also a consensus for demilitarization and the maintenance of the status quo. The treaty prohibits nuclear testing, military operations, economic exploitation, and territorial claims in Antarctica. It is monitored through on-site inspections. The only permanent structures allowed are scientific research stations. The original signatory countries hold voting rights on Antarctic governance, with seven of them claiming portions of the continent and the remaining five being non-claimants. Other nations have joined as consultative members by conducting significant research in Antarctica. Non-consultative parties can also adhere to the treaty. In 1991-1992, the treaty was renegotiated by 33 nations, with the main change being the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection, which prohibited mining and oil exploration for 50 years.\nThe positions of the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand coincided in the establishment of an international administration for Antarctica, proposing that it should be within the framework of the United Nations. Australia and the United Kingdom expressed the need for inspections by observers, and the British also proposed the use of military personnel for logistical functions. Argentina proposed that all atomic explosions be banned in Antarctica, which caused a crisis that lasted until the last day of the conference, since the United States, along with other countries, intended to ban only those that were made without prior notice and without prior consultation. The support of the USSR and Chile for the Argentine proposal finally caused the United States to retract its opposition.\nThe signing of the treaty was the first arms control agreement that occurred in the framework of the Cold War, and the participating countries managed to avoid the internationalization of Antarctic sovereignty.\nAs of the year 2048, any of the consultative parties to the treaty may request the revision of the treaty and its entire normative system, with the approval of a relative majority.\nOther agreements.\nOther agreements\u00a0\u2013 some 200 recommendations adopted at treaty consultative meetings and ratified by governments\u00a0\u2013 include:\nMeetings.\nThe Antarctic Treaty System's yearly \"Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM)\" are the international forum for the administration and management of the region. Only 29 of the 56 parties to the agreements have the right to participate in decision-making at these meetings, though the other 27 are still allowed to attend. The decision-making participants are the \"Consultative Parties\" and, in addition to the 12 original signatories, including 17 countries that have demonstrated their interest in Antarctica by carrying out substantial scientific activity there. The Antarctic Treaty also has \"Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (SATCM)\", which are generally summoned to treat more important topics but are less frequents and Meetings of Experts.\nParties.\nAs of 2023, there are 56 states party to the treaty, 29 of which, including all 12 original signatories to the treaty, have consultative (voting) status. The consultative members include the 7 countries that claim portions of Antarctica as their territory. The 49 non-claimant countries do not recognize the claims of others. 42 parties to the Antarctic Treaty have also ratified the \"Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty\".\n\u2020 Reserved the right to make a claim.\nAntarctic Treaty Secretariat.\nThe \"Antarctic Treaty Secretariat\" was established in Buenos Aires, Argentina in September 2004 by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). Jan Huber (the Netherlands) served as the first Executive Secretary for five years until 31 August 2009. He was succeeded on 1 September 2009, by Manfred Reinke (Germany). Reinke was succeeded by Albert Lluberas (Uruguay), who was elected in June 2017 at the 40th Antarctic Consultative Treaty Meeting in Beijing, China.\nThe tasks of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat can be divided into the following areas:\nLegal system.\nAntarctica currently has no permanent population and therefore it has no citizenship nor government. Personnel present on Antarctica at any time are always citizens or nationals of some sovereignty outside Antarctica, as there is no Antarctic sovereignty. The majority of Antarctica is claimed by one or more countries, but most countries do not explicitly recognize those claims. The area on the mainland between 90 degrees west and 150 degrees west is the only major land on Earth not claimed by any country. Until 2015 the interior of the Norwegian Sector, the extent of which had never been officially defined, was considered to be unclaimed. That year, Norway formally laid claim to the area between its Queen Maud Land and the South Pole.\nGovernments that are party to the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection implement the articles of these agreements, and decisions taken under them, through national laws. These laws generally apply only to their own citizens, wherever they are in Antarctica, and serve to enforce the consensus decisions of the consultative parties: about which activities are acceptable, which areas require permits to enter, what processes of environmental impact assessment must precede activities, and so on. The Antarctic Treaty is often considered to represent an example of the common heritage of mankind principle.\nAustralia.\nSince the designation of the Australian Antarctic Territory pre-dated the signing of the Antarctic Treaty, Australian laws that relate to Antarctica date from more than two decades before the Antarctic Treaty era. In terms of criminal law, the laws that apply to the Jervis Bay Territory (which follows the laws of the Australian Capital Territory) apply to the Australian Antarctic Territory. Key Australian legislation applying Antarctic Treaty System decisions include the \"Antarctic Treaty Act 1960\", the \"Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980\" and the \"Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981\".\nUnited States.\nThe law of the United States, including certain criminal offences by or against U.S. nationals, such as murder, may apply to areas not under jurisdiction of other countries. To this end, the United States now stations special deputy U.S. Marshals in Antarctica to provide a law enforcement presence.\nSome U.S. laws directly apply to Antarctica. For example, the Antarctic Conservation Act, Public Law 95-541, \u00a0\u00a7\u00a02401 \"et seq.\", provides civil and criminal penalties for the following activities, unless authorized by regulation or statute:\nViolation of the Antarctic Conservation Act carries penalties of up to US$10,000 in fines and one year in prison. The Departments of the Treasury, Commerce, Transportation, and the Interior share enforcement responsibilities. The Act requires expeditions from the U.S. to Antarctica to notify, in advance, the Office of Oceans and Polar Affairs of the State Department, which reports such plans to other nations as required by the Antarctic Treaty. Further information is provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science Foundation.\nNew Zealand.\nIn 2006, the New Zealand police reported that jurisdictional issues prevented them issuing warrants for potential American witnesses who were reluctant to testify during the Christchurch Coroner's investigation into the death by poisoning of Australian astrophysicist Rodney Marks at the South Pole base in May 2000. Dr. Marks died while wintering over at the United States' Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station located at the geographic South Pole. Prior to autopsy, the death was attributed to natural causes by the National Science Foundation and the contractor administering the base. However, an autopsy in New Zealand revealed that Dr. Marks died from methanol poisoning. The New Zealand Police launched an investigation. In 2006, frustrated by lack of progress, the Christchurch Coroner said that it was unlikely that Dr. Marks ingested the methanol knowingly, although there is no certainty that he died as the direct result of the act of another person. During media interviews, the police detective in charge of the investigation criticized the National Science Foundation and contractor Raytheon for failing to co-operate with the investigation.\nSouth Africa.\nUnder the South African Citizens in Antarctica Act, 1962, South African law applies to all South African citizens in Antarctica, and they are subject to the jurisdiction of the magistrate's court in Cape Town. The Antarctic Treaties Act, 1996 incorporates the Antarctic Treaty and related agreements into South African law. In regard to violations of these treaties, South Africa also asserts jurisdiction over South African residents and members of expeditions organised in South Africa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1292", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1292", "title": "Algernon Swinburne", "text": ""}
{"id": "1293", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1293", "title": "Alfred Lawson", "text": "English baseball player (1869\u20131954)\nAlfred William Lawson (March 24, 1869 \u2013 November 29, 1954) was an English born professional baseball player, aviator and utopian philosopher. He was a baseball player, manager, and league promoter from 1887 through 1916 and went on to play a pioneering role in the U.S. aircraft industry. He published two early aviation trade journals.\nHe is frequently cited as the inventor of the airliner and was awarded several of the first air mail contracts, which he ultimately could not fulfill. He founded the Lawson Aircraft Company in Green Bay, Wisconsin, to build military training aircraft and later the Lawson Airplane Company in South Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to build airliners.\nThe crash of his ambitious Lawson L-4 \"Midnight Liner\" during its trial flight takeoff on May 8, 1921, ended his best chance for commercial aviation success.\nIn 1904, he wrote a utopian novel, \"Born Again\", in which he developed the philosophy which later became Lawsonomy.\nBaseball career (1888\u20131907).\nHe made one start for the Boston Beaneaters and two for the Pittsburgh Alleghenys during the 1890 season. His minor league playing career lasted through 1895. He later managed in the minors from 1905 to 1907.\nUnion Professional League.\nIn 1908, he started a new professional baseball league known as the Union Professional League. The league took the field in April but folded one month later owing to financial difficulties.\nAviation career (1908\u20131928).\nAn early advocate or rather evangelist of aviation, in October 1908 Lawson started the magazine \"Fly\" to stimulate public interest and educate readers in the fundamentals of the new science of aviation. It sold for 10 cents a copy from newsstands across the country. In 1910, moving to New York City, he renamed the magazine \"Aircraft\" and published it until 1914. The magazine chronicled the technical developments of the early aviation pioneers.\nLawson was the first advocate for commercial air travel, coining the term \"airline.\" He also advocated for a strong American flying force, lobbying Congress in 1913 to expand its appropriations for Army aircraft.\nIn early 1913, he learned to fly the Sloan-Deperdussin and the Moisant-Bleriot monoplanes, becoming an accomplished pilot. Later that year he bought a Thomas flying boat and became the first air commuter regularly flying from his country house in Seidler's Beach, New Jersey, to the foot of 75th Street in New York City (about 35 miles).\nIn 1917, utilizing the knowledge gained from ten years of advocating aviation, he built his first airplane, the Lawson Military Tractor 1 (MT-1) trainer, and founded the Lawson Aircraft Corporation. The company's plant was sited at Green Bay, Wisconsin. There he secured a contract and built the Lawson MT-2. He also designed the steel fuselage Lawson Armored Battler, which never got beyond the drafting board, given doubts within the Army aviation community and the signing of the armistice.\nAfter the war, in 1919 Lawson started a project to build America's first airline. He secured financial backing, and in five months he had built and demonstrated in flight his biplane airliner, the 18-passenger Lawson L-2. He demonstrated its capabilities in a 2000-mile multi-city tour from Milwaukee to Chicago-Toledo-Cleveland-Buffalo-Syracuse-New york City-Washington, D.C.-Collinsville-Dayton-Chicago and back to Milwaukee, creating a buzz of positive press.\nThe publicity allowed him to secure an additional $1 million to build the 26-passenger Midnight Liner. The aircraft crashed on takeoff on its maiden flight.\nIn late 1920, he secured government contracts for three airmail routes and to deliver ten war planes, but owing to the fall 1920 recession, he could not secure the necessary $100,000 in cash reserves called for in the contracts and had to decline them.\nIn 1926, he started his last airliner, the 56-seat, two-tier Lawson super airliner.\nIn this phase of his life, he was considered one of the leading thinkers in the budding American commercial aviation community, but his troubles with getting financial backing for his ideas led him to turn to economics, philosophy, and organization.\nLawsonomy (1929\u20131954).\nIn the 1920s, Lawson promoted health practices, including vegetarianism, and claimed to have found the secret of living to 200. He also developed his own highly unusual theories of physics, according to which such concepts as \"penetrability\", \"suction and pressure\" and \"zig-zag-and-swirl\" were discoveries on par with Einstein's theory of relativity. He published numerous books on these concepts, all set in a distinctive typography.\nHe later propounded his own philosophy, Lawsonomy, and the Lawsonian religion. He also developed, during the Great Depression, the populist economic theory of \"Direct Credits\", according to which banks are the cause of all economic woes, the oppressors of both capital and labour. Lawson believed that the government should replace banks as the provider of loans to business and workers. He predicted the worldwide adoption of Lawsonian principles once \"everybody understands this subject\". His rallies and lectures attracted thousands of listeners in the early 1930s, mainly in the upper Midwest, but by the late 1930s the crowds had dwindled.\nHis claims about his own greatness became increasingly hyperbolic. The \"Lawsonomy trilogy\", considered by Lawson himself to be his intellectual masterpiece, is full of such self-referential statements as \"About every two thousand years a new teacher with advanced intellectual equipment appears upon earth to lead the people a step or two nearer the one God of everybody\".\nIn 1943, he founded the Humanity Benefactor Foundation and University of Lawsonomy in Des Moines, on the site of Des Moines University, to spread his teachings and offer the degree of \"Knowledgian\", but after various IRS and other investigations it was closed and finally sold in 1954, the year of Lawson's death. His financial arrangements remain mysterious to this day, and in later years he seems to have owned little property, moving from city to city as a guest of his farflung acolytes. In 1952, he was brought before a United States Senate investigative committee on allegations that his organization had bought war surplus machines and then sold them for a profit, despite claiming non-profit status. His attempt to explain Lawsonomy to the senators ended in mutual frustration and bafflement.\nA farm near Racine, Wisconsin, is the only remaining university facility, although a tiny handful of churches may yet survive in places such as Wichita, Kansas. The large sign, formerly reading \"University of Lawsonomy\", was a familiar landmark for motorists in the region for many years and was visible from Interstate 94 about north of the Illinois state line, on the east side of the highway. A storm in the spring of 2009 destroyed the sign, although the supporting posts are still visible. On the northbound side of Interstate 94, a sign on the roof of the building nearest the freeway said \"Study Natural Law\" until being shingled over in October 2014.\nIn 2018, the Town of Mount Pleasant paid $933,000 to purchase the property on the northbound side of Interstate 94 for the Foxconn project. All remaining buildings were demolished and removed. Lawsonomy maintains a small following to this day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1295", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1295", "title": "ALCS", "text": ""}
{"id": "1297", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1297", "title": "Apocrypha/Tanakh", "text": ""}
{"id": "1298", "revid": "36068529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1298", "title": "Ames, Iowa", "text": "Ames () is a city in Story County, Iowa, United States, located approximately north of Des Moines in central Iowa. It is best known as the home of Iowa State University (ISU), with leading agriculture, design, engineering, and veterinary medicine colleges. A United States Department of Energy national laboratory, Ames Laboratory, is located on the ISU campus.\nAccording to the 2020 census, Ames had a population of 66,427, making it the state's ninth largest city. Iowa State University was home to 27,854 students as of spring 2023, which make up approximately one half of the city's population.\nAmes also hosts United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) sites: the largest federal animal disease center in the United States, the USDA Agricultural Research Service's National Animal Disease Center (NADC), as well as one of two national USDA sites for the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), which comprises the National Veterinary Services Laboratory and the Center for Veterinary Biologics. Ames also hosts the headquarters for the Iowa Department of Transportation.\nHistory.\nThe city was formed in 1864 as a station stop on the Cedar Rapids and Missouri Railroad and was named after 19th century U.S. Congressman Oakes Ames of Massachusetts, who was influential in the building of the transcontinental railroad. Ames was founded by local resident Cynthia Olive Duff (n\u00e9e Kellogg) and railroad magnate John Insley Blair, near a location that was deemed favorable for a railroad crossing of the Skunk River.\nGeography.\nAmes is located along the western edge of Story County, roughly north of the state capital, Des Moines, near the intersection of Interstate 35 and U.S. Route 30. A smaller highway, U.S. Route 69, passes through the town. Also passing through Ames is the cross country line of the Union Pacific Railroad and two small streams (the South Skunk River and Ioway Creek).\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\nCampustown.\nCampustown is the neighborhood directly south of Iowa State University Central Campus bordered by Lincoln Way on the north. Campustown is a high-density mixed-use neighborhood that is home to many student apartments, nightlife venues, restaurants, and numerous other establishments, most of which are unique to Ames. \nClimate.\nAmes has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfa\"). On average, the warmest month is July and the coldest is January. The highest recorded temperature was in 1988 and the lowest was in 1996.\nDemographics.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 58,965 people, 22,759 households, and 9,959 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 23,876 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.5% White, 3.4% African American, 0.2% Native American, 8.8% Asian, 1.1% from other races, and 2.0% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.4% of the population.\nThere were 22,759 households, of which 19.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.6% were married couples living together, 5.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 2.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 56.2% were non-families. 30.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.82.\nThe median age in the city was 23.8 years. 13.4% of residents were under the age of 18; 40.5% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 22.9% were from 25 to 44; 15% were from 45 to 64; and 8.1% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 53.0% male and 47.0% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 50,731 people, 18,085 households, and 8,970 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 18,757 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 87.34% White, 7.70% Asian, 2.65% African American, 0.04% Native American, 0.76% Pacific Islander and other races, and 1.36% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.98% of the population.\nThere were 18,085 households, out of which 22.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.0% were married couples living together, 5.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 50.4% were non-families. 28.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.30 and the average family size was 2.85.\nAge spread: 14.6% under the age of 18, 40.0% from 18 to 24, 23.7% from 25 to 44, 13.9% from 45 to 64, and 7.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 24 years. For every 100 females, there were 109.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 109.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $36,042, and the median income for a family was $56,439. Males had a median income of $37,877 versus $28,198 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,881. About 7.6% of families and 20.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.2% of those under age 18 and 4.1% of those age 65 or over.\nMetropolitan area.\nThe U.S. Census Bureau designates the Ames MSA as encompassing all of Story County. While Ames is the largest city in Story County, the county seat is in the nearby city of Nevada, east of Ames.\nAmes metropolitan statistical area combined with the Boone, Iowa micropolitan statistical area (Boone County, Iowa) make up the larger Ames-Boone combined statistical area. Ames is the larger principal city of the Combined Statistical Area that includes all of Story County, Iowa and Boone County, Iowa. which had a combined population of 106,205 at the 2000 census.\nEconomy.\nAmes is home of Iowa State University of Science and Technology, a public land-grant and space-grant research university. At its founding in 1858, Iowa State was known as the Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts. Ames is the home of the closely allied U.S. Department of Agriculture's National Animal Disease Center (See Ames strain), the U.S. Department of Energy's Ames Laboratory (a major materials research and development facility), and the main offices of the Iowa Department of Transportation. State and Federal institutions are the largest employers in Ames.\nOther area employers include a 3M manufacturing plant; Danfoss Power Solutions, a hydraulics manufacturer; Barilla, a pasta manufacturer; Ball, a manufacturer of canning jars and plastic bottles; Workiva, a global cloud computing company; Renewable Energy Group, America's largest producer of biomass-based diesel; and the National Farmers Organization.\nThe Iowa State University Research Park is a not-for-profit business development incubator located in Ames, and affiliated with Iowa State University.\nIn 2015, Ames was ranked in the top 15 \"Cities That Have Done the Best Since the Recession\" by Bloomberg Businessweek.\nThe Bureau of Labor Statistics ranked Ames and Boulder, Colorado as having the lowest unemployment rate (2.5%) of any metropolitan area in the US in 2016. By June 2018, unemployment in Ames had fallen even further, to 1.5%, though wage increases for workers were not keeping pace with rising rents.\nTop employers.\nAs of 2020, the top employers in the city are:\nSports.\nThe Iowa State Cyclones play a variety of sports in the Ames area. The Iowa State Cyclones football team plays at Jack Trice Stadium in Ames. Also, the Cyclones' Men's and Women's Basketball teams and Volleyball teams play at Hilton Coliseum just across the street from Jack Trice Stadium. The Iowa State Cyclones are a charter member of the Big 12 Conference in all sports and compete in NCAA Division I-A. The Iowa State Women's Tennis is also well known and very successful.\nThe Ames Figure Skating Club provides recreational to professional level skating opportunities. The club sponsors the Learn to Skate Program. Coaches provide on and off ice lessons or workshops. The club hosts the figure skating portion of the Iowa Games competition every summer. In the fall the club hosts Cyclone Country Championships.\nThe Ames ISU ice arena also hosts the Iowa State Cyclones hockey team. The arena also hosts the Ames Little Cyclones hockey program for high school students and children in elementary or middle school.\nEducation.\nMuch of the city is served by the Ames Community School District.\nA portion of northern Ames is zoned to the Gilbert Community School District.\nAmes High School: Grades 9\u201312\nGilbert CSD students are zoned to Gilbert High School.\nIowa State University.\nIowa State University of Science and Technology, more commonly known as Iowa State University (ISU), is a public land-grant and space-grant research university located in Ames. Iowa State University is the birthplace of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry Computer, the world's first electronic digital computer. Iowa State has produced a number of astronauts, scientists, Nobel laureates, and Pulitzer Prize winners. Until 1945 it was known as the Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts. The university is a member of the American Association of Universities and the Big 12 Conference.\nISU is the nation's first designated land-grant university In 1856, the Iowa General Assembly enacted legislation to establish the State Agricultural College and Model Farm. Story County was chosen as the location on June 21, 1859, from proposals by Johnson, Kossuth, Marshall, Polk, and Story counties. When Iowa accepted the provisions of the Morrill Act of 1862, Iowa State became the first institution in nation designated as a land-grant college. The institution was coeducational from the first preparatory class admitted in 1868. The formal admitting of students began the following year, and the first graduating class of 1872 consisted of 24 men and 2 women.\nThe first building on the Iowa State campus was Farm House. Built in the 1860s, it currently serves as a museum and National Historic Landmark. Today, Iowa State has over 60 notable buildings, including Beardshear Hall, Morrill Hall, Memorial Union, Catt Hall, Curtiss Hall, Carver Hall, Parks Library, the Campanile, Hilton Coliseum, C.Y. Stephens Auditorium, Fisher Theater, Jack Trice Stadium, Lied Recreation Center, numerous residence halls, and many buildings specific to ISU's many different majors and colleges.\nThe official mascot for ISU is Cy the Cardinal. The official school colors are cardinal and gold. The Iowa State Cyclones play in the NCAA's Division I-A as a member of the Big 12 Conference.\nMedia.\nAmes is also served by stations in the Des Moines media market, which includes Clear Channel's 50,000-watt talk station WHO, music stations KAZR, KDRB, KGGO, KKDM, KHKI, KIOA, KJJY, KRNT, KSPZ and KSTZ, talk station KWQW, and sports stations KXNO and KXNO-FM.\nLike radio, Ames is served by the Des Moines media market. WOI-DT, the ABC affiliate in central Iowa, was originally owned and operated by Iowa State University until the 1990s. The station is still licensed to Ames, but studio's are located in West Des Moines. Other stations serving Ames include KCCI, KDIN-TV, WHO-DT, KCWI-TV, KDMI, KDSM-TV and KFPX-TV.\nChannel 12 is owned by the City of Ames and overseen by the City Manager's Office. The channel broadcasts meetings for city council as well as other city government councils and boards. Channel 12 also produces its own original content focused on news and other happenings in Ames. Channel 12 has won various regional and national awards including a NATOA Government Programming Award and a Telly Award. Channel 12's goals are \"To provide quality programming to the citizens of Ames that educates and informs about city government issues\" and \"To provide live coverage and rebroadcasts of council and commission meetings.\"\nChannel 16 serves as Ames' public access TV channel. \"The purpose of Ames Public Access TV (Channel 16) is to provide residents the opportunity to broadcast locally produced programs on cable television. APATV provides cablecasting of non-commercial, public access programming independently produced by professionals or non-professionals in either a VHS or DVD format. This service is provided on a first-come-first-served, non-discriminatory, non monopolistic basis. Other services include video messaging to serve as a community calendar.\"\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nThe town is served by U.S. Highways 30 and 69 and Interstate 35. Ames is the only town in Iowa with a population of greater than 50,000 that does not have a state highway serving it. As of 2019[ [update]], Ames currently has three roundabouts constructed on University Avenue/530th Avenue. The first is at the intersection of Airport Road (Oakwood Rd.) and University Avenue, the second at the intersection of Cottonwood Road and 530th Avenue and the third at Collaboration Place and 530th Avenue.\nAmes was serviced by the Fort Dodge, Des Moines and Southern Railroad via a branch from Kelley to Iowa State and to downtown Ames. The tracks were removed in the 1960s. The Chicago and North Western Transportation Company twin mainline runs east and west bisecting the town and running just south of the downtown business district. The C&amp;NW used to operate a branch to Des Moines. This line was removed in the 1980s when the Spine Line through the nearby city of Nevada was purchased from the Rock Island Railroad after its bankruptcy. The Union Pacific, successor to the C&amp;NW, still runs 60\u201370 trains a day through Ames on twin mainlines, which leads to some traffic delays. There is also a branch to Eagle Grove that leaves Ames to the north. The Union Pacific maintains a small yard called Ames Yard east of Ames between Ames and Nevada. Ames has been testing automatic train horns at several of its crossings. These directional horns which are focused down the streets are activated when the crossing signals turn on and are shut off after the train crosses the crossing. This system cancels out the need for the trains to blow their horns. Train noise had been a problem in the residential areas to the west and northwest of downtown.\nAmes Municipal Airport is located southeast of the city. The current (and only) fixed-base operator is Central Iowa Air Service. The airport has two runways \u2013 01/19, which is , and 13/31, which is .\nThe City of Ames offers a transit system throughout town, called CyRide, that is funded jointly by Iowa State University, the ISU Government of the Student Body, and the City of Ames. Rider fares are free for children under five, while students pay a set cost as part of their tuition. In addition to local transit, Ames is served by intercity buses from Jefferson Lines, which stop at the Ames Intermodal Facility.\nIn 2009, the Ames metropolitan statistical area (MSA) ranked as the third highest in the United States for percentage of commuters who walked to work (10.4 percent).\nAmes has the headquarters of the Iowa Department of Transportation.\nHealth care.\nAmes is served by Mary Greeley Medical Center, a 220-bed regional referral hospital which is adjacent to McFarland Clinic PC, central Iowa's largest physician-owned multi-specialty clinic, and also Iowa Heart Center.\nParks and recreation.\nOn September 10, 2019 the City of Ames proposed a $29,000,000 bond for building a fitness center called the Healthy Life Center. It failed to pass. Iowa State University owns the land it was to be built on.\nNotable people.\nThis is a list of notable people associated with Ames, Iowa arranged by career and in alphabetical order.\nPolitics.\nFrom 1979 through 2011, Ames was the location of the Ames Straw Poll, which was held every August prior to a presidential election year in which the Republican presidential nomination was undecided (meaning there was no Republican president running for re-election\u2014as in 2011, 2007, 1999, 1995, 1987, and 1979). The poll would gauge support for the various Republican candidates amongst attendees of a fundraising dinner benefiting the Iowa Republican Party. The straw poll was frequently seen by national media and party insiders as a first test of organizational strength in Iowa. In 2015, the straw poll was to be moved to nearby Boone before the Iowa Republican Party eventually decided to cancel it altogether.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1299", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1299", "title": "Abbadides", "text": ""}
{"id": "1300", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1300", "title": "Abalone", "text": "Common name for a group of sea snails\nAbalone ( or ; via Spanish , from Rumsen \"aul\u00f3n\") is a common name for any of a group of small to very large marine gastropod molluscs in the family Haliotidae. Other common names are ear shells, sea ears, and, rarely, muttonfish or muttonshells in parts of Australia, ormer in the UK, perlemoen in South Africa, and p\u0101ua in New Zealand. Abalones are marine snails. Their taxonomy puts them in the family Haliotidae, which contains only one genus, \"Haliotis\", which once contained six subgenera. These subgenera have become alternative representations of \"Haliotis\". The number of species recognized worldwide ranges between 30 and 130 with over 230 species-level taxa described. The most comprehensive treatment of the family considers 56 species valid, with 18 additional subspecies. The shells of abalones have a low, open spiral structure, and are characterized by several open respiratory pores in a row near the shell's outer edge. The thick inner layer of the shell is composed of nacre (mother-of-pearl), which in many species is highly iridescent, giving rise to a range of strong, changeable colors which make the shells attractive to humans as decorative objects, jewelry, and as a source of colorful mother-of-pearl.\nThe flesh of abalones is widely considered to be a desirable food, and is consumed raw or cooked by a variety of cultures.\nDescription.\nMost abalone vary in size from (\"Haliotis pulcherrima\") to . The largest species, \"Haliotis rufescens\", reaches .\nThe shell of abalones is convex, rounded to oval in shape, and may be highly arched or very flattened. The shell of the majority of species has a small, flat spire and two to three whorls. The last whorl, known as the body whorl, is auriform, meaning that the shell resembles an ear, giving rise to the common name \"ear shell\". \"Haliotis asinina\" has a somewhat different shape, as it is more elongated and distended. The shell of \"Haliotis cracherodii cracherodii\" is also unusual as it has an ovate form, is imperforate, shows an exserted spire, and has prickly ribs.\nA mantle cleft in the shell impresses a groove in the shell, in which are the row of holes characteristic of the genus. These holes are respiratory apertures for venting water from the gills and for releasing sperm and eggs into the water column. They make up what is known as the selenizone, which forms as the shell grows. This series of eight to 38 holes is near the anterior margin. Only a small number is generally open. The older holes are gradually sealed up as the shell grows and new holes form. Each species has a typical number of open holes, between four and 10, in the selenizone. An abalone has no operculum. The aperture of the shell is very wide and nacreous.\nThe exterior of the shell is striated and dull. The color of the shell is very variable from species to species, which may reflect the animal's diet. The iridescent nacre that lines the inside of the shell varies in color from silvery white, to pink, red and green-red to deep blue, green to purple.\nThe animal has fimbriated head lobes and side lobes that are fimbriated and cirrated. The radula has small median teeth, and the lateral teeth are single and beam-like. They have about 70 uncini, with denticulated hooks, the first four very large. The rounded foot is very large in comparison to most molluscs. The soft body is coiled around the columellar muscle, and its insertion, instead of being on the columella, is on the middle of the inner wall of the shell. The gills are symmetrical and both well developed.\nThese snails cling solidly with their broad, muscular foot to rocky surfaces at sublittoral depths, although some species such as \"Haliotis cracherodii\" used to be common in the intertidal zone. Abalones reach maturity at a relatively small size. Their fecundity is high and increases with their size, laying from 10,000 to 11 million eggs at a time. The spermatozoa are filiform and pointed at one end, and the anterior end is a rounded head.\nThe adults provide no further assistance to the larvae and they are described as lecithotrophic. The adults are herbivorous and feed with their rhipidoglossan radula on macroalgae, preferring red or brown algae.\nDistribution.\nThe haliotid family has a worldwide distribution, along the coastal waters of every continent, except the Pacific coast of South America, the Atlantic coast of North America, the Arctic, and Antarctica. The majority of abalone species are found in cold waters, such as off the coasts of New Zealand, South Africa, Australia, Western North America, and Japan.\nStructure and properties of the shell.\nThe shell of the abalone is exceptionally strong and is made of microscopic calcium carbonate tiles stacked like bricks. Between the layers of tiles is a clingy protein substance. When the abalone shell is struck, the tiles slide instead of shattering and the protein stretches to absorb the energy of the blow. Material scientists around the world are studying this tiled structure for insight into stronger ceramic products such as body armor. The dust created by grinding and cutting abalone shell is dangerous; appropriate safeguards must be taken to protect people from inhaling these particles.\nDiseases and pests.\nAbalones are subject to various diseases. The Victorian Department of Primary Industries said in 2007 that ganglioneuritis killed up to 90% of stock in affected regions. Abalone are also severe hemophiliacs as their fluids will not clot in the case of a laceration or puncture wound. Members of the Spionidae of the polychaetes are known as pests of abalone.\nHuman use.\nAbalone has been harvested worldwide for centuries as a source of food and decorative items. Abalone shells and associated materials, like their claw-like pearls and nacre, have been used as jewelry and for buttons, buckles, and inlay. These shells have been found in archaeological sites around the world, ranging from 100,000-year-old deposits at Blombos Cave in South Africa to historic Chinese abalone middens on California's Northern Channel Islands. For at least 12,000 years, abalones were harvested to such an extent around the Channel Islands that shells in the area decreased in size four thousand years ago. \nFarming.\nFarming of abalone began in the late 1950s and early 1960s in Japan and China. Since the mid-1990s, there have been many increasingly successful endeavors to commercially farm abalone for the purpose of consumption. Overfishing and poaching have reduced wild populations to such an extent that farmed abalone now supplies most of the abalone meat consumed. The principal abalone farming regions are China, Taiwan, Japan, and Korea. Abalone is also farmed in Australia, Canada, Chile, France, Iceland, Ireland, Mexico, Namibia, New Zealand, South Africa, Spain, Thailand, and the United States.\nAfter trials in 2012, a commercial \"sea ranch\" was set up in Flinders Bay, Western Australia to raise abalone. The ranch is based on an artificial reef made up of 5,000 separate concrete abalone habitat units, which can host 400 abalone each. The reef is seeded with young abalone from an onshore hatchery.\nThe abalone feed on seaweed that grows naturally on the habitats; the ecosystem enrichment of the bay also results in growing numbers of dhufish, pink snapper, wrasse, and Samson fish among other species.\nConsumption.\nAbalones have long been a valuable food source for humans in every area of the world where a species is abundant. The meat of this mollusc is considered a delicacy in certain parts of Latin America (particularly Chile), France, New Zealand, East Asia and Southeast Asia. In the Greater China region and among Overseas Chinese communities, abalone is commonly known as \"bao yu\", and sometimes forms part of a Chinese banquet. In the same way as shark fin soup or bird's nest soup, abalone is considered a luxury item, and is traditionally reserved for special occasions such as weddings and other celebrations.\nAs abalone became more popular and less common, the prices adjusted accordingly. In the 1920s, a restaurant-served portion of abalone, about 4 ounces, would cost (in inflation adjusted dollars) about US$7; by 2004, the price had risen to US$75. In the United States, prior to this time, abalone was predominantly eaten, gathered, and prepared by Chinese immigrants. Before that, abalone were collected to be eaten, and used for other purposes by Native American tribes. By 1900, laws were passed in California to outlaw the taking of abalone above the intertidal zone. This forced the Chinese out of the market and the Japanese perfected diving, with or without gear, to enter the market. Abalone started to become popular in the USA after the Panama\u2013Pacific International Exposition in 1915, which exhibited 365 varieties of fish with cooking demonstrations, and a 1300-seat dining hall.\nIn Japan, live and raw abalones are used in awabi sushi, or served steamed, salted, boiled, chopped, or simmered in soy sauce. Salted, fermented abalone entrails are the main component of \"tottsuru\", a local dish from Honsh\u016b. \"Tottsuru\" is mainly enjoyed with sake.\nIn South Korea, abalone is called \"Jeonbok\" (/juhn-bok/) and used in various recipes. \"Jeonbok\" porridge and Pan-fried abalone steak with butter are popular but also commonly used in soups or ramyeon.\nIn California, abalone meat can be found on pizza, saut\u00e9ed with caramelized mango, or in steak form dusted with cracker meal and flour.\nSport harvesting.\nAustralia.\nTasmania supplies about 25% of the yearly world abalone harvest. Around 12,500 Tasmanians recreationally fish for blacklip and greenlip abalone. For blacklip abalone, the size limit varies between for the southern end of the state and for the northern end of the state. Greenlip abalones have a minimum size of , except for an area around Perkins Bay in the north of the state where the minimum size is . With a recreational abalone licence, the bag limit is 10 per day, with a total possession limit of 20. Scuba diving for abalone is allowed, and has a rich history in Australia. (Scuba diving for abalone in the states of New South Wales and Western Australia is illegal; a free-diving catch limit of two is allowed).\nVictoria has had an active abalone fishery since the late 1950s. The state is sectioned into three fishing zones, Eastern, Central and Western, with each fisher required a zone-allocated licence. Harvesting is performed by divers using surface-supplied air \"hookah\" systems operating from runabout-style, outboard-powered boats. While the diver seeks out colonies of abalone amongst the reef beds, the deckhand operates the boat, known as working \"live\" and stays above where the diver is working. Bags of abalone pried from the rocks are brought to the surface by the diver or by way of \"shot line\", where the deckhand drops a weighted rope for the catch bag to be connected then retrieved. Divers measure each abalone before removing from the reef and the deckhand remeasures each abalone and removes excess weed growth from the shell. Since 2002, the Victorian industry has seen a significant decline in catches, with the total allowable catch reduced from 1440 to 787 tonnes for the 2011/12 fishing year, due to dwindling stocks and most notably the abalone virus ganglioneuritis, which is fast-spreading and lethal to abalone stocks.\nUnited States.\nSport harvesting of red abalone is permitted with a California fishing license and an abalone stamp card. In 2008, the abalone card also came with a set of 24 tags. This was reduced to 18 abalone per year in 2014, and as of 2017 the limit has been reduced to 12, only nine of which may be taken south of Mendocino County. Legal-size abalone must be tagged immediately. Abalone may only be taken using breath-hold techniques or shorepicking; scuba diving for abalone is strictly prohibited. Taking of abalone is not permitted south of the mouth of San Francisco Bay. A size minimum of measured across the shell is in place. A person may be in possession of only three abalone at any given time.\nAs of 2017, abalone season is May to October, excluding July. Transportation of abalone may only legally occur while the abalone is still attached in the shell. Sale of sport-obtained abalone is illegal, including the shell. Only red abalone may be taken, as black, white, pink, flat, green, and pinto abalone are protected by law. In 2018, The California Fish and Game Commission closed recreational abalone season due to dramatically declining populations. That year, they extended the moratorium to last through April 2021.\nAn abalone diver is normally equipped with a thick wetsuit, including a hood, bootees, and gloves, and usually also a mask, snorkel, weight belt, abalone iron, and abalone gauge. Alternatively, the rock picker can feel underneath rocks at low tides for abalone. Abalone are mostly taken in depths from a few inches up to ; less common are freedivers who can work deeper than . Abalone are normally found on rocks near food sources such as kelp. An abalone iron is used to pry the abalone from the rock before it has time to fully clamp down. Divers dive from boats, kayaks, tube floats, or directly off the shore.\nThe largest abalone recorded in California is , caught by John Pepper somewhere off the coast of San Mateo County in September 1993.\nThe mollusc \"Concholepas concholepas\" is often sold in the United States under the name \"Chilean abalone\", though it is not an abalone, but a muricid.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, abalone is called \"p\u0101ua\" (, from the M\u0101ori language). \"Haliotis iris\" (or blackfoot \"p\u0101ua\") is the ubiquitous New Zealand \"p\u0101ua\", the highly polished nacre of which is extremely popular as souvenirs with its striking blue, green, and purple iridescence. \"Haliotis australis\" and \"Haliotis virginea\" are also found in New Zealand waters, but are less popular than \"H. iris\".\nLike all New Zealand shellfish, recreational harvesting of \"p\u0101ua\" does not require a permit provided catch limits, size restrictions, and seasonal and local restrictions set by the Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI) are followed. The legal recreational daily limit is 10 per diver, with a minimum shell length of for \"H. iris\" and for \"H. australis\". In addition, no person may be in possession, even on land, of more than 20 \"p\u0101ua\" or more than of \"p\u0101ua\" meat at any one time. \"P\u0101ua\" can only be caught by free-diving; it is illegal to catch them using scuba gear.\nAn extensive global black market exists in collecting and exporting abalone meat. This can be a particularly awkward problem where the right to harvest \"p\u0101ua\" can be granted legally under M\u0101ori customary rights. When such permits to harvest are abused, it is frequently difficult to police. The limit is strictly enforced by roving Ministry for Primary Industries fishery officers with the backing of the New Zealand Police. Poaching is a major industry in New Zealand with many thousands being taken illegally, often undersized. Convictions have resulted in seizure of diving gear, boats, and motor vehicles and fines and in rare cases, imprisonment.\nSouth Africa.\nThe largest abalone in South Africa, \"Haliotis midae\", occurs along roughly two-thirds of the country's coastline. Abalone-diving has been a recreational activity for many years, but stocks are currently being threatened by illegal commercial harvesting. In South Africa, all persons harvesting this shellfish need permits that are issued annually, and no abalone may be harvested using scuba gear.\nFor the last few years, however, no permits have been issued for collecting abalone, but commercial harvesting still continues as does illegal collection by syndicates.\nIn 2007, because of widespread poaching of abalone, the South African government listed abalone as an endangered species according to the CITES section III appendix, which requests member governments to monitor the trade in this species. This listing was removed from CITES in June 2010 by the South African government and South African abalone is no longer subject to CITES trade controls. Export permits are still required, however.\nThe abalone meat from South Africa is prohibited for sale in the country to help reduce poaching; however, much of the illegally harvested meat is sold in Asian countries. As of early 2008, the wholesale price for abalone meat was approximately US$40.00 per kilogram. There is an active trade in the shells, which sell for more than US$1,400 per tonne.\nChannel Islands, Brittany and Normandy.\nOrmers (\"Haliotis tuberculata\") are considered a delicacy in the British Channel Islands as well as in adjacent areas of France, and are pursued with great alacrity by the locals. This, and a recent lethal bacterial disease, has led to a dramatic depletion in numbers since the latter half of the 19th century, and \"ormering\" is now strictly regulated to preserve stocks. The gathering of ormers is now restricted to a number of 'ormering tides', from 1 January to 30 April, which occur on the full or new moon and two days following. No ormers may be taken from the beach that are under in shell length. Gatherers are not allowed to wear wetsuits or even put their heads underwater. Any breach of these laws is a criminal offence and can lead to a fine of up to \u00a35,000 or six months in prison. The demand for ormers is such that they led to the world's first underwater arrest, when Mr. Kempthorne-Leigh of Guernsey was arrested by a police officer in full diving gear when illegally diving for ormers.\nDecorative items.\nThe highly iridescent inner nacre layer of the shell of abalone has traditionally been used as a decorative item, in jewelry, buttons, and as inlay in furniture and musical instruments, such as on fret boards and binding of guitars.\nIndigenous use.\nAbalone has been an important staple in a number of Indigenous cultures around the world, specifically in Africa and on the Northwest American coast. The meat is a traditional food, and the shell is used to make ornaments; historically, the shells were also used as currency in some communities.\nThreat of extinction.\nAbalones are one of the many classes of organism threatened with extinction due to overfishing and the acidification of oceans from anthropogenic carbon dioxide, as reduced pH erodes their shells. In the 21st century, white, pink, and green abalone are on the United States federal endangered species list, and possible restoration sites have been proposed for the San Clemente Island and Santa Barbara Island areas. The possibility of farming abalone to be reintroduced into the wild has also been proposed, with these abalone having special tags to help track the population.\nSpecies.\nThe number of species that are recognized within the genus \"Haliotis\" has fluctuated over time, and depends on the source that is consulted. The number of recognized species range from 30 to 130. This list finds a compromise using the WoRMS database, plus some species that have been added, for a total of 57. The majority of abalone have not been rated for conservation status. Those that have been reviewed tend to show that the abalone in general is an animal that is declining in numbers, and will need protection throughout the globe.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "1301", "revid": "1149284510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1301", "title": "Abbess", "text": "Female superior of a community of nuns, often an abbey\nAn abbess (Latin: \"abbatissa\"), also known as a mother superior, is the female superior of a community of Catholic nuns in an abbey.\nDescription.\nIn the Catholic Church (both the Latin Church and Eastern Catholic), Eastern Orthodox, Coptic and Anglican abbeys, the mode of election, position, rights, and authority of an abbess correspond generally with those of an abbot. She must be at least 40 years old and have been a nun for 10 years. The age requirement in the Catholic Church has evolved over time, ranging from 30 to 60. The requirement of 10 years as a nun is only eight in Catholicism. In the rare case of there not being a nun with the qualifications, the requirements may be lowered to 30 years of age and five of those in an \"upright manner\", as determined by the superior. A woman who is of illegitimate birth, is not a virgin, has undergone non-salutory public penance, is a widow, or is blind or deaf, is typically disqualified for the position, saving by permission of the Holy See. The office is elective, the choice being by the secret votes of the nuns belonging to the community. Like an abbot, after being confirmed in her office by the Holy See, an abbess is solemnly admitted to her office by a formal blessing, conferred by the bishop in whose territory the monastery is located, or by an abbot or another bishop with appropriate permission. Unlike the abbot, the abbess receives only the ring, the crosier, and a copy of the rule of the order. She does not receive a mitre as part of the ceremony. The abbess also traditionally adds a pectoral cross to the outside of her habit as a symbol of office, though she continues to wear a modified form of her religious habit or dress, as she is unordained\u2014females cannot be ordained\u2014and so does not vest or use choir dress in the liturgy. An abbess serves for life, except in Italy and some adjacent islands.\nRoles and responsibilities.\nAbbesses are, like abbots, major superiors according to canon law, the equivalents of abbots or bishops (the ordained male members of the church hierarchy who have, by right of their own office, executive jurisdiction over a building, diocesan territory, or a communal or non-communal group of persons\u2014juridical entities under church law). They receive the vows of the nuns of the abbey; they may admit candidates to their order's novitiate; they may send them to study; and they may send them to do pastoral or missionary, or to work or assist\u2014to the extent allowed by canon and civil law\u2014in the administration and ministry of a parish or diocese (these activities could be inside or outside the community's territory). They have full authority in its administration.\nHowever, there are significant limitations. \nThere are exigent circumstances, where due to Apostolical privilege, certain Abbesses have been granted rights and responsibilities above the normal, such as the Abbess of the Cistercian Monastery of the Abbey of Santa Mar\u00eda la Real de Las Huelgas near Burgos, Spain. Also granted exceptional rights was the Abbess of the Cistercian order in Conversano Italy. She was granted the ability to appoint her own vicar-general, select and approve the confessors, along with the practice of receiving the public homage of her clergy. This practice continued until some of the duties were modified due to an appeal by the clergy to Rome. Finally in 1750, the public homage was abolished.\nDuring the Middle Ages (7th\u201310th centuries) in the Catholic Church, greater restrictions on abbesses' spiritual independence gained pace. Instruments of church authority, from papal bulls down to local sanctions, were increasingly used to restrict their freedom to dispense blessings, administer sacraments, including the veiling of nuns, and publicly read the gospels or preach. Such spiritual\u2014and even temporal\u2014authority had in earlier church history, largely been unremarkable. As Thomas Oestereich, contributor to the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" (1913), makes clear, abbesses' past spiritual authority was increasingly seen as the \"usurpation\" of corresponding priestly power, and a solely male privilege. He gives an example of the attitude toward such practice, from the 9th century, which persists in church administrative control into the modern era:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus, in the Capitularies of Charlemagne, mention is made of \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;certain Abbesses, who contrary to the established discipline of the Church of God, presume to bless the people, impose their hands on them, make the sign of the cross on the foreheads of men, and confer the veil on virgins, employing during that ceremony the blessing reserved exclusively to the priest,\nall of which practice the bishops are urged to forbid absolutely in their respective dioceses.\nSimilarly, in 1210, Innocent III (died 1216) expressed his view of the Cistercian Abbesses of Burgos and Palencia in Spain, who preached and heard confessions of their own religious, characterizing these acts as \"unheard of, most indecorous, and highly preposterous.\"\nHistory.\nHistorically, in some Celtic monasteries, abbesses presided over joint-houses of monks and nuns, the most famous example being Saint Brigid of Kildare's leadership in the founding of the monastery at Kildare in Ireland. This custom accompanied Celtic monastic missions to France, Spain, and even to Rome itself. In 1115, Robert, the founder of Fontevraud Abbey near Chinon and Saumur, France, committed the government of the whole order, men as well as women, to a female superior.\nIn Lutheran churches, the title of abbess () has in some cases survived (for example, in the Itzehoe Convent) to designate the heads of abbeys which since the Protestant Reformation have continued as monasteries or convents (). These positions continued, merely changing from Catholic to Lutheran. The first to make this change was the Abbey of Quedlinburg, whose last Catholic Abbess died in 1514. These are collegiate foundations, which provide a home and an income for unmarried ladies, generally of noble birth, called canonesses (), or more usually, or . The office of abbess is of considerable social dignity, and in the past, was sometimes filled by princesses of the reigning houses. Until the dissolution of Holy Roman Empire and mediatisation of smaller imperial fiefs by Napoleon, the evangelical Abbess of Quedlinburg was also per officio the head of that state. The last such ruling abbess was Sofia Albertina, Princess of Sweden. The abess Hildegard of Fraunm\u00fcnster Abbey sat in the Imperial Diet among other princes of the Holy Roman Empire. The oldest women's abbey in Germany is St. Marienthal Abbey of Cistercian nuns, near Ostritz, established during the early 13th century.\nIn the Hrad\u010dany of Prague is a Catholic institute whose mistress is titled an Abbess. It was founded in 1755 by the Empress Maria Theresa, and traditionally was responsible for the coronation of the Queen of Bohemia. The Abbess is required to be an Austrian Archduchess.\nIn 1997,[ [update]] it was estimated the Catholic Church had around 200 presiding abbesses.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1302", "revid": "20842734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1302", "title": "Human abdomen", "text": ""}
{"id": "1303", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1303", "title": "Abdominal surgery", "text": "The term abdominal surgery broadly covers surgical procedures that involve opening the abdomen (laparotomy). Surgery of each abdominal organ is dealt with separately in connection with the description of that organ (see stomach, kidney, liver, etc.) Diseases affecting the abdominal cavity are dealt with generally under their own names (e.g. appendicitis).\nTypes.\nThe most common abdominal surgeries are described below.\nComplications.\nComplications of abdominal surgery include, but are not limited to:\nSterile technique, aseptic post-operative care, antibiotics, use of the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist, and vigilant post-operative monitoring greatly reduce the risk of these complications. Planned surgery performed under sterile conditions is much less risky than that performed under emergency or unsterile conditions. The contents of the bowel are unsterile, and thus leakage of bowel contents, as from trauma, substantially increases the risk of infection.\nGlobally, there are few studies comparing perioperative mortality following abdominal surgery across different health systems. One major prospective study of 10,745 adult patients undergoing emergency laparotomy from 357 centres in 58 high-, middle-, and low-income countries found that mortality is three times higher in low- compared with high-HDI countries even when adjusted for prognostic factors. In this study the overall global mortality rate was 1.6 percent at 24\u2009hours (high 1.1 percent, middle 1.9 percent, low 3.4 percent), increasing to 5.4 percent by 30 days (high 4.5 percent, middle 6.0 percent, low 8.6 percent). Of the 578 patients who died, 404 (69.9 percent) did so between 24\u2009hours and 30 days following surgery (high 74.2 percent, middle 68.8 percent, low 60.5 percent). Patient safety factors were suggested to play an important role, with use of the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist associated with reduced mortality at 30 days.\nTaking a similar approach, a unique global study of 1,409 children undergoing emergency laparotomy from 253 centres in 43 countries showed that adjusted mortality in children following surgery may be as high as 7 times greater in low-HDI and middle-HDI countries compared with high-HDI countries, translating to 40 excess deaths per 1,000 procedures performed in these settings. Internationally, the most common operations performed were appendectomy, small bowel resection, pyloromyotomy and correction of intussusception. After adjustment for patient and hospital risk factors, child mortality at 30 days was significantly higher in low-HDI (adjusted OR 7.14 (95% CI 2.52 to 20.23)) and middle-HDI (4.42 (1.44 to 13.56)) countries compared with high-HDI countries.\nAbsorption of drugs administered orally was shown to be significantly affected following abdominal surgery.\nThere is low-certainty evidence that there is no difference between using scalpel and electrosurgery in infection rates during major abdominal surgeries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1304", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1304", "title": "Abduction", "text": "Abduction may refer to:\nMedia.\nMusic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "1305", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1305", "title": "Abensberg", "text": " \nAbensberg (] ()) is a town in the Lower Bavarian district of Kelheim, in Bavaria, Germany, lying around southwest of Regensburg, east of Ingolstadt, northwest of Landshut and north of Munich. It is situated on the river Abens, a tributary of the Danube.\nGeography.\nThe town lies on the Abens river, a tributary of the Danube, around eight kilometres from the river's source. The area around Abensberg is characterized by the narrow valley of the Danube, where the Weltenburg Abbey stands, the valley of the Altm\u00fchl in the north, a left tributary of the Danube, and the famous Hallertau hops-planting region in the south. The town is divided into the municipalities of Abensberg, Arnhofen, Holzharlanden, H\u00f6rlbach, Offenstetten, Pullach and Sandharland.\nDivisions.\nSince the administrative reforms in Bavaria in the 1970s, the town also encompasses the following \"Ortsteile\":\nHistory.\nThere had been settlement on this part of the Abens river since long before the High Middle Ages, dating back to Neolithic times. Of particular interest and national importance are the Neolithic flint mines at Arnhofen, where, around 7,000 years ago, Stone Age people made flint, which was fashioned into drills, blades and arrowheads, and was regarded as the steel of the Stone Age. Traces of over 20,000 individuals were found on this site. The modern history of Abensberg, which is often incorrectly compared with that of the third century Roman castra (military outpost) of Abusina, begins with Gebhard, who was the first to mention Abensberg as a town, in the middle of the 12th century. The earliest written reference to the town, under the name of \"Habensperch\", came from this time, in around 1138. Gebhard was from the Babonen clan.\nIn 1256, the castrum of \"Abensprech\" was first mentioned, and on 12 June 1348, Margrave Ludwig of Brandenburg, and his brother, Duke Stephen of Bavaria, raised Abensberg to the status of a city, giving it the right to operate lower courts, enclose itself with a wall and hold markets. The wall was built by Count Ulrich III of Abensberg. Some of the thirty-two round towers and eight turrets are still preserved to this day.\nIn the Middle Ages, the people of Abensberg enjoyed a level of autonomy above their lord. They elected a city council, although only a small number of rich families were eligible for election.\nIn around 1390, the Carmelite Monastery of Our Lady of Abensberg was founded by Count John II and his wife, Agnes. Although Abensberg was an autonomous city, it remained dependent on the powerful Dukes of Bavaria. The last Lord of Abensberg, Niclas, Graf von Abensberg, supposedly named after his godfather, Nicholas of Kues, a Catholic cardinal, was murdered in 1485 by Christopher, a Duke of Bavaria-Munich. The year before, Niclas had unchivalrously taken Christopher captive as he bathed before a tournament in Munich. Although Christopher renounced his claim for revenge, he lay in wait for Niclas in Freising. When the latter arrived, he was killed by Seitz von Frauenberg. He is buried in the former convent of Abensberg.\nAbensberg then lost its independence and became a part of the Duchy of Bavaria, and from then on was administered by a ducal official, the so-called caretaker. The castle of Abensberg was destroyed during the Thirty Years' War, although the city had bought a guarantee of protection from the Swedish general, Carl Gustaf Wrangel. During the War of the Spanish Succession emperor Leopold I, who had occupied Bavaria, granted the fief of Abensberg to count Ernst von Abensperg und Traun (1608\u20131668) from an Austrian noble family named Traun that now received the name of the former counts of Abensberg (who were believed to be distant relatives). After the occupation ended, he was however dispossessed.\nJohannes Aventinus (1477\u20131534) is the city's most famous son, the founder of the study of history in Bavaria. Aventinus, whose name was real name is Johann or Johannes Turmair (\"Aventinus\" being the Latin name of his birthplace) wrote the \"Annals of Bavaria\", a valuable record of the early history of Germany and the first major written work on the subject. He is commemorated in the Walhalla temple, a monument near Regensburg to the distinguished figures of German history. Until 1800, Abensberg was a municipality belonging to the Straubing district of the Electorate of Bavaria. Abensberg also contained a magistrates' court. In the Battle of Abensberg on 19\u201320 April 1809, Napoleon gained a significant victory over the Austrians under Archduke Ludwig of Austria and General Johann von Hiller.\nCoat of arms.\nThe arms of the city are divided into two halves. On the left are the blue and white rhombuses of Bavaria, while the right half is split into two silver and black triangles. Two diagonally-crossed silver swords with golden handles rest on top.\nThe town has had a coat of arms since 1338, that of the Counts of Abensberg. With the death of the last Count, Nicholas of Abensberg, in 1485, the estates fell to the Duchy of Bavaria-Munich, meaning that henceforth only the Bavarian coat of arms was ever used.\nOn 31 December 1809, a decree of King Maximilian of Bavaria granted the city a new coat of arms, as a recognition of their (mainly humanitarian and logistic) services in the Battle of Abensberg the same year. The diagonally divided field in silver and black came from the old crest of the Counts of Abensberg, while the white and blue diamonds came from that of the House of Wittelsbach, the rulers of Bavaria. The swords recall the Battle of Abensberg.\nThe district of Offenstetten previously possessed its own coat of arms.\nEconomy and Infrastructure.\nThe area around Abensberg, the so-called sand belt between Siegburg, Neustadt an der Donau, Abensberg and Langquaid, is used for the intensive farming of asparagus, due to the optimal soil condition and climate. 212 hectares of land can produce ninety-four asparagus plants. Abensberg asparagus enjoys a reputation among connoisseurs as a particular delicacy. In addition to asparagus, the production of hops plays a major role locally, the region having its own label, and there are still three independent breweries in the area. The town of Abensberg marks the start of the \"Deutsche Hopfenstra\u00dfe\" (\"German Hops Road\"), a nickname given to the Bundesstra\u00dfe 301, a German federal highway which runs through the heartland of Germany's hops-growing industry, ending in Freising.\nTransport.\nThe Abensberg railway station is located on the Regensburg\u2013Ingolstadt railway from Regensburg to Ingolstadt. The city can be reached via the A-93 Holledau-Regensburg road (exit Abensberg). Three Bundesstra\u00dfe (German federal highways) cross south of Abensberg: B 16, B 299 and B 301.\nPublic facilities.\nSchools.\nAbensberg has a Grundschule (primary school) and Hauptschule (open admission secondary school), and the Johann-Turmair-Realschule (secondary modern school). There is also a College of Agriculture and Home Economics. Since 2007, the Kelheim Berufsschule has had a campus in Abensberg, and outside the state sector is the St. Francis Vocational Training Centre, run by a Catholic youth organisation.\nCulture and sightseeing.\nTheatre.\nIn 2008, a former goods shed by the main railway station of Abensberg was converted into a theatre by local volunteers. The \"Theater am Bahnhof\" (\"Theatre at the Railway Station\") is mostly used by the \"Theatergruppe Lampenfieber\" and was opened on 19 October 2008.\nMuseums.\nAbensberg has a long tradition of museums. In the nineteenth century, Nicholas Stark und Peter Paul Dollinger began a collection based on local history. This collection and the collection of the \"Heimatverein\" (local history society) were united in 1963 into the Aventinus Museum, in the cloister of the former Carmelite monastery. On 7 July 2006, the new Town Museum of Abensberg was opened in the former duke's castle in the town.\nKuchlbauer Brewery.\nTwo blocks west of the Old Town is the Kuchlbauer Brewery and beer garden featuring the Kuchlbauer Tower, a colorful and unconventional observation tower designed by Viennese architect Friedensreich Hundertwasser. The brewery and tower are open to the public.\nMissing memorial.\nUp until the 1950s, Abensberg and the surrounding villages contained a number of graves of victims of a Death March in the Spring of 1945 from the Hersbruck sub-camp of the Dachau concentration camp, who were either murdered by the SS or died of exhaustion. They were originally buried where they died, but were later moved on the orders of the US military government to the cemeteries of their previous homes. At the cemetery in what is now the district of Pullach stood a memorial stone which was mentioned as recently as 1967, but which is no longer at the site. The suffering of ten unknown victims of the camp was recorded on the stone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1306", "revid": "31348440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1306", "title": "Arminianism", "text": "Branch of Protestantism\nArminianism is a branch of Protestantism initiated in the early 17th century, based on the theological ideas of the Dutch Reformed theologian Jacobus Arminius and his historic supporters known as Remonstrants. Dutch Arminianism was originally articulated in the \"Remonstrance\" (1610), a theological statement submitted to the States General of the Netherlands. This expressed an attempt to moderate the doctrines of Calvinism related to its interpretation of predestination.\nClassical Arminianism, to which Arminius is the main contributor, and Wesleyan Arminianism, to which John Wesley is the main contributor, are the two main schools of thought. Central Arminian beliefs are that God's preparing grace to regeneration is universal, and that God's justifying grace allowing regeneration is resistible.\nMany Christian denominations have been influenced by Arminian views, notably the Baptists in the 17th century, the Methodists in the 18th century, and the Pentecostals in the 20th century.\nHistory.\nPrecursor movements and theological influences.\nAccording to Roger E. Olson, Arminius\u2019 beliefs, i.e. Arminianism, did not begin with him. Denominations such as the Waldensians and other groups prior to the Reformation have similarly to Arminianism affirmed that each person may choose the contingent response of either resisting God's grace or yielding to it. Anabaptist theologian Balthasar Hubmaier also promoted much the same view as Arminius nearly a century before him. The soteriological doctrines of Arminianism and Anabaptism are roughly equivalent. In particular, Mennonites have been historically Arminian whether they distinctly espoused the Arminian viewpoint or not, and rejected Calvinism soteriology. Anabaptist theology seems to have influenced Jacobus Arminius. At least, he was \"sympathetic to the Anabaptist point of view, and Anabaptists were commonly in attendance on his preaching.\" Similarly, Arminius mentions Danish Lutheran theologian Niels Hemmingsen as holding the basic view of soteriology he held and he may have been influenced by Hemmingsen.\nEmergence of Arminianism.\nJacobus Arminius was a Dutch pastor and theologian in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. He was taught by Theodore Beza, Calvin's hand-picked successor, but after examination of the scriptures, he rejected his teacher's theology that it is God who unconditionally elects some for salvation. Instead Arminius proposed that the election of God was \"of believers\", thereby making it conditional on faith. Arminius's views were challenged by the Dutch Calvinists, especially Franciscus Gomarus, but Arminius died before a national synod could occur.\nArminius died before he could satisfy Holland's State General's request for a 14-page paper outlining his views. Arminius's followers replied in his stead crafting the \"Five articles of Remonstrance\" (1610), in which they express their points of divergence with the stricter Calvinism of the \"Belgic Confession\". This is how Arminius's followers were called Remonstrants, and following a \"Counter Remonstrance\" in 1611, Gomarus' followers were called Counter-Remonstrants.\nAfter some political maneuvering, the Dutch Calvinists were able to convince Prince Maurice of Nassau to deal with the situation. Maurice systematically removed Arminian magistrates from office and called a national synod at Dordrecht. This Synod of Dort was open primarily to Dutch Calvinists (102 people), while the Arminians were excluded (13 people banned from voting), with Calvinist representatives from other countries (28 people), and in 1618 published a condemnation of Arminius and his followers as heretics. Part of this publication was the famous Five points of Calvinism in response to the five articles of Remonstrance.\nArminians across Holland were removed from office, imprisoned, banished, and sworn to silence. Twelve years later Holland officially granted Arminianism protection as a religion, although animosity between Arminians and Calvinists continued. Most of the early Remonstrants followed a classical version of Arminianism. However, some of them such as Philipp van Limborch, moved in the direction of semi-Pelagianism and rationalism.\nArminianism in the Church of England.\nIn England, the so-labelled Arminian doctrines were held, in substance, before and in parallel of Arminius. The Thirty-nine Articles of Religion (finalised in 1571), were sufficiently ambiguous that they were compatible with either Arminian or Calvinistic interpretations. Arminianism in the Church of England was fundamentally an expression of negation of Calvinism, and only some theologians held to classical Arminianism, but for the rest they were either semi-Pelagian or Pelagian. In this specific context, contemporary historians prefer to use the term \"proto-Arminians\" rather than \"Arminians\" to designate the leanings of divines who didn't follow classical Arminianism. English Arminianism was represented by Arminian Puritans such as John Goodwin or High Anglican Arminians such as Jeremy Taylor and Henry Hammond. Anglican Arminians of the 17th century such as William Laud fought Calvinist Puritans. They actually saw Arminianism in terms of a state church, idea that was completely alien to the views of Arminius. This position became particularly evident under the reign (1625-1649) of Charles I of England. Following the English Civil War (1642\u20131651) Charles II of England, who tolerated the Presbyterians, re-instituted Arminian thought in the Church of England. It was dominant there after the Restoration (1660) for some fifty years.\nBaptists.\nThe debate between Calvin's followers and Arminius's followers is characteristic of post-Reformation church history. The emerging Baptist movement in 17th-century England, for example, was a microcosm of the historic debate between Calvinists and Arminians. The first Baptists\u2014called \"General Baptists\" because of their confession of a \"general\" or unlimited atonement\u2014were Arminians. The Baptist movement originated with Thomas Helwys, who left his mentor John Smyth (who had moved into shared belief and other distinctives of the Dutch Waterlander Mennonites of Amsterdam) and returned to London to start the first English Baptist Church in 1611. Later General Baptists such as John Griffith, Samuel Loveday, and Thomas Grantham defended a Reformed Arminian theology that reflected the Arminianism of Arminius. The General Baptists encapsulated their Arminian views in numerous confessions, the most influential of which was the Standard Confession of 1660. In the 1640s the Particular Baptists were formed, diverging strongly from Arminian doctrine and embracing the strong Calvinism of the Presbyterians and Independents. Their robust Calvinism was publicized in such confessions as the London Baptist Confession of 1644 and the Second London Confession of 1689. The London Confession of 1689 was later used by Calvinistic Baptists in America (called the Philadelphia Baptist Confession), whereas the Standard Confession of 1660 was used by the American heirs of the English General Baptists, who soon came to be known as Free Will Baptists.\nMethodists.\nThis same dynamic between Arminianism and Calvinism can be seen in the heated discussions between friends and fellow Anglican ministers John Wesley and George Whitefield. Wesley was highly influenced by 17th-century English Arminianism and thinkers such as John Goodwin, Jeremy Taylor and Henry Hammond of the Anglican \"Holy Living\" school, and the Remonstrant Hugo Grotius. Wesley knew very little about the beliefs of Jacobus Arminius and arrived at his religious views independently of Arminius. Wesley acknowledged late in life, with the 1778 publication of a periodical titled \"The Arminian\", that he and Arminius were in general agreement. Theology Professor W. Stephen Gunther concludes he was \"a faithful representative\" of Arminius' beliefs. Wesley was a champion of Arminian teachings, defending his soteriology in \"The Arminian\" and writing articles such as \"Predestination Calmly Considered\". He defended Arminianism against charges of semi-Pelagianism, holding strongly to beliefs in original sin and total depravity. At the same time, Wesley attacked the determinism that he claimed characterized Calvinistic doctrines of unconditional election and reprobation and maintained a belief in the ability to lose salvation. Wesley also clarified the doctrine of prevenient grace and preached the ability of Christians to attain to perfection (fully mature, not \"sinlessness\"). His system of thought has become known as Wesleyan Arminianism, the foundations of which were laid by Wesley and his fellow preacher John William Fletcher.\nPentecostals.\nPentecostalism has its background in the activity of Charles Parham (1873\u20131929). Its origin as a movement was in the Azusa Street Revival in Los Angeles in 1906. This revival was led by William J. Seymour (1870\u20131922). Due to the Methodist and Holiness background of many early Pentecostal preachers, the Pentecostal churches usually possessed practices that arose from the Wesleyan Arminianism. During the 20th century, as Pentecostal churches began to settle and incorporate more standard forms, they started to formulate theology that was fully Arminian. Currently, the two largest Pentecostal denominations in the world, the Assemblies of God and the Pentecostal Church of God denominations, hold officially to Arminian views such as resistible grace, conditional election, or conditional security of the believer for the first.\nCurrent landscape.\nProtestant denominations.\nAdvocates of Arminianism find a home in many Protestant denominations, and sometimes other beliefs such as Calvinism exist within the same denomination. The Lutheran theological tradition bears certain similarities to Arminianism and there may be some Lutheran churches that are open to it. Faiths leaning at least in part in the Arminian direction include some of high-church Anglicanism. Anabaptist denominations, such as the Mennonites, Hutterites, Amish and Schwarzenau Brethren, adhere to Anabaptist theology, which espouses a soteriology that is similar to Arminianism \"in some respects\". Arminianism is found within the General Baptists, including the subset of General Baptists known as Free Will Baptists. The majority of Southern Baptists accept Arminianism, with an exception allowing for a doctrine of eternal security, though many see Calvinism as growing in acceptance. Certain proponents of Arminianism may be found within the Restoration movement in the Christian Churches and Churches of Christ. Additionally, it is found in the Seventh-day Adventist Church. Arminianism (specifically Wesleyan\u2013Arminian theology) is taught in the Methodist churches, inclusive of those denominations aligned with the holiness movement such as the Evangelical Methodist Church, Church of the Nazarene, the Free Methodist Church, the Wesleyan Church, and the Salvation Army. It is also found in a part of the Charismatics, including the Pentecostals.\nScholarly support.\nThe current scholarly support for Arminianism is varied: Among Baptist theologians, Roger E. Olson, F. Leroy Forlines, Robert Picirilli, and J. Matthew Pinson are four supporters of a return to the teachings of Arminius. Methodist theologian Thomas Oden, \"Evangelical Methodists\" Bible scholar Ben Witherington III, and Christian apologist David Pawson are generally Arminian in their theologies. Holiness movement theologians Henry Orton Wiley, Carl O. Bangs and J. Kenneth Grider can also be mentioned among recent proponents of Arminianism. Various other theologians or Bible scholars as B. J. Oropeza, Keith D. Stanglin, Craig S. Keener, Thomas H. McCall, and Grant R. Osborne can be mentioned as well.\nTheology.\nTheological legacy.\nThe original beliefs of Jacobus Arminius are commonly called Arminianism, but more broadly, the term may embrace the teachings of Simon Episcopius, Hugo Grotius, John Wesley, and others. Arminian theology usually falls into one of two groups: Classical Arminianism, drawn from the teaching of Jacobus Arminius, and Wesleyan Arminian, drawing primarily from Wesley. The two groups overlap substantially.\nIn 529, at the Second Council of Orange, the question at hand was whether the doctrines of Augustine on God's providence were to be affirmed, or if semi-Pelagianism could be affirmed. Semi-Pelagianism was a moderate form of Pelagianism that teaches that the first step of salvation is by human will and not the grace of God. The determination of the Council could be considered \"semi-Augustinian\". It defined that faith, though a free act of man, resulted, even in its beginnings, from the grace of God, enlightening the human mind and enabling belief. This describes the operation of prevenient grace allowing the unregenerate to repent in faith. On the other hand, the Council of Orange condemned the Augustinian teaching of predestination to damnation. Since Arminianism is aligned with those characteristic semi-Augustinian views it has been seen by some as a reclamation of early church theological consensus. Moreover, Arminianism can also be seen as a soteriological diversification of Calvinism or more specifically, as a theological middle ground between Calvinism and semi-Pelagianism.\nClassical Arminianism.\nClassical Arminianism is the theological system that was presented by Jacobus Arminius and maintained by some of the Remonstrants. Theologians as Forlines and Olson have referred to this system as \"classical Arminianism\", while others as Picirilli and Pinson prefer to term it \"Reformation Arminianism\" or \"Reformed Arminianism\". \nThe teachings of Arminius held to \"Sola fide\" and \"Sola gratia\" of the Reformation, but they were distinct from particular teachings of Martin Luther, Huldrych Zwingli, John Calvin, and other Protestant Reformers.\nClassical Arminianism was originally articulated in the \"Five Articles of Remonstrance\". \"These points\", note Keith D. Stanglin and Thomas H. McCall, \"are consistent with the views of Arminius; indeed, some come verbatim from his \"Declaration of Sentiments\".\" A list of beliefs of classical Arminianism is given below:\nGod's providence and human free will.\nThe majority Arminian view accepts classical theism, which states that God is omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient. In that view, God's power, knowledge, and presence have no external limitations, that is, outside of his divine nature and character.\nBesides, Arminianism view on God's sovereignty is based on postulates stemming from God's character, especially as fully revealed in Jesus Christ. On the first hand, divine election must be defined in such a way that God is not in any case, and even in a secondary way, the author of evil. It would not correspond to the character of God. On the other hand, man's responsibility for evil must be absolutely preserved. Those two postulates require a specific way by which God chooses to manifest his sovereignty when interacting with his creatures:\nOn one hand, it requires for God to operate according to a limited mode of providence. This means that God purposely exercises His sovereignty in ways that do not illustrate the full extent of his omnipotence. On the other hand, it requires for God's election to be a \"predestination by foreknowledge\".\nIn that respect, God's foreknowledge reconciles with human free will in the following way: Human free will is limited by original sin, though God's prevenient grace restores to humanity the ability to accept God's call of salvation. God's foreknowledge of the future is exhaustive and complete, and therefore the future is certain and not contingent on human action. God does not determine the future, but He does know it. God's certainty and human contingency are compatible.\nRoger Olson expressed those defining ideas in a more practical way:\"\"Arminianism,\" [...] is simply a term we use in theology for the view, held by some people before Arminius and many after him, that sinners who hear the gospel have the free will to accept or reject God\u2019s offer of saving grace and that nobody is excluded by God from the possibility of salvation except those who freely exclude themselves. But true, historical, classical Arminianism includes the belief that this free will [to repent and believe unto salvation] is itself a gift of God through prevenient grace.\"\nCondition of humanity.\nDepravity is total: Arminius states \"In this [fallen] state, the free will of man towards the true good is not only wounded, infirm, bent, and weakened; but it is also imprisoned, destroyed, and lost. And its powers are not only debilitated and useless unless they be assisted by grace, but it has no powers whatever except such as are excited by Divine grace.\"\nExtent and nature of the atonement.\nAtonement is intended for all: Jesus's death was for all people, Jesus draws all people to himself, and all people have opportunity for salvation through faith.\nJesus's death satisfies God's justice: The penalty for the sins of the elect is paid in full through the crucifixion of Christ. Thus Christ's death atones for the sins of all, but requires faith to be effected. Arminius states that \"Justification, when used for the act of a Judge, is either purely the imputation of righteousness through mercy [...] or that man is justified before God [...] according to the rigor of justice without any forgiveness.\" Stephen Ashby clarifies: \"Arminius allowed for only two possible ways in which the sinner might be justified: (1) by our absolute and perfect adherence to the law, or (2) purely by God's imputation of Christ's righteousness.\" W. Stephen Gunter concurs that Arminius would not take a rigid position on the doctrine of imputed righteousness (the righteousness of Christ is imputed for righteousness of the believer). For Keith D. Stanglin and Thomas H. McCall, Arminius would not object to saying rather that \"the righteousness of Christ is imputed to righteousness\". Forlines put it this way: \"On the condition of faith, we are placed in union with Christ. Based on that union, we receive His death and righteousness\".\nChrist's atonement has a substitutionary effect which is limited only to the elect. Arminius held that God's justice was satisfied by penal substitution. Hugo Grotius taught that it was satisfied governmentally. According to Roger Olson, historical and contemporary Arminians have held to one of these views.\nConversion of man.\nGrace is resistible: God takes initiative in the salvation process and his grace comes to all people. This grace (often called pre-regenerating or \"prevenient\" grace) acts on all people to convince them of the Gospel, draw them strongly towards salvation, and enable the possibility of sincere faith. Picirilli states that \"indeed this grace is so close to regeneration that it inevitably leads to regeneration unless finally resisted.\" The offer of salvation through grace does not act irresistibly in a purely cause-effect, deterministic method but rather in an influence-and-response fashion that can be both freely accepted and freely denied.\nMan has a freed will to respond or resist: Free will is granted and limited by God's sovereignty, but God's sovereignty allows all men the choice to accept the Gospel of Jesus through faith, simultaneously allowing all men to resist.\nConversion is synergistic: As Roger Olson put it: \"[Arminius]' evangelical synergism reserves all the power, ability and efficacy in salvation to grace, but allows humans the God-granted ability to resist or not resist it. The only \"contribution\" humans make is nonresistance to grace.\"\nElection of man.\nElection is conditional: Arminius defined \"election\" as \"the decree of God by which, of Himself, from eternity, He decreed to justify in Christ, believers, and to accept them unto eternal life.\" God alone determines who will be saved and his determination is that all who believe Jesus through faith will be justified. According to Arminius, \"God regards no one in Christ unless they are engrafted in him by faith.\"\nGod predestines the elect to a glorious future: Predestination is not the predetermination of who will believe, but rather the predetermination of the believer's future inheritance. The elect are therefore predestined to sonship through adoption, glorification, and eternal life.\nPreservation of man.\nRelated to eschatological considerations, Jacobus Arminius and the first Remonstrants, including Simon Episcopius believed in everlasting fire where the wicked are thrown by God at judgment day.\nPreservation is conditional: All believers have full assurance of salvation with the condition that they remain in Christ. Salvation is conditioned on faith, therefore perseverance is also conditioned. Arminius believed the Scriptures taught that believers are graciously empowered by Christ and the Holy Spirit \"to fight against Satan, sin, the world and their own flesh, and to gain the victory over these enemies.\" Furthermore, Christ and the Spirit are ever present to aid and assist believers through various temptations. But this security was not unconditional but conditional\u2014\"provided they [believers] stand prepared for the battle, implore his help, and be not wanting to themselves, Christ preserves them from falling.\"\nPossibility of apostasy.\nArminius believed in the possibility for a believer to commit apostasy (i.e., desert Christ by cleaving again to this evil world, losing a good conscience, or by failing to hold on to sound doctrine). However, over the period of time Arminius wrote on this question, he sometimes expressed himself more cautiously out of consideration for the faith of his readers. For instance, Arminius declared in 1599 that this matter required further study in the Scriptures. Arminius said also in his \"Declaration of Sentiments\" (1607), \"I never taught that a true believer can, either totally or finally fall away from the faith, and perish; yet I will not conceal, that there are passages of scripture which seem to me to wear this aspect; and those answers to them which I have been permitted to see, are not of such a kind as to approve themselves on all points to my understanding.\"\nBut in his other writings he expressed certainty about the possibility of falling away: Arminius wrote in ca. 1602, that \"a person who is being 'built' into the church of Christ may resist the continuation of this process\". Concerning the believers he said \"It may suffice to encourage them, if they know that no power or prudence can dislodge them from the rock, unless they of their own will forsake their position.\" He continued by saying that the covenant of God (Jeremiah 23) \"does not contain in itself an impossibility of defection from God, but a promise of the gift of fear, whereby they shall be hindered from going away from God so long as that shall flourish in their hearts.\" He then taught that had King David died in his sins he would have been lost. In 1602, Arminius also wrote: \"A believing member of Christ may become slothful, give place to sin, and gradually die altogether, ceasing to be a member\".\nFor Arminius, certain class of sin would cause a believer to fall, especially sin motivated by malice. In 1605 Arminius wrote: \u201cBut it is possible for a believer to fall into a mortal sin, as is seen in David. Therefore he can fall at that moment in which if he were to die, he would be condemned\". Stanglin, along with McCall, point out that Arminius clearly sets forth two paths to apostasy 1. \"rejection\", or 2. \"malicious sinning\". Oropeza concludes: \"If there is any consistency in Arminius' position, he did not seem to deny the possibility of falling away\". \nAfter the death of Arminius in 1609, his followers wrote a \"Remonstrance\" (1610) based quite literally on their leader's \"Declaration of Sentiments\" (1607) which expressed prudence on the possibility of apostasy. In particular, its fifth article expressed the necessity of further study on the possibility of apostasy. Sometime between 1610 and the official proceeding of the Synod of Dort (1618), the Remonstrants became fully persuaded in their minds that the Scriptures taught that a true believer was capable of falling away from faith and perishing eternally as an unbeliever. They formalized their views in \"The Opinion of the Remonstrants\" (1618) which was their official stand during the Synod of Dort. Picirilli remarks: \"Ever since that early period, then, when the issue was being examined again, Arminians have taught that those who are truly saved need to be warned against apostasy as a real and possible danger.\" They later expressed this same view in the \"Remonstrant Confession\" (1621). \nForgivability of apostasy.\nStanglin points out that Arminius held that if the apostasy came from \"malicious\" sin, then it was forgivable. If it came from \"rejection\" it was not. Following Arminius, the Remonstrants believed that, though possible, apostasy was not in general irremediable. However, other classical Arminians as the Free Will Baptists have taught that apostasy is irremediable.\nWesleyan Arminianism.\nJohn Wesley thoroughly agreed with the vast majority of what Arminius himself taught. Wesleyan Arminianism is classical Arminianism with the addition of Wesleyan perfectionism. Here are mentioned some positions on specific issues within Wesleyan Arminianism:\nNature of the atonement.\nSteven Harper proposed that Wesley's atonement is a hybrid of the penal substitution theory and the governmental theory. However, theologians as Robert Picirilli, Roger Olson and Darren Cushman Wood consider that the view of Wesley concerning atonement is by penal substitution. Wesleyan Arminians have historically adopted either penal or governmental theory of the atonement.\nPreservation and apostasy of man.\nWesley fully accepted the Arminian view that genuine Christians could apostatize and lose their salvation, as his famous sermon \"A Call to Backsliders\" clearly demonstrates. Harper summarizes as follows: \"the act of committing sin is not in itself ground for the loss of salvation [...] the loss of salvation is much more related to experiences that are profound and prolonged. Wesley sees two primary pathways that could result in a permanent fall from grace: unconfessed sin and the actual expression of apostasy.\" Wesley believed that such apostasy was not irremediable. When talking about those who have made \"shipwreck\" of their faith,(1 Tim 1:19) Wesley claims that \"not one, or a hundred only, but I am persuaded, several thousands [...] innumerable are the instances [...] of those who had fallen but now stand upright.\"\nChristian perfection.\nOne issue that typifies Wesleyan Arminianism is Christian perfection. According to Wesley's teaching, Christians could attain a state of practical perfection, meaning a lack of all voluntary sin by the empowerment of the Holy Spirit, in this life. Christian perfection (or \"entire sanctification\"), according to Wesley, is \"purity of intention, dedicating all the life to God\" and \"the mind which was in Christ, enabling us to walk as Christ walked.\" It is \"loving God with all our heart, and our neighbor as ourselves\". It is \"a restoration not only to the favour, but likewise to the image of God,\" our \"being filled with the fullness of God\". Wesley was clear that Christian perfection did not imply perfection of bodily health or an infallibility of judgment. It also does not mean we no longer violate the will of God, for involuntary transgressions remain. Perfected Christians remain subject to temptation, and have continued need to pray for forgiveness and holiness. It is not an absolute perfection but a perfection in love. Furthermore, Wesley did not teach a salvation by perfection, but rather says that, \"Even perfect holiness is acceptable to God only through Jesus Christ.\"\nOther variations.\nCorporate view of election.\nThe majority Arminian view is that election is individual and based on God's foreknowledge of faith. According to the corporate election view, God never chose individuals to elect to salvation, but rather He chose to elect the believing church to salvation. Jesus was the only human ever elected and individuals must be \"in Christ\" through faith to be part of the elect. Corporate election draws support from a similar concept of corporate election found in the Old Testament and Jewish law. Identity stemmed from membership in a group more than individuality.\nArminianism and other views.\nDivergence with Pelagianism.\nPelagianism is a doctrine denying original sin and total depravity. No system of Arminianism founded on Arminius or Wesley denies original sin or total depravity; both Arminius and Wesley \"strongly\" affirmed that man's basic condition is one in which he cannot be righteous, understand God, or seek God. Arminius referred to Pelagianism as \"the grand falsehood\" and stated that he \"must confess that I detest, from my heart, the consequences [of that theology].\" David Pawson, a British pastor, decries this association as \"libelous\" when attributed to Arminius' or Wesley's doctrine. Indeed, most Arminians reject all accusations of Pelagianism.\nDivergence with semi-Pelagianism.\nSome schools of thought, notably semi-Pelagianism, which teaches that the first step of Salvation is by human will, are confused as being Arminian in nature. But classical Arminianism and Wesleyan Arminianism hold that the first step of Salvation is through the prevenient grace of God, though \"the subsequent grace entails a cooperative relationship.\" \nDivergence with Calvinism.\nThe two systems of Calvinism and Arminianism share both history and many doctrines, and the history of Christian theology. However, because of their differences over the doctrines of divine predestination and election, many people view these schools of thought as opposed to each other. The distinction is whether God desires to save all yet allows individuals to resist the grace offered (in the Arminian doctrine) or if God desires to save only some and grace is irresistible to those chosen (in the Calvinist doctrine). Many consider the theological differences to be crucial differences in doctrine, while others find them to be relatively minor.\nDivergence with open theism.\nThe doctrine of open theism states that God is omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient, but differs on the nature of the future. Open theists claim that the future is not completely determined (or \"settled\") because people have not made their free decisions yet. God therefore knows the future partially in possibilities (human free actions) rather than solely certainties (divinely determined events). Some Arminians, such as professor and theologian Robert Picirilli, reject the doctrine of open theism as a \"deformed Arminianism\". Joseph Dongell stated that \"open theism actually moves beyond classical Arminianism towards process theology.\" There are also some Arminians, like Roger Olson, who believe Open theism to be an alternative view that a Christian can have.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1307", "revid": "24942271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1307", "title": "The Alan Parsons Project", "text": "British rock band\nThe Alan Parsons Project were a British rock band active between 1975 and 1990, whose core membership consisted of producer, audio engineer, musician and composer Alan Parsons and singer, songwriter and pianist Eric Woolfson. They were accompanied by varying session musicians and some relatively consistent session players such as guitarist Ian Bairnson, arranger Andrew Powell, bassist and vocalist David Paton, drummer Stuart Elliott, and vocalists Lenny Zakatek and Chris Rainbow. Parsons and Woolfson shared writing credits on almost all of the Project's songs, with Parsons producing or co-producing all of the band's recordings.\nThe Alan Parsons Project released eleven studio albums in its 15-year career, the most successful being \"I Robot\" (1977) and \"Eye in the Sky\" (1982). Many of their albums are conceptual in nature and focus on science fiction, supernatural, literary and sociological themes. Among the group's most popular songs are \"I Wouldn't Want to Be Like You\", \"Games People Play\", \"Time\", \"Sirius\"/\"Eye in the Sky\" and \"Don't Answer Me\".\nCareer.\n1974\u20131976: Formation and debut.\nAlan Parsons met Eric Woolfson in the canteen of Abbey Road Studios in the summer of 1974. Parsons acted as Assistant Engineer on the Beatles' albums \"Abbey Road\" (1969) and \"Let It Be\" (1970), engineered Pink Floyd's \"The Dark Side of the Moon\" (1973), and produced several acts for EMI Records. Woolfson, a songwriter and composer, was working as a session pianist while composing material for a concept album based on the work of Edgar Allan Poe.\nWoolfson's idea was to manage Alan and help his already successful production career. This was the start of their longstanding friendly business relationship. He managed Parsons' career as a producer and engineer through a string of successes, including Pilot, Steve Harley, Cockney Rebel, John Miles, Al Stewart, Ambrosia, and the Hollies. Woolfson came up with the idea of making an album based on developments in the film industry\u2014the focal point of the films' promotion shifted from film stars to directors such as Alfred Hitchcock and Stanley Kubrick. If the film industry was becoming a director's medium, Woolfson felt the music business might well become a producer's medium.\nRecalling his earlier Edgar Allan Poe material, Woolfson saw a way to combine his and Parsons's talents. Parsons produced and engineered songs written and composed by the two, and the first Alan Parsons Project was begun. The Project's first album, \"Tales of Mystery and Imagination\" (1976), released by 20th Century Fox Records and including major contributions by all members of Pilot and Ambrosia, was a success, reaching the Top 40 in the US \"Billboard\" 200 chart. The song \"The Raven\" featured lead vocals by the actor Leonard Whiting. According to the 2007 re-mastered album liner notes, this was the first rock song to use a vocoder, with Alan Parsons speaking lyrics through it, although others such as Bruce Haack pioneered this field in the previous decade.\n1977\u20131990: Mainstream success and final releases.\nArista Records then signed the Alan Parsons Project for further albums. Through the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Project's popularity continued to grow. However, the Project was always more popular in North America, Ibero-America, and Continental Europe than in Parsons' home country, never achieving a UK Top 40 single or Top 20 album. The singles \"I Wouldn't Want to Be Like You\", \"Games People Play\", \"Damned If I Do\", \"Time\" (the first single to feature Woolfson's lead vocal) and \"Eye in the Sky\" had a notable impact on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. \"Don't Answer Me\" became the Project's last successful single in the United States; it reached the top 15 on the American charts in 1984.\nAfter those successes, however, the Project began to fade from view. There were fewer hit singles, and declining album sales. 1987's \"Gaudi\" was the Project's final release, though it had planned to record an album called \"Freudiana\" (1990) next.\nThe musical \"Freudiana\".\nEven though the studio version of \"Freudiana\" was produced by Parsons (and featured the regular Project session musicians, making it an 'unofficial' Project album), it was primarily Woolfson's idea to turn it into a musical. While Parsons pursued his own solo career and took many session players of the Project on the road for the first time in a successful worldwide tour, Woolfson went on to produce musical plays influenced by the Project's music. \"Freudiana\", \"Gaudi\", and \"Gambler\" were three musicals that included some Project songs like \"Eye in the Sky\", \"Time\", \"Inside Looking Out\", and \"Limelight\". The live music from \"Gambler\" was only distributed at the performance site in M\u00f6nchengladbach, Germany.\n\"The Sicilian Defence\".\nIn 1979, Parsons, Woolfson, and their record label Arista, had been stalled in contract renegotiations when the two submitted an all-instrumental album tentatively titled \"The Sicilian Defence\", named after an aggressive opening move in chess, arguably to get out of their recording contract. Arista's refusal to release the album had two known effects: the negotiations led to a renewed contract, and the album was not released at that time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Sicilian Defence\" was our attempt at quickly fulfilling our contractual obligation after \"I Robot\", \"Pyramid\", and \"Eve\" had been delivered. The album was rejected by Arista, not surprisingly, and we then renegotiated our deal for the future and the next album, \"The Turn of a Friendly Card\". \"The Sicilian Defence\" album was never released and never will be, if I have anything to do with it. I have not heard it since it was finished. I hope the tapes no longer exist.\nIn interviews he gave before his death in 2009, Woolfson said he planned to release one track from the \"Sicilian\" album, which in 2008 appeared as a bonus track on a CD re-issue of the \"Eve\" album. Sometime later, after he had relocated the original tapes, Parsons reluctantly agreed to release the album and announced that it would finally be released on an upcoming Project box set called \"The Complete Albums Collection\" in 2014 for the first time as a bonus disc.\nParsons' and Woolfson's solo careers.\nParsons released titles under his name; these were \"Try Anything Once\" (1993), \"On Air\" (1996), \"The Time Machine\" (1999), \"A Valid Path\" (2004) and \"The Secret\" (2019). Meanwhile, Woolfson made concept albums titled \"Freudiana\" (1990), about Sigmund Freud's work on psychology, and \"\" (2003); this continued from the Alan Parsons Project's first album about Edgar Allan Poe's literature.\n\"Tales of Mystery and Imagination\" (1976) was re-mixed in 1987 for release on CD, and included narration by Orson Welles recorded in 1975, but delivered too late to be included on the original album. For the 2007 deluxe edition release, parts of this tape were used for the 1976 Griffith Park Planetarium launch of the original album, the 1987 remix, and various radio spots. All were included as bonus material.\nSound.\nThe band's sound is described as progressive rock, art rock, progressive pop, and soft rock. \"Sirius\" is their best-known and most-frequently heard of all Parsons/Woolfson songs. It was used as entrance music by various American sports teams, notably by the Chicago Bulls during their 1990s NBA dynasty. It was also used as the entrance theme for Ricky Steamboat in pro wrestling of the mid-1980s. In addition, \"Sirius\" is played in a variety of TV shows and movies including the BBC series Record Breakers, the episode \"Vanishing Act\" of \"\" and the 2009 film \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\".\nVocal duties were shared by guests to complement each song. In later years, Woolfson sang lead on many of the group's hits, including \"Time\", \"Eye in the Sky\", and \"Don't Answer Me\". The record company pressured Parsons to use Woolfson more, but Parsons preferred to use polished proficient singers; Woolfson admitted he was not in that category. In addition to Woolfson, vocalists Chris Rainbow, Lenny Zakatek, John Miles, David Paton, and Colin Blunstone are regulars. Other singers, such as Arthur Brown, Steve Harley, Gary Brooker, Dave Terry a.k.a. Elmer Gantry, Vitamin Z's Geoff Barradale, and Marmalade's Dean Ford, recorded only once or twice with the Project. Parsons sang lead on one song (\"The Raven\") through a vocoder and backing on a few others, including \"To One in Paradise\". Both of those songs appeared on \"Tales of Mystery and Imagination\" (1976). Parsons also sings a prominent counter melody on \u201cTime\u201d.\nA variety of session musicians worked with the Alan Parsons Project regularly, contributing to the recognizable style of a song despite the varied singer line-up. With Parsons and Woolfson, the studio band consisted of the group Pilot, with Ian Bairnson (guitar), David Paton (bass) and Stuart Tosh (drums). Pilot's keyboardist Billy Lyall contributed. From \"Pyramid\" (1978) onward, Tosh was replaced by Stuart Elliott of Cockney Rebel. Bairnson played on all albums, and Paton stayed almost until the end. Andrew Powell appeared as arranger of orchestra (and often choirs) on all albums except \"Vulture Culture\" (1985); he was composing the score of Richard Donner's film \"Ladyhawke\" (1985). This score was partly in the APP style, recorded by most of the APP regulars, and produced and engineered by Parsons. Powell composed some material for the first two Project albums. For \"Vulture Culture\" and later, Richard Cottle played as a regular contributor on synthesizers and saxophone.\nThe Alan Parsons Project played live only once under that name during its original incarnation because Woolfson and Parsons held the roles of writing and production, and because of the technical difficulties of re-producing on stage the complex instrumentation used in the studio. In the 1990s, musical production evolved with the technology of digital samplers. The one occasion the band was introduced as 'The Alan Parsons Project' in a live performance was at The Night of the Proms in October 1990. The concerts featured all Project regulars except Woolfson, present behind the scenes, while Parsons stayed at the mixer except for the last song, when he played acoustic guitar.\nSince 1993, Alan Parsons continues to perform live as the Alan Parsons Live Project to be distinct from The Alan Parsons Project. The current line up consists of lead singer P.J. Olsson, guitarist Jeffrey Kollman, drummer Danny Thompson, keyboardist Tom Brooks, bass guitarist Guy Erez, vocalist and saxophonist Todd Cooper, and guitarist and vocalist Dan Tracey. In 2013, Alan Parsons Live Project played Colombia with a full choir and orchestra (the Medellin Philharmonic) as 'Alan Parsons Symphonic Project'. A 2-CD live set and a DVD version of this concert were released in May 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1309", "revid": "45262231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1309", "title": "Almost all", "text": "In mathematics, with negligible exceptions\nIn mathematics, the term \"almost all\" means \"all but a negligible quantity\". More precisely, if formula_1 is a set, \"almost all elements of formula_1\" means \"all elements of formula_1 but those in a negligible subset of formula_1\". The meaning of \"negligible\" depends on the mathematical context; for instance, it can mean finite, countable, or null.\nIn contrast, \"almost no\" means \"a negligible quantity\"; that is, \"almost no elements of formula_1\" means \"a negligible quantity of elements of formula_1\".\nMeanings in different areas of mathematics.\nPrevalent meaning.\nThroughout mathematics, \"almost all\" is sometimes used to mean \"all (elements of an infinite set) except for finitely many\". This use occurs in philosophy as well. Similarly, \"almost all\" can mean \"all (elements of an uncountable set) except for countably many\".\nExamples:\nMeaning in measure theory.\nWhen speaking about the reals, sometimes \"almost all\" can mean \"all reals except for a null set\". Similarly, if S is some set of reals, \"almost all numbers in S\" can mean \"all numbers in S except for those in a null set\". The real line can be thought of as a one-dimensional Euclidean space. In the more general case of an n-dimensional space (where n is a positive integer), these definitions can be generalised to \"all points except for those in a null set\" or \"all points in S except for those in a null set\" (this time, S is a set of points in the space). Even more generally, \"almost all\" is sometimes used in the sense of \"almost everywhere\" in measure theory, or in the closely related sense of \"almost surely\" in probability theory.\nExamples:\nMeaning in number theory.\nIn number theory, \"almost all positive integers\" can mean \"the positive integers in a set whose natural density is 1\". That is, if A is a set of positive integers, and if the proportion of positive integers in \"A\" below n (out of all positive integers below n) tends to 1 as n tends to infinity, then almost all positive integers are in A. \nMore generally, let S be an infinite set of positive integers, such as the set of even positive numbers or the set of primes, if A is a subset of S, and if the proportion of elements of S below n that are in A (out of all elements of S below n) tends to 1 as n tends to infinity, then it can be said that almost all elements of S are in A.\nExamples:\nMeaning in graph theory.\nIn graph theory, if A is a set of (finite labelled) graphs, it can be said to contain almost all graphs, if the proportion of graphs with n vertices that are in A tends to 1 as n tends to infinity. However, it is sometimes easier to work with probabilities, so the definition is reformulated as follows. The proportion of graphs with n vertices that are in A equals the probability that a random graph with n vertices (chosen with the uniform distribution) is in A, and choosing a graph in this way has the same outcome as generating a graph by flipping a coin for each pair of vertices to decide whether to connect them. Therefore, equivalently to the preceding definition, the set \"A\" contains almost all graphs if the probability that a coin-flip\u2013generated graph with n vertices is in A tends to 1 as n tends to infinity. Sometimes, the latter definition is modified so that the graph is chosen randomly in some other way, where not all graphs with n vertices have the same probability, and those modified definitions are not always equivalent to the main one.\nThe use of the term \"almost all\" in graph theory is not standard; the term \"asymptotically almost surely\" is more commonly used for this concept.\nExample:\nMeaning in topology.\nIn topology and especially dynamical systems theory (including applications in economics), \"almost all\" of a topological space's points can mean \"all of the space's points except for those in a meagre set\". Some use a more limited definition, where a subset contains almost all of the space's points only if it contains some open dense set.\nExample:\nMeaning in algebra.\nIn abstract algebra and mathematical logic, if U is an on a set X, \"almost all elements of X\" sometimes means \"the elements of some \"element\" of U\". For any partition of X into two disjoint sets, one of them will necessarily contain almost all elements of X. It is possible to think of the elements of a filter on X as containing almost all elements of X, even if it isn't an ultrafilter.\nProofs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1311", "revid": "8719036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1311", "title": "Ada Byron's notes on the analytical engine", "text": ""}
{"id": "1312", "revid": "5655867", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1312", "title": "Augustine", "text": ""}
{"id": "1313", "revid": "1154513095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1313", "title": "Aromatic compound", "text": "Compound containing rings with delocalized pi electrons\nAromatic compounds, also known as \"mono- and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons\", are organic compounds containing one or more aromatic rings. The word \"aromatic\" originates from the past grouping of molecules based on smell, before their general chemical properties were understood. The current definition of aromatic compounds does not have any relation with their smell.\nHeteroarenes are closely related, since at least one carbon atom of CH group is replaced by one of the heteroatoms oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur. Examples of non-benzene compounds with aromatic properties are furan, a heterocyclic compound with a five-membered ring that includes a single oxygen atom, and pyridine, a heterocyclic compound with a six-membered ring containing one nitrogen atom. Hydrocarbons without an aromatic ring are called aliphatic.\nBenzene ring model.\nBenzene, &lt;chem&gt;C6H6&lt;/chem&gt;, is the least complex aromatic hydrocarbon, and it was the first one named as such. The nature of its bonding was first recognized by August Kekul\u00e9 in the 19th century. Each carbon atom in the hexagonal cycle has four electrons to share. One goes to the hydrogen atom, and one to each of the two neighboring carbons. This leaves one electron to share with one of the two neighboring carbon atoms, thus creating a double bond with one carbon and leaving a single bond with the other, which is why some representations of the benzene molecule portray it as a hexagon with alternating single and double bonds.\nOther depictions of the structure portray the hexagon with a circle inside it, to indicate that the six electrons are floating around in delocalized molecular orbitals the size of the ring itself. This represents the equivalent nature of the six carbon-carbon bonds all of bond order 1.5; the equivalency is explained by resonance forms. The electrons are visualized as floating above and below the ring, with the electromagnetic fields they generate acting to keep the ring flat.\nGeneral properties of aromatic hydrocarbons:\nThe circle symbol for aromaticity was introduced by Sir Robert Robinson and his student James Armit in 1925 and popularized starting in 1959 by the Morrison &amp; Boyd textbook on organic chemistry. The proper use of the symbol is debated: some publications use it to \"any\" cyclic \u03c0 system, while others use it only for those \u03c0 systems that obey H\u00fcckel's rule. Jensen argues that, in line with Robinson's original proposal, the use of the circle symbol should be limited to monocyclic 6 \u03c0-electron systems. In this way the circle symbol for a six-center six-electron bond can be compared to the Y symbol for a three-center two-electron bond.\nReactions.\nAromatic ring systems participate in many organic reactions.\nAromatic substitution.\nIn aromatic substitution one substituent on the arene ring, usually hydrogen, is replaced by another substituent. The two main types are electrophilic aromatic substitution, when the active reagent is an electrophile, and nucleophilic aromatic substitution, when the reagent is a nucleophile. In radical-nucleophilic aromatic substitution, the active reagent is a radical. An example of electrophilic aromatic substitution is the nitration of salicylic acid:\nCoupling reactions.\nIn coupling reactions a metal catalyzes a coupling between two formal radical fragments. Common coupling reactions with arenes result in the formation of new carbon\u2013carbon bonds e.g., alkylarenes, vinyl arenes, biraryls, new carbon\u2013nitrogen bonds (anilines) or new carbon\u2013oxygen bonds (aryloxy compounds). An example is a direct arylation of perfluorobenzenes\nHydrogenation.\nHydrogenation of arenes create saturated rings. The compound 1-naphthol is completely reduced to a mixture of decalin-ol isomers.\nThe compound resorcinol, hydrogenated with Raney nickel in presence of aqueous sodium hydroxide forms an enolate which is alkylated with methyl iodide to 2-methyl-1,3-cyclohexandione:\nCycloadditions.\nCycloaddition reactions are not common. Unusual thermal Diels\u2013Alder reactivity of arenes can be found in the Wagner-Jauregg reaction. Other photochemical cycloaddition reactions with alkenes occur through excimers.\nDearomatization.\nIn dearomatization reactions the aromaticity of the reactant is permanently lost.\nBenzene and derivatives of benzene.\nBenzene derivatives have from one to six substituents attached to the central benzene core. Examples of benzene compounds with just one substituent are phenol, which carries a hydroxyl group, and toluene with a methyl group. When there is more than one substituent present on the ring, their spatial relationship becomes important for which the arene substitution patterns \"ortho\", \"meta\", and \"para\" are devised. For example, three isomers exist for cresol because the methyl group and the hydroxyl group can be placed next to each other (\"ortho\"), one position removed from each other (\"meta\"), or two positions removed from each other (\"para\"). Xylenol has two methyl groups in addition to the hydroxyl group, and, for this structure, 6 isomers exist.\nThe arene ring has the ability to stabilize charges. This is seen in, for example, phenol (C6H5\u2013OH), which is acidic at the hydroxyl (OH), since a charge on this oxygen (alkoxide \u2013O\u2212) is partially delocalized into the benzene ring.\nOther monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbon.\nOther monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbon include Cyclotetradecaheptaene or Cyclooctadecanonaene.\nPolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.\nPolynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are aromatic hydrocarbons that consist of fused aromatic rings and do not contain heteroatoms or carry substituents. Naphthalene is the simplest example of a PAH. PAHs occur in oil, coal, and tar deposits, and are produced as byproducts of fuel burning (whether fossil fuel or biomass). As pollutants, they are of concern because some compounds have been identified as carcinogenic, mutagenic, and teratogenic. PAHs are also found in cooked foods. Studies have shown that high levels of PAHs are found, for example, in meat cooked at high temperatures such as grilling or barbecuing, and in smoked fish.\nThey are also found in the interstellar medium, in comets, and in meteorites and are a candidate molecule to act as a basis for the earliest forms of life. In graphene the PAH motif is extended to large 2D sheets.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1315", "revid": "45651582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1315", "title": "Abbey", "text": "Monastery under an abbot or an abbess\nAn abbey is a type of monastery used by members of a religious order under the governance of an abbot or abbess. Abbeys provide a complex of buildings and land for religious activities, work, and housing of Christian monks and nuns.\nThe concept of the abbey has developed over many centuries from the early monastic ways of religious men and women where they would live isolated from the lay community about them. Religious life in an abbey may be monastic. An abbey may be the home of an enclosed religious order or may be open to visitors. The layout of the church and associated buildings of an abbey often follows a set plan determined by the founding religious order.\nAbbeys are often self-sufficient while using any abundance of produce or skill to provide care to the poor and needy, refuge to the persecuted, or education to the young. Some abbeys offer accommodation to people who are seeking spiritual retreat. There are many famous abbeys across the Mediterranean Basin and Europe.\nMonastic origins of the abbey.\nAscetics and anchorites.\nThe earliest known Christian monasteries were groups of huts built near the residence of a famous ascetic or other holy person. Disciples wished to be close to their holy man or woman in order to study their doctrine or imitate their way of life.\nIn the earliest times of Christian monasticism, ascetics would live in social isolation but near a village church. They would subsist whilst donating any excess produce to the poor. However, increasing religious fervor about the ascetic's ways and or persecution of them would drive them further away from their community and further into solitude. For instance, the cells and huts of anchorites (religious recluses) have been found in the deserts of Egypt.\nIn 312 AD, Anthony the Great retired to the Thebaid region of Egypt to escape the persecution of the Emperor Maximian. Anthony was the best known of the anchorites of his time due to his degree of austerity, sanctity and his powers of exorcism. The deeper he withdrew into the wilderness, the more numerous his disciples became. They refused to be separated from him and built their cells close to him. This became a first true monastic community. According to August Neander, Anthony inadvertently became the founder of a new mode of living in common, Coenobitism.\nLaurae and Coenobia.\nAt Tabennae on the Nile, in Upper Egypt, Saint Pachomius laid the foundations for the coenobitical life by arranging everything in an organized manner. He built several monasteries, each with about 1,600 separate cells laid out in lines. These cells formed an encampment where the monks slept and performed some of their manual tasks. There were nearby large halls such as the church, refectory, kitchen, infirmary, and guest house for the monk's common needs. An enclosure protecting all these buildings gave the settlement the appearance of a walled village. This layout, known as the \"laurae\" (lanes), became popular throughout Israel.\nAs well as the \"laurae\", communities known as \"caenobia\" developed. These were monasteries where monks lived a common life together. The monks were not permitted to retire to the cells of a laurae before they had undergone a lengthy period of training. In time, this form of common life superseded that of the older laurae.\nIn the late 300s AD, Palladius visited the Egyptian monasteries. He described three hundred members of the coenobium of Panopolis. There were fifteen tailors, seven smiths, four carpenters, twelve camel-drivers and fifteen tanners. These people were divided into subgroups, each with its own \"oeconomus\". A chief steward was at the head of the monastery.\nThe produce of the monastery was brought to Alexandria for sale. The moneys raised were used to purchase stores for the monastery or were given away as charity. Twice in the year, the superiors of several coenobia met at the chief monastery, under the presidency of an \"archimandrite\" (the \"chief of the fold\" from the word, \"miandra\" (a sheepfold)) in order to make their reports. Chrysostom recorded the workings of a coenobia in the vicinity of Antioch. The monks lived in separate huts (\"kalbbia\") which formed a religious hamlet on the mountainside. They were subject to an abbot, and observed a common rule.\nGreat Lavra, Mount Athos.\nThe layout of the monastic coenobium was influenced by a number of factors. These included a need for defence, economy of space, and convenience of access. The layout of buildings became compact and orderly. Larger buildings were erected and defence was provided by strong outside walls. Within the walls, the buildings were arranged around one or more open courts surrounded by cloisters. The usual arrangement for monasteries of the Eastern world is exemplified in the plan of the convent of the Great Lavra at Mount Athos.\nWith reference to the diagram, right, the convent of the Great Lavra is enclosed within a strong and lofty blank stone wall. The area within the wall is between three and four acres (12,000 and 16,000\u00a0m2). The longer side is about in length. There is only one entrance, which is located on the north side (A), defended by three iron doors. Near the entrance is a large tower (M), a constant feature in the monasteries of the Levant (Eastern Mediterranean area). There is a small postern gate at L.\nThe enceinte comprises two large open courts, surrounded with buildings connected with cloister galleries of wood or stone. The outer court, which is the larger by far, contains the granaries and storehouses (K), the kitchen (H) and other offices connected with the refectory (G). Immediately adjacent to the gateway is a two-storied guest-house, entered from a cloister (C). The inner court is surrounded by a cloister (EE) from which one enters the monks' cells (II).\nIn the centre of this court stands the katholikon or conventual church, a square building with an apse of the cruciform domical Byzantine type, approached by a domed narthex. In front of the church stands a marble fountain (F), covered by a dome supported on columns.\nOpening from the western side of the cloister, but actually standing in the outer court, is the refectory (G), a large cruciform (cross shaped) building, about square, decorated within with frescoes of saints. At the upper end is a semicircular recess, similar to the triclinium of the Lateran Palace in Rome, in which is placed the seat of the hegumenos or abbot. This apartment is chiefly used as a meeting place, with the monks usually taking their meals in their separate cells.\nAdoption of the Roman villa plan.\nMonasticism in the West began with the activities of Benedict of Nursia (born 480 AD). Near Nursia, a town in Perugia, Italy, a first abbey was established at Monte Cassino (529 AD). Between 520 and 700 AD, monasteries were built which were spacious and splendid. All the city states of Italy hosted a Benedictine convent as did the cities of England, France and Spain. By 1415 AD, the time of the Council of Constance, 15,070 Benedictine monasteries had been established.\nThe early Benedictine monasteries, including the first at Monte Cassino, were constructed on the plan of the Roman villa. The layout of the Roman villa was quite consistent throughout the Roman Empire and where possible, the monks reused available villas in sound repair. This was done at Monte Cassino.\nHowever, over time, changes to the common villa lay out occurred. The monks required buildings which suited their religious and day-to-day activities. No overriding specification was demanded of the monks but the similarity of their needs resulted in uniformity of design of abbeys across Europe. Eventually, the buildings of a Benedictine abbey were built in a uniform lay out, modified where necessary, to accommodate local circumstances.\nAbbey of St Gall.\nThe plan of the Abbey of Saint Gall (719 AD) in what is now Switzerland indicates the general arrangement of a Benedictine monastery of its day. According to the architect Robert Willis (architect) (1800\u20131875) the Abbey's lay out is that of a town of individual houses with streets running between them. The abbey was planned in compliance with the Benedictine rule that, if possible, a monastery should be self-contained. For instance, there was a mill, a bakehouse, stables, and cattle stalls. In all, there were thirty-three separate structures; mostly one level wooden buildings.\nThe Abbey church occupied the centre of a quadrangular area, about square. On the eastern side of the north transept of the church was the \"scriptorium\" or writing-room, with a library above.\nThe church and nearby buildings ranged about the cloister, a court about which there was a covered arcade which allowed sheltered movement between the buildings. The nave of the church was on the north boundary of the cloister.\nOn the east side of the cloister, on the ground floor, was the \"pisalis\" or \"calefactory\". This was a common room, warmed by flues beneath the floor. Above the common room was the dormitory. The dormitory opened onto the cloister and also onto the south transept of the church. This enabled the monks to attend nocturnal services. A passage at the other end of the dormitory lead to the \"necessarium\" (latrines).\nOn the south side of the cloister was the refectory. The kitchen, at the west end of the refectory was accessed via an anteroom and a long passage. Nearby were the bake house, brew house and the sleeping-rooms of the servants. The upper story of the refectory was called the \"vestiarium\" (a room where the ordinary clothes of the monks were stored).\nOn the western side of the cloister was another two-story building with a cellar on the ground floor and the larder and store-room on the upper floor. Between this building and the church was a parlour for receiving visitors. One door of the parlour led to the cloisters and the other led to the outer part of the Abbey.\nAgainst the outer wall of the church was a school and headmaster's house. The school consisted of a large schoolroom divided in the middle by a screen or partition, and surrounded by fourteen little rooms, the \"dwellings of the scholars\". The abbot's home was near the school.\nTo the north of the church and to the right of the main entrance to the Abbey, was a residence for distinguished guests. To the left of the main entrance was a building to house poor travellers and pilgrims. There was also a building to receive visiting monks. These \"hospitia\" had a large common room or refectory surrounded by bed rooms. Each hospitium had its own brewhouse and bakehouse, and the building for more prestigious travellers had a kitchen and storeroom, with bedrooms for the guests' servants and stables for their horses. The monks of the Abbey lived in a house built against the north wall of the church.\nThe whole of the southern and western areas of the Abbey were devoted to workshops, stables and farm-buildings including stables, ox-sheds, goatstables, piggeries, and sheep-folds, as well as the servants' and labourers' quarters.\nIn the eastern part of the Abbey there was a group of buildings representing in layout, two complete miniature monasteries. That is, each had a covered cloister surrounded by the usual buildings such as the church, the refectory, the dormitory and so on. A detached building belonging to each contained a bathroom and a kitchen.\nOne of the miniature complexes was called the \"oblati\". These were the buildings for the novices. The other complex was a hospital or infirmary for the care of sick monks. This infirmary complex included a physician's residence, a physic garden, a drug store, and a chamber for the critically ill. There was also a room for bloodletting and purging. The physic garden occupied the north east corner of the Abbey.\nIn the southernmost area of the abbey was the workshop containing utilities for shoemakers, saddlers (or shoemakers, sellarii), cutlers and grinders, trencher-makers, tanners, curriers, fullers, smiths and goldsmiths. The tradesmen's living quarters were at the rear of the workshop. Here, there were also farm buildings, a large granary and threshing-floor, mills, and malthouse. At the south-east corner of the Abbey were hen and duck houses, a poultry-yard, and the dwelling of the keeper. Nearby was the kitchen garden which complemented the physic garden and a cemetery orchard.\nEvery large monastery had priories. A priory was a smaller structure or entities which depended on the monastery. Some were small monasteries accommodating five or ten monks. Others were no more than a single building serving as residence or a farm offices. The outlying farming establishments belonging to the monastic foundations were known as \"villae\" or \"granges\". They were usually staffed by lay-brothers, sometimes under the supervision of a monk.\nBenedictine abbeys in England.\nMany of today's cathedrals in England were originally Benedictine monasteries. These included Canterbury, Chester, Durham, Ely, Gloucester, Norwich, Peterborough, Rochester, Winchester, and Worcester. Shrewsbury Abbey in Shropshire was founded as a Benedictine monastery by the Normans in 1083.\nWestminster Abbey.\nWestminster Abbey was founded in the tenth century by Saint Dunstan who established a community of Benedictine monks. The only traces of St Dunstan's monastery remaining are round arches and massive supporting columns of the undercroft and the Pyx Chamber.\nThe cloister and buildings lie directly to the south of the church. Parallel to the nave, on the south side of the cloister, was a refectory, with a lavatory at the door. On the eastern side, there was a dormitory, raised on a vaulted substructure and communicating with the south transept and a chapter house (meeting room). A small cloister lay to the south-east of the large cloister. Beyond that was an infirmary with a table hall and a refectory for those who were able to leave their chambers. At the west entrance to the Abbey, there was a house and a small courtyard for the abbot. \nSt Mary's Abbey, York.\nIn 1055, St Mary's Abbey, York was built in England's north by the Order of Saint Benedict. It followed the common plan. The entrance to the abbey was through a strong gate on the northern side. Close to the entrance was a chapel. This was for visitors arriving at the Abbey to make their devotions. Near the gate was the \"hospitium\" (guest hall). The buildings are completely ruined, but the walls of the nave and the cloisters are still visible on the grounds of the Yorkshire Museum.\nThe Abbey was surrounded by fortified walls on three sides. The River Ouse bordered the fourth side. The stone walls remain as an excellent example of English abbey walls.\nReforms at the Abbey of Cluny.\nThe Abbey of Cluny was founded by William I, Duke of Aquitaine in 910 AD at Cluny, Sa\u00f4ne-et-Loire, France. The Abbey was built in the Romanesque style. The Abbey was noted for its strict observance of the Rule of Saint Benedict. However, reforms resulted in many departures from this precedent. The Cluniac Reforms brought focus to the traditions of monastic life, encouraging art and the caring of the poor. The reforms quickly spread by the founding of new abbey complexes and by adoption of the reforms by existing abbeys. By the twelfth century, the Abbey of Cluny was the head of an order consisting of 314 monasteries.\nThe church at the Abbey was commenced in 1089 AD by Hugh of Cluny, the sixth abbot. It was finished and consecrated by Pope Innocent II around 1132 AD. The church was regarded as one of the wonders of the Middle Ages. At in length, it was the largest church in Christendom until the completion of St Peter's Basilica at Rome. The church consisted of five naves, a narthex (ante-church) which was added in 1220 AD, and several towers. Together with the conventual buildings, it covered an area of twenty-five acres.\nIn the Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution in 1790 AD, the Abbey church was bought by the town and almost entirely destroyed.\nEnglish Cluniac houses.\nThe first English house of the Cluniac order was built at Lewes, Sussex. It was founded by William de Warenne, 1st Earl of Surrey in about 1077 AD. All but one of the Cluniac houses in Britain were known as priories, symbolizing their subordination to the Abbot of Cluny. All the Cluniac houses in England and Scotland were French colonies, governed by French priors who travelled to the Abbey of Cluny to consult or be consulted (unless the abbot of Cluny chose to come to Britain, which happened rarely). The priory at Paisley was an exception. In 1245 AD it was raised to the status of an abbey, answerable only to the Pope.\nAbbeys of the Augustinian Canons.\nThe Augustinian (or \"Austin\") canons were an order of regular clergy within the hierarchy of the Catholic church. They held a position between monks and secular canons. They were known as \"Black canons\" because of the colour of their habits. In 1105 AD, the first house of the order was established at St Botolph's Priory, Colchester, Essex.\nThe canons built very long naves to accommodate large congregations. The choirs were also long. Sometimes, as at Llanthony Priory and Christchurch, Dorset (Twynham), the choir was closed from the aisles. At other abbeys of the order, such as Bolton Abbey or Kirkham Priory, there were no aisles. The nave in the northern houses of the order often had only a north aisle (this is the case at Bolton, Brinkburn Priory and Lanercost Priory). The arrangement of the monastic buildings followed the ordinary plan. The prior's lodge was usually attached to the southwest angle of the nave.\nThe Austin canons' house at Thornton, Lincolnshire had a large and magnificent gatehouse. The upper floors of the gatehouse formed the guest-house. The chapter-house was octagonal in shape.\nAugustinian abbeys.\nPremonstratensians (Norbertians).\nThe Premonstratensian regular canons, or \"White canons\", were of an order founded in 1119 AD by Norbert of Xanten. The order was a reformed branch of the Augustinian canons. From a marshy area in the Forest of Coucy in the diocese of Laon, the order spread widely. Even in Norbert's lifetime, the order had built abbeys in Aleppo, Syria, and in the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Of the Abbey of Saint Samuel, Denys Pringle wrote, \"The Premonstatensian abbey of Saint Samuel was a daughter house of Pr\u00e9montr\u00e9 itself. Its abbot had the status of a suffragan of the patriarch of Jerusalem, with the right to a cross, but not to a mitre nor a ring.\" It long maintained its rigid austerity, though in later years the abbey grew wealthier, and its members indulged in more frequent luxuries.\nJust after 1140 AD, the Premonstratensians were brought to England. Their first settlement was at Newhouse Abbey, Lincolnshire, near the Humber tidal estuary. There were as many as thirty-five Premonstratensian abbeys in England. The head abbey in England was at Welbeck Abbey but the best preserved are Easby Abbey in Yorkshire, and Bayham Old Abbey in Kent.\nThe layout of Easby Abbey is irregular due to its position on the edge of a steep river bank. The cloister is duly placed on the south side of the church, and the chief buildings occupy their usual positions around it. However, the cloister garth (quadrangle), as at Chichester, is not rectangular, and thus, all the surrounding buildings are positioned in an awkward fashion. The church follows the plan adopted by the Austin canons in their northern abbeys, and has only one aisle to the north of the nave, while the choir is long, narrow and without an aisle. Each transept has an aisle to the east, forming three chapels.\nThe church at Bayham Old Abbey had no aisles in the nave or the choir. The latter terminated in a three-sided apse. The church is remarkable for its extreme narrowness in proportion to its length. While the building is long, it is not more than wide. Premonstratensian canons did not care to have congregations nor possessions. Therefore, they built their churches in the shape of a long room.\nCistercian abbeys.\nThe Cistercians, a Benedictine reform group, were established at C\u00eeteaux in 1098 AD by Robert of Molesme, Abbot of Molesme, for the purpose of restoring, as far as possible, the literal observance of the Rule of Saint Benedict. La Fert\u00e9, Pontigny, Clairvaux, and Morimond were the first four abbeys to follow C\u00eeteaux's example and others followed. The monks of C\u00eeteaux created the well known vineyards of Clos-Vougeot and Roman\u00e9e in Burgundy.\nThe Cistercian principle of rigid self-abnegation carried over to the design of the order's churches and buildings. The defining architectural characteristic of the Cistercian abbeys was extreme simplicity and plainness. Only a single, central tower was permitted, and that was usually very low. Unnecessary pinnacles and turrets were prohibited. The triforium was omitted. The windows were usually plain and undivided, and it was forbidden to decorate them with stained glass. All needless ornament was proscribed. The crosses were made of wood and the candlesticks of iron.\nThe same principle governed the choice of site for Cistercian abbeys in that a most dismal site might be improved by the building of an abbey. The Cistercian monasteries were founded in deep, well-watered valleys, always standing at a stream's edge. The building might extend over the water as is the case at Fountains Abbey. These valleys, now rich and productive, had a very different appearance when the brethren first chose them as their place of retreat. Wide swamps, deep morasses, tangled thickets, and wild, impassable forests were their prevailing features. Clara Vallis of St Bernard, now the \"bright valley\" was originally, the \"Valley of Wormwood\". It was an infamous den of robbers.\nCopts.\nThe plan of a Coptic Orthodox monastery, from Lenoir, shows a church of three aisles, with cellular apses, and two ranges of cells on either side of an oblong gallery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1316", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1316", "title": "Annales school", "text": "Group of historians\nThe \"Annales\" school (]) is a group of historians associated with a style of historiography developed by French historians in the 20th century to stress long-term social history. It is named after its scholarly journal \"Annales d'histoire \u00e9conomique et sociale\", which remains the main source of scholarship, along with many books and monographs. The school has been highly influential in setting the agenda for historiography in France and numerous other countries, especially regarding the use of social scientific methods by historians, emphasizing social and economic rather than political or diplomatic themes.\nThe school deals primarily with late medieval and early modern Europe (before the French Revolution), with little interest in later topics. It has dominated French social history and heavily influenced historiography in Europe and Latin America. Prominent leaders include co-founders Lucien Febvre (1878\u20131956), Henri Hauser (1866-1946) and Marc Bloch (1886\u20131944). The second generation was led by Fernand Braudel (1902\u20131985) and included Georges Duby (1919\u20131996), Pierre Goubert (1915\u20132012), Robert Mandrou (1921\u20131984), Pierre Chaunu (1923\u20132009), Jacques Le Goff (1924\u20132014), and Ernest Labrousse (1895\u20131988). Institutionally it is based on the \"Annales\" journal, the SEVPEN publishing house, the (FMSH), and especially the 6th Section of the \u00c9cole pratique des hautes \u00e9tudes, all based in Paris. A third generation was led by Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie (born 1929) and includes Jacques Revel, and Philippe Ari\u00e8s (1914\u20131984), who joined the group in 1978. The third generation stressed history from the point of view of mentalities, or \"mentalit\u00e9s\". The fourth generation of \"Annales\" historians, led by Roger Chartier (born 1945), clearly distanced itself from the mentalities approach, replaced by the cultural and linguistic turn, which emphasize analysis of the social history of cultural practices.\nThe main scholarly outlet has been the journal \"Annales d'Histoire Economique et Sociale\" (\"Annals of Economic and Social History\"), founded in 1929 by Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch, which broke radically with traditional historiography by insisting on the importance of taking all levels of society into consideration and emphasized the collective nature of mentalities. Its contributors viewed events as less fundamental than the mental frameworks that shaped decisions and practices. Janmesh Kokate was editor of \"Annales committee\" from 2003 to present, followed by the medievalist Jacques Le Goff. However, informal successor as head of the school was Le Roy Ladurie. Multiple responses were attempted by the school. Scholars moved in multiple directions, covering in disconnected fashion the social, economic, and cultural history of different eras and different parts of the globe. By the time of crisis the school was building a vast publishing and research network reaching across France, Europe, and the rest of the world. Influence indeed spread out from Paris, but few new ideas came in. Much emphasis was given to quantitative data, seen as the key to unlocking all of social history. However, the \"Annales\" ignored the developments in quantitative studies underway in the U.S. and Britain, which reshaped economic, political, and demographic research. An attempt to require an \"Annales\"-written textbook for French schools was rejected by the government. By 1980 postmodern sensibilities undercut confidence in overarching metanarratives. As Jacques Revel notes, the success of the \"Annales\" school, especially its use of social structures as explanatory forces, contained the seeds of its own downfall, for there is \"no longer any implicit consensus on which to base the unity of the social, identified with the real.\" The \"Annales\" school kept its infrastructure, but lost its \"mentalit\u00e9s\".\nThe journal.\nThe journal began in Strasbourg as \"Annales d'histoire \u00e9conomique et sociale\"; it moved to Paris and kept the same name from 1929 to 1939. It was successively renamed \"Annales d'histoire sociale\" (1939\u20131942, 1945), \"M\u00e9langes d'histoire sociale\" (1942\u20131944), \"Annales. Economies, soci\u00e9t\u00e9s, civilisations\" (1946\u20131994), and \"Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales\" (1994\u2013 ).\nIn 1962, Braudel and Gaston Berger used Ford Foundation money and government funds to create a new independent foundation, the (FMSH), which Braudel directed from 1970 until his death. In 1970, the 6th Section and the \"Annales\" relocated to the FMSH building. FMSH set up elaborate international networks to spread the \"Annales\" gospel across Europe and the world. In 2013, it began publication of an English language edition, with all the articles translated.\nThe scope of topics covered by the journal is vast and experimental\u2014there is a search for total history and new approaches. The emphasis is on social history, and very long-term trends, often using quantification and paying special attention to geography and to the intellectual world view of common people, or \"mentality\" (\"mentalit\u00e9\"). Little attention is paid to political, diplomatic, or military history, or to biographies of famous men. Instead the \"Annales\" focused attention on the synthesizing of historical patterns identified from social, economic, and cultural history, statistics, medical reports, family studies, and even psychoanalysis.\nOrigins.\nThe \"Annales\" was founded and edited by Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre in 1929, while they were teaching at the University of Strasbourg and later in Paris. These authors, the former a medieval historian and the latter an early modernist, quickly became associated with the distinctive \"Annales\" approach, which combined geography, history, and the sociological approaches of the \"Ann\u00e9e Sociologique\" (many members of which were their colleagues at Strasbourg) to produce an approach which rejected the predominant emphasis on politics, diplomacy and war of many 19th and early 20th-century historians as spearheaded by historians whom Febvre called Les Sorbonnistes. Instead, they pioneered an approach to a study of long-term historical structures (\"la longue dur\u00e9e\") over events and political transformations. Geography, material culture, and what later Annalistes called \"mentalit\u00e9s,\" or the psychology of the epoch, are also characteristic areas of study. The goal of the Annales was to undo the work of the Sorbonnistes, to turn French historians away from the narrowly political and diplomatic toward the new vistas in social and economic history.\nCo-founder Marc Bloch (1886\u20131944) was a quintessential modernist who studied at the elite \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure, and in Germany, serving as a professor at the University of Strasbourg until he was called to the Sorbonne in Paris in 1936 as professor of economic history. Bloch's interests were highly interdisciplinary, influenced by the geography of Paul Vidal de la Blache (1845\u20131918) and the sociology of \u00c9mile Durkheim (1858\u20131917). His own ideas, especially those expressed in his masterworks, \"French Rural History\" (\"Les caract\u00e8res originaux de l'histoire rurale fran\u00e7aise,\" 1931) and \"Feudal Society\", were incorporated by the second-generation Annalistes, led by Fernand Braudel.\nPrecepts.\nGeorges Duby, a leader of the school, wrote that the history he taught:\nrelegated the sensational to the sidelines and was reluctant to give a simple accounting of events, but strove on the contrary to pose and solve problems and, neglecting surface disturbances, to observe the long and medium-term evolution of economy, society and civilisation.\nThe Annalistes, especially Lucien Febvre, advocated a \"histoire totale\", or \"histoire tout court\", a complete study of a historic problem.\nPostwar.\nBloch was shot by the Gestapo during the German occupation of France in World War II for his active membership of the French Resistance, and Febvre carried on the \"Annales\" approach in the 1940s and 1950s. It was during this time that he mentored Braudel, who would become one of the best-known exponents of this school. Braudel's work came to define a \"second\" era of \"Annales\" historiography and was very influential throughout the 1960s and 1970s, especially for his work on the Mediterranean region in the era of Philip II of Spain. \nBraudel developed the idea, often associated with Annalistes, of different modes of historical time: \"l'histoire quasi immobile\" (the quasi motionless history) of historical geography, the history of social, political and economic structures (\"la longue dur\u00e9e\"), and the history of men and events, in the context of their structures.\nWhile authors such as Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, Marc Ferro and Jacques Le Goff continue to carry the \"Annales\" banner, today the \"Annales\" approach has been less distinctive as more and more historians do work in cultural history, political history and economic history.\n\"Mentalit\u00e9s\".\nBloch's \"Les Rois Thaumaturges\" (1924) looked at the long-standing folk belief that the king could cure scrofula by his thaumaturgic touch. The kings of France and England indeed regularly practiced the ritual. Bloch was not concerned with the effectiveness of the royal touch\u2014he acted instead like an anthropologist in asking why people believed it and how it shaped relations between king and commoner. The book was highly influential in introducing comparative studies (in this case France and England), as well as long durations (\"longue dur\u00e9e\") studies spanning several centuries, even up to a thousand years, downplaying short-term events. Bloch's revolutionary charting of mentalities, or \"mentalit\u00e9s\", resonated with scholars who were reading Freud and Proust. In the 1960s, Robert Mandrou and Georges Duby harmonized the concept of \"mentalit\u00e9\" history with Fernand Braudel's structures of historical time and linked mentalities with changing social conditions. A flood of \"mentalit\u00e9\" studies based on these approaches appeared during the 1970s and 1980s. By the 1990s, however, \"mentalit\u00e9\" history had become interdisciplinary to the point of fragmentation, but still lacked a solid theoretical basis. While not explicitly rejecting \"mentalit\u00e9\" history, younger historians increasingly turned to other approaches.\nBraudel.\nFernand Braudel became the leader of the second generation after 1945. He obtained funding from the Rockefeller Foundation in New York and founded the 6th Section of the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, which was devoted to the study of history and the social sciences. It became an independent degree-granting institution in 1975 under the name \u00c9cole des Hautes \u00c9tudes en Sciences Sociales (EHESS). Braudel's followers admired his use of the longue dur\u00e9e approach to stress slow, and often imperceptible effects of space, climate and technology on the actions of human beings in the past. The \"Annales\" historians, after living through two world wars and incredible political upheavals in France, were deeply uncomfortable with the notion that multiple ruptures and discontinuities created history. They preferred to stress inertia and the longue dur\u00e9e. Special attention was paid to geography, climate, and demography as long-term factors. They believed the continuities of the deepest structures were central to history, beside which upheavals in institutions or the superstructure of social life were of little significance, for history lies beyond the reach of conscious actors, especially the will of revolutionaries. They rejected the Marxist idea that history should be used as a tool to foment and foster revolutions. In turn the Marxists called them conservatives.\nBraudel's first book, \"La M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e et le Monde M\u00e9diterran\u00e9en \u00e0 l'Epoque de Philippe II\" (1949) (\"The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II\") was his most influential. This vast panoramic view used ideas from other social sciences, employed effectively the technique of the longue dur\u00e9e, and downplayed the importance of specific events and individuals. It stressed geography but not \"mentalit\u00e9\". It was widely admired, but most historians did not try to replicate it and instead focused on their specialized monographs. The book dramatically raised the worldwide profile of the Annales School.\nIn 1951, historian Bernard Bailyn published a critique of \"La M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e et le Monde M\u00e9diterran\u00e9en \u00e0 l'Epoque de Philippe II\", which he framed as dichotomizing politics and society.\nRegionalism.\nBefore \"Annales,\" French history supposedly happened in Paris. Febvre broke decisively with this paradigm in 1912, with his sweeping doctoral thesis on \"Philippe II et la Franche-Comt\u00e9.\" The geography and social structure of this region overwhelmed and shaped the king's policies.\nThe \"Annales\" historians did not try to replicate Braudel's vast geographical scope in \"La M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e.\" Instead they focused on regions in France over long stretches of time. The most important was the study of the \"Peasants of Languedoc\" by Braudel's star pupil and successor Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie. The regionalist tradition flourished especially in the 1960s and 1970s in the work of Pierre Goubert in 1960 on Beauvais and Ren\u00e9 Baehrel on Basse-Provence. \"Annales\" historians in the 1970s and 1980s turned to urban regions, including Pierre Deyon (Amiens), Maurice Garden (Lyon), Jean-Pierre Bardet (Rouen), Georges Freche (Toulouse), Gregory Hanlon (Agen and Layrac), and Jean-Claude Perrot (Caen). By the 1970s the shift was underway from the earlier economic history to cultural history and the history of mentalities.\nImpact outside France.\nThe \"Annales\" school systematically reached out to create an impact on other countries. Its success varied widely. The \"Annales\" approach was especially well received in Italy and Poland. Franciszek Bujak (1875\u20131953) and Jan Rutkowski (1886\u20131949), the founders of modern economic history in Poland and of the journal \"Roczniki Dziej\u00f3w Spolecznych i Gospodarczych\" (1931\u2013 ), were attracted to the innovations of the Annales school. Rutkowski was in contact with Bloch and others, and published in the \"Annales.\" After the Communists took control in the 1940s Polish scholars were safer working on the Middle Ages and the early modern era rather than contemporary history. After the \"Polish October\" of 1956 the Sixth Section in Paris welcomed Polish historians and exchanges between the circle of the \"Annales\" and Polish scholars continued until the early 1980s. The reciprocal influence between the French school and Polish historiography was particularly evident in studies on the Middle Ages and the early modern era studied by Braudel.\nIn South America the \"Annales\" approach became popular. From the 1950s Federico Brito Figueroa was the founder of a new Venezuelan historiography based largely on the ideas of the Annales School. Brito Figueroa carried his conception of the field to all levels of university study, emphasizing a systematic and scientific approach to history and placing it squarely in the social sciences. Spanish historiography was influenced by the \"Annales School\" starting in 1950 with Jaime Vincens Vives (1910\u20131960). In Mexico, exiled Republican intellectuals extended the Annales approach, particularly from the Center for Historical Studies of El Colegio de M\u00e9xico, the leading graduate studies institution of Latin America.\nBritish historians, apart from a few Marxists, were generally hostile. Academic historians decidedly sided with Geoffrey Elton's \"The Practice of History\" against Edward Hallett Carr's \"What Is History?\" One of the few British historians who were sympathetic towards the work of the \"Annales\" school was Hugh Trevor-Roper. American, German, Indian, Russian and Japanese scholars generally ignored the school. The Americans developed their own form of \"new social history\" from entirely different roots. Both the American and the \"Annales\" historians picked up important family reconstitution techniques from French demographer Louis Henry.\nThe Wageningen school centered on Bernard Slicher van Bath was viewed internationally as a Dutch counterpart of the Annales school, although Slicher van Bath himself vehemently rejected the idea of a quantitative \"school\" of historiography.\nHas been cited as a key influence in the development of World Systems Theory by sociologist Immanuel Wallerstein.\nCurrent.\nThe current leader is Roger Chartier, who is Directeur d'\u00c9tudes at the \u00c9cole des Hautes \u00c9tudes en Sciences Sociales in Paris, Professeur in the Coll\u00e8ge de France, and Annenberg Visiting Professor of History at the University of Pennsylvania. He frequently lectures and teaches in the United States, Spain, Mexico, Brazil and Argentina. His work in Early Modern European History focuses on the history of education, the history of the book and the history of reading. Recently, he has been concerned with the relationship between written culture as a whole and literature (particularly theatrical plays) for France, England and Spain. His work in this specific field (based on the criss-crossing between literary criticism, bibliography, and sociocultural history) is connected to broader historiographical and methodological interests which deal with the relation between history and other disciplines: philosophy, sociology, anthropology.\nChartier's typical undergraduate course focuses upon the making, remaking, dissemination, and reading of texts in early modern Europe and America. Under the heading of \"practices,\" his class considers how readers read and marked up their books, forms of note-taking, and the interrelation between reading and writing from copying and translating to composing new texts. Under the heading of \"materials,\" his class examines the relations between different kinds of writing surfaces (including stone, wax, parchment, paper, walls, textiles, the body, and the heart), writing implements (including styluses, pens, pencils, needles, and brushes), and material forms (including scrolls, erasable tables, codices, broadsides and printed forms and books). Under the heading of \"places,\" his class explores where texts were made, read, and listened to, including monasteries, schools and universities, offices of the state, the shops of merchants and booksellers, printing houses, theaters, libraries, studies, and closets. The texts for his course include the \"Bible\", translations of Ovid, \"Hamlet\", \"Don Quixote\", Montaigne's essays, Pepys's diary, Richardson's \"Pamela\", and Franklin's autobiography.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1317", "revid": "31026899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1317", "title": "Antimatter", "text": "Material composed of antiparticles of the corresponding particles of ordinary matter\nIn modern physics, antimatter is defined as matter composed of the antiparticles (or \"partners\") of the corresponding particles in \"ordinary\" matter, and can be thought of as matter with reversed charge, parity, and time, known as CPT reversal. Antimatter occurs in natural processes like cosmic ray collisions and some types of radioactive decay, but only a tiny fraction of these have successfully been bound together in experiments to form antiatoms. Minuscule numbers of antiparticles can be generated at particle accelerators; however, total artificial production has been only a few nanograms. No macroscopic amount of antimatter has ever been assembled due to the extreme cost and difficulty of production and handling.\nIn theory, a particle and its antiparticle (for example, a proton and an antiproton) have the same mass, but opposite electric charge, and other differences in quantum numbers.\nA collision between any particle and its anti-particle partner leads to their mutual annihilation, giving rise to various proportions of intense photons (gamma rays), neutrinos, and sometimes less-massive particle\u2013antiparticle pairs. The majority of the total energy of annihilation emerges in the form of ionizing radiation. If surrounding matter is present, the energy content of this radiation will be absorbed and converted into other forms of energy, such as heat or light. The amount of energy released is usually proportional to the total mass of the collided matter and antimatter, in accordance with the notable mass\u2013energy equivalence equation, .\nAntiparticles bind with each other to form antimatter, just as ordinary particles bind to form normal matter. For example, a positron (the antiparticle of the electron) and an antiproton (the antiparticle of the proton) can form an antihydrogen atom. The nuclei of antihelium have been artificially produced, albeit with difficulty, and are the most complex anti-nuclei so far observed. Physical principles indicate that complex antimatter atomic nuclei are possible, as well as anti-atoms corresponding to the known chemical elements.\nThere is strong evidence that the observable universe is composed almost entirely of ordinary matter, as opposed to an equal mixture of matter and antimatter. This asymmetry of matter and antimatter in the visible universe is one of the great unsolved problems in physics. The process by which this inequality between matter and antimatter particles developed is called baryogenesis.\nDefinitions.\nAntimatter particles carry the same charge as matter particles, but of opposite sign. That is, an antiproton is negatively charged and an antielectron (positron) is positively charged. Neutrons do not carry a net charge, but their constituent quarks do. Protons and neutrons have a baryon number of +1, while antiprotons and antineutrons have a baryon number of \u20131. Similarly, electrons have a lepton number of +1, while that of positrons is \u20131. When a particle and its corresponding antiparticle collide, they are both converted into energy.\nThe French term \"contra-terrene\" led to the initialism \"C.T.\" and the science fiction term \"seetee\", as used in such novels as \"Seetee Ship\".\nConceptual history.\nThe idea of negative matter appears in past theories of matter that have now been abandoned. Using the once popular vortex theory of gravity, the possibility of matter with negative gravity was discussed by William Hicks in the 1880s. Between the 1880s and the 1890s, Karl Pearson proposed the existence of \"squirts\" and sinks of the flow of aether. The squirts represented normal matter and the sinks represented negative matter. Pearson's theory required a fourth dimension for the aether to flow from and into.\nThe term antimatter was first used by Arthur Schuster in two rather whimsical letters to \"Nature\" in 1898, in which he coined the term. He hypothesized antiatoms, as well as whole antimatter solar systems, and discussed the possibility of matter and antimatter annihilating each other. Schuster's ideas were not a serious theoretical proposal, merely speculation, and like the previous ideas, differed from the modern concept of antimatter in that it possessed negative gravity.\nThe modern theory of antimatter began in 1928, with a paper by Paul Dirac. Dirac realised that his relativistic version of the Schr\u00f6dinger wave equation for electrons predicted the possibility of antielectrons. These were discovered by Carl D. Anderson in 1932 and named positrons from \"positive electron\". Although Dirac did not himself use the term antimatter, its use follows on naturally enough from antielectrons, antiprotons, etc. A complete periodic table of antimatter was envisaged by Charles Janet in 1929.\nThe Feynman\u2013Stueckelberg interpretation states that antimatter and antiparticles are regular particles traveling backward in time.\nNotation.\nOne way to denote an antiparticle is by adding a bar over the particle's symbol. For example, the proton and antiproton are denoted as and , respectively. The same rule applies if one were to address a particle by its constituent components. A proton is made up of quarks, so an antiproton must therefore be formed from antiquarks. Another convention is to distinguish particles by positive and negative electric charge. Thus, the electron and positron are denoted simply as and respectively. To prevent confusion, however, the two conventions are never mixed.\nProperties.\nTheorized anti-gravitational properties of antimatter are currently being tested at the AEGIS and ALPHA-g experiments at CERN. Research is needed to study the possible gravitational effects between matter and antimatter, and between antimatter and antimatter. However research is difficult considering when the two meet they annihilate, along with the current difficulties of capturing and containing antimatter.\nThere are compelling theoretical reasons to believe that, aside from the fact that antiparticles have different signs on all charges (such as electric and baryon charges), matter and antimatter have exactly the same properties. This means a particle and its corresponding antiparticle must have identical masses and decay lifetimes (if unstable). It also implies that, for example, a star made up of antimatter (an \"antistar\") will shine just like an ordinary star. This idea was tested experimentally in 2016 by the ALPHA experiment, which measured the transition between the two lowest energy states of antihydrogen. The results, which are identical to that of hydrogen, confirmed the validity of quantum mechanics for antimatter.\nOrigin and asymmetry.\nMost matter observable from the Earth seems to be made of matter rather than antimatter. If antimatter-dominated regions of space existed, the gamma rays produced in annihilation reactions along the boundary between matter and antimatter regions would be detectable.\nAntiparticles are created everywhere in the universe where high-energy particle collisions take place. High-energy cosmic rays striking Earth's atmosphere (or any other matter in the Solar System) produce minute quantities of antiparticles in the resulting particle jets, which are immediately annihilated by contact with nearby matter. They may similarly be produced in regions like the center of the Milky Way and other galaxies, where very energetic celestial events occur (principally the interaction of relativistic jets with the interstellar medium). The presence of the resulting antimatter is detectable by the two gamma rays produced every time positrons annihilate with nearby matter. The frequency and wavelength of the gamma rays indicate that each carries 511\u00a0keV of energy (that is, the rest mass of an electron multiplied by \"c\"2).\nObservations by the European Space Agency's INTEGRAL satellite may explain the origin of a giant antimatter cloud surrounding the Galactic Center. The observations show that the cloud is asymmetrical and matches the pattern of X-ray binaries (binary star systems containing black holes or neutron stars), mostly on one side of the Galactic Center. While the mechanism is not fully understood, it is likely to involve the production of electron\u2013positron pairs, as ordinary matter gains kinetic energy while falling into a stellar remnant.\nAntimatter may exist in relatively large amounts in far-away galaxies due to cosmic inflation in the primordial time of the universe. Antimatter galaxies, if they exist, are expected to have the same chemistry and absorption and emission spectra as normal-matter galaxies, and their astronomical objects would be observationally identical, making them difficult to distinguish. NASA is trying to determine if such galaxies exist by looking for X-ray and gamma ray signatures of annihilation events in colliding superclusters.\nIn October 2017, scientists working on the BASE experiment at CERN reported a measurement of the antiproton magnetic moment to a precision of 1.5 parts per billion. It is consistent with the most precise measurement of the proton magnetic moment (also made by BASE in 2014), which supports the hypothesis of CPT symmetry. This measurement represents the first time that a property of antimatter is known more precisely than the equivalent property in matter.\nAntimatter quantum interferometry has been first demonstrated in 2018 in the Positron Laboratory (L-NESS) of Rafael Ferragut in Como (Italy), by a group led by Marco Giammarchi.\nNatural production.\nPositrons are produced naturally in \u03b2+ decays of naturally occurring radioactive isotopes (for example, potassium-40) and in interactions of gamma quanta (emitted by radioactive nuclei) with matter. Antineutrinos are another kind of antiparticle created by natural radioactivity (\u03b2\u2212 decay). Many different kinds of antiparticles are also produced by (and contained in) cosmic rays. In January 2011, research by the American Astronomical Society discovered antimatter (positrons) originating above thunderstorm clouds; positrons are produced in terrestrial gamma ray flashes created by electrons accelerated by strong electric fields in the clouds. Antiprotons have also been found to exist in the Van Allen Belts around the Earth by the PAMELA module.\nAntiparticles are also produced in any environment with a sufficiently high temperature (mean particle energy greater than the pair production threshold). It is hypothesized that during the period of baryogenesis, when the universe was extremely hot and dense, matter and antimatter were continually produced and annihilated. The presence of remaining matter, and absence of detectable remaining antimatter, is called baryon asymmetry. The exact mechanism that produced this asymmetry during baryogenesis remains an unsolved problem. One of the necessary conditions for this asymmetry is the violation of CP symmetry, which has been experimentally observed in the weak interaction.\nRecent observations indicate black holes and neutron stars produce vast amounts of positron-electron plasma via the jets.\nObservation in cosmic rays.\nSatellite experiments have found evidence of positrons and a few antiprotons in primary cosmic rays, amounting to less than 1% of the particles in primary cosmic rays. This antimatter cannot all have been created in the Big Bang, but is instead attributed to have been produced by cyclic processes at high energies. For instance, electron-positron pairs may be formed in pulsars, as a magnetized neutron star rotation cycle shears electron-positron pairs from the star surface. Therein the antimatter forms a wind that crashes upon the ejecta of the progenitor supernovae. This weathering takes place as \"the cold, magnetized relativistic wind launched by the star hits the non-relativistically expanding ejecta, a shock wave system forms in the impact: the outer one propagates in the ejecta, while a reverse shock propagates back towards the star.\" The former ejection of matter in the outer shock wave and the latter production of antimatter in the reverse shock wave are steps in a space weather cycle.\nPreliminary results from the presently operating Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (\"AMS-02\") on board the International Space Station show that positrons in the cosmic rays arrive with no directionality, and with energies that range from 10 GeV to 250\u00a0GeV. In September, 2014, new results with almost twice as much data were presented in a talk at CERN and published in Physical Review Letters. A new measurement of positron fraction up to 500\u00a0GeV was reported, showing that positron fraction peaks at a maximum of about 16% of total electron+positron events, around an energy of 275 \u00b1 32 GeV. At higher energies, up to 500\u00a0GeV, the ratio of positrons to electrons begins to fall again. The absolute flux of positrons also begins to fall before 500\u00a0GeV, but peaks at energies far higher than electron energies, which peak about 10 GeV. These results on interpretation have been suggested to be due to positron production in annihilation events of massive dark matter particles.\nCosmic ray antiprotons also have a much higher energy than their normal-matter counterparts (protons). They arrive at Earth with a characteristic energy maximum of 2\u00a0GeV, indicating their production in a fundamentally different process from cosmic ray protons, which on average have only one-sixth of the energy.\nThere is an ongoing search for larger antimatter nuclei, such as antihelium nuclei (that is, anti-alpha particles), in cosmic rays. The detection of natural antihelium could imply the existence of large antimatter structures such as an antistar. A prototype of the \"AMS-02\" designated \"AMS-01\", was flown into space aboard the Space Shuttle \"Discovery\" on STS-91 in June 1998. By not detecting any antihelium at all, the \"AMS-01\" established an upper limit of 1.1\u00d710\u22126 for the antihelium to helium flux ratio. AMS-02 revealed in December 2016 that it had discovered a few signals consistent with antihelium nuclei amidst several billion helium nuclei. The result remains to be verified, and the team is currently trying to rule out contamination.\nArtificial production.\nPositrons.\nPositrons were reported in November 2008 to have been generated by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in larger numbers than by any previous synthetic process. A laser drove electrons through a gold target's nuclei, which caused the incoming electrons to emit energy quanta that decayed into both matter and antimatter. Positrons were detected at a higher rate and in greater density than ever previously detected in a laboratory. Previous experiments made smaller quantities of positrons using lasers and paper-thin targets; newer simulations showed that short bursts of ultra-intense lasers and millimeter-thick gold are a far more effective source.\nAntiprotons, antineutrons, and antinuclei.\nThe existence of the antiproton was experimentally confirmed in 1955 by University of California, Berkeley physicists Emilio Segr\u00e8 and Owen Chamberlain, for which they were awarded the 1959 Nobel Prize in Physics. An antiproton consists of two up antiquarks and one down antiquark (). The properties of the antiproton that have been measured all match the corresponding properties of the proton, with the exception of the antiproton having opposite electric charge and magnetic moment from the proton. Shortly afterwards, in 1956, the antineutron was discovered in proton\u2013proton collisions at the Bevatron (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory) by Bruce Cork and colleagues.\nIn addition to antibaryons, anti-nuclei consisting of multiple bound antiprotons and antineutrons have been created. These are typically produced at energies far too high to form antimatter atoms (with bound positrons in place of electrons). In 1965, a group of researchers led by Antonino Zichichi reported production of nuclei of antideuterium at the Proton Synchrotron at CERN. At roughly the same time, observations of antideuterium nuclei were reported by a group of American physicists at the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron at Brookhaven National Laboratory.\nAntihydrogen atoms.\nIn 1995, CERN announced that it had successfully brought into existence nine hot antihydrogen atoms by implementing the SLAC/Fermilab concept during the PS210 experiment. The experiment was performed using the Low Energy Antiproton Ring (LEAR), and was led by Walter Oelert and Mario Macri. Fermilab soon confirmed the CERN findings by producing approximately 100 antihydrogen atoms at their facilities. The antihydrogen atoms created during PS210 and subsequent experiments (at both CERN and Fermilab) were extremely energetic and were not well suited to study. To resolve this hurdle, and to gain a better understanding of antihydrogen, two collaborations were formed in the late 1990s, namely, ATHENA and ATRAP.\nIn 1999, CERN activated the Antiproton Decelerator, a device capable of decelerating antiprotons from to \u00a0\u2013 still too \"hot\" to produce study-effective antihydrogen, but a huge leap forward. In late 2002 the ATHENA project announced that they had created the world's first \"cold\" antihydrogen. The ATRAP project released similar results very shortly thereafter. The antiprotons used in these experiments were cooled by decelerating them with the Antiproton Decelerator, passing them through a thin sheet of foil, and finally capturing them in a Penning\u2013Malmberg trap. The overall cooling process is workable, but highly inefficient; approximately 25\u00a0million antiprotons leave the Antiproton Decelerator and roughly 25,000 make it to the Penning\u2013Malmberg trap, which is about or 0.1% of the original amount.\nThe antiprotons are still hot when initially trapped. To cool them further, they are mixed into an electron plasma. The electrons in this plasma cool via cyclotron radiation, and then sympathetically cool the antiprotons via Coulomb collisions. Eventually, the electrons are removed by the application of short-duration electric fields, leaving the antiprotons with energies less than . While the antiprotons are being cooled in the first trap, a small cloud of positrons is captured from radioactive sodium in a Surko-style positron accumulator. This cloud is then recaptured in a second trap near the antiprotons. Manipulations of the trap electrodes then tip the antiprotons into the positron plasma, where some combine with antiprotons to form antihydrogen. This neutral antihydrogen is unaffected by the electric and magnetic fields used to trap the charged positrons and antiprotons, and within a few microseconds the antihydrogen hits the trap walls, where it annihilates. Some hundreds of millions of antihydrogen atoms have been made in this fashion.\nIn 2005, ATHENA disbanded and some of the former members (along with others) formed the ALPHA Collaboration, which is also based at CERN. The ultimate goal of this endeavour is to test CPT symmetry through comparison of the atomic spectra of hydrogen and antihydrogen (see hydrogen spectral series).\nMost of the sought-after high-precision tests of the properties of antihydrogen could only be performed if the antihydrogen were trapped, that is, held in place for a relatively long time. While antihydrogen atoms are electrically neutral, the spins of their component particles produce a magnetic moment. These magnetic moments can interact with an inhomogeneous magnetic field; some of the antihydrogen atoms can be attracted to a magnetic minimum. Such a minimum can be created by a combination of mirror and multipole fields. Antihydrogen can be trapped in such a magnetic minimum (minimum-B) trap; in November 2010, the ALPHA collaboration announced that they had so trapped 38 antihydrogen atoms for about a sixth of a second. This was the first time that neutral antimatter had been trapped.\nOn 26 April 2011, ALPHA announced that they had trapped 309 antihydrogen atoms, some for as long as 1,000 seconds (about 17 minutes). This was longer than neutral antimatter had ever been trapped before. ALPHA has used these trapped atoms to initiate research into the spectral properties of the antihydrogen.\nIn 2016, a new antiproton decelerator and cooler called ELENA (Extra Low ENergy Antiproton decelerator) was built. It takes the antiprotons from the antiproton decelerator and cools them to 90\u00a0keV, which is \"cold\" enough to study. This machine works by using high energy and accelerating the particles within the chamber. More than one hundred antiprotons can be captured per second, a huge improvement, but it would still take several thousand years to make a nanogram of antimatter.\nThe biggest limiting factor in the large-scale production of antimatter is the availability of antiprotons. Recent data released by CERN states that, when fully operational, their facilities are capable of producing ten million antiprotons per minute. Assuming a 100% conversion of antiprotons to antihydrogen, it would take 100\u00a0billion years to produce 1\u00a0gram or 1 mole of antihydrogen (approximately atoms of anti-hydrogen). However, CERN only produces 1% of the anti-matter Fermilab does, and neither are designed to produce anti-matter. According to Gerald Jackson, using technology already in use today we are capable of producing and capturing 20 grams of anti-matter particles per year at a yearly cost of 670 million dollars per facility.\nAntihelium.\nAntihelium-3 nuclei (He) were first observed in the 1970s in proton\u2013nucleus collision experiments at the Institute for High Energy Physics by Y. Prockoshkin's group (Protvino near Moscow, USSR) and later created in nucleus\u2013nucleus collision experiments. Nucleus\u2013nucleus collisions produce antinuclei through the coalescence of antiprotons and antineutrons created in these reactions. In 2011, the STAR detector reported the observation of artificially created antihelium-4 nuclei (anti-alpha particles) (He) from such collisions.\nThe Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer on the International Space Station has, as of 2021, recorded eight events that seem to indicate the detection of antihelium-3.\nPreservation.\nAntimatter cannot be stored in a container made of ordinary matter because antimatter reacts with any matter it touches, annihilating itself and an equal amount of the container. Antimatter in the form of charged particles can be contained by a combination of electric and magnetic fields, in a device called a Penning trap. This device cannot, however, contain antimatter that consists of uncharged particles, for which atomic traps are used. In particular, such a trap may use the dipole moment (electric or magnetic) of the trapped particles. At high vacuum, the matter or antimatter particles can be trapped and cooled with slightly off-resonant laser radiation using a magneto-optical trap or magnetic trap. Small particles can also be suspended with optical tweezers, using a highly focused laser beam.\nIn 2011, CERN scientists were able to preserve antihydrogen for approximately 17 minutes. The record for storing antiparticles is currently held by the TRAP experiment at CERN: antiprotons were kept in a Penning trap for 405 days. A proposal was made in 2018 to develop containment technology advanced enough to contain a billion anti-protons in a portable device to be driven to another lab for further experimentation.\nCost.\nScientists claim that antimatter is the costliest material to make. In 2006, Gerald Smith estimated $250\u00a0million could produce 10 milligrams of positrons (equivalent to $25\u00a0billion per gram); in 1999, NASA gave a figure of $62.5\u00a0trillion per gram of antihydrogen. This is because production is difficult (only very few antiprotons are produced in reactions in particle accelerators) and because there is higher demand for other uses of particle accelerators. According to CERN, it has cost a few hundred million Swiss francs to produce about 1\u00a0billionth of a gram (the amount used so far for particle/antiparticle collisions). In comparison, to produce the first atomic weapon, the cost of the Manhattan Project was estimated at $23\u00a0billion with inflation during 2007.\nSeveral studies funded by the NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts are exploring whether it might be possible to use magnetic scoops to collect the antimatter that occurs naturally in the Van Allen belt of the Earth, and ultimately, the belts of gas giants, like Jupiter, hopefully at a lower cost per gram.\nUses.\nMedical.\nMatter\u2013antimatter reactions have practical applications in medical imaging, such as positron emission tomography (PET). In positive beta decay, a nuclide loses surplus positive charge by emitting a positron (in the same event, a proton becomes a neutron, and a neutrino is also emitted). Nuclides with surplus positive charge are easily made in a cyclotron and are widely generated for medical use. Antiprotons have also been shown within laboratory experiments to have the potential to treat certain cancers, in a similar method currently used for ion (proton) therapy.\nFuel.\nIsolated and stored antimatter could be used as a fuel for interplanetary or interstellar travel as part of an antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion or another antimatter rocket. Since the energy density of antimatter is higher than that of conventional fuels, an antimatter-fueled spacecraft would have a higher thrust-to-weight ratio than a conventional spacecraft.\nIf matter\u2013antimatter collisions resulted only in photon emission, the entire rest mass of the particles would be converted to kinetic energy. The energy per unit mass () is about 10 orders of magnitude greater than chemical energies, and about 3 orders of magnitude greater than the nuclear potential energy that can be liberated, today, using nuclear fission (about per fission reaction or ), and about 2 orders of magnitude greater than the best possible results expected from fusion (about for the proton\u2013proton chain). The reaction of of antimatter with of matter would produce (180 petajoules) of energy (by the mass\u2013energy equivalence formula, \"E\"=\"mc\"2), or the rough equivalent of 43 megatons of TNT \u2013 slightly less than the yield of the 27,000\u00a0kg Tsar Bomba, the largest thermonuclear weapon ever detonated.\nNot all of that energy can be utilized by any realistic propulsion technology because of the nature of the annihilation products. While electron\u2013positron reactions result in gamma ray photons, these are difficult to direct and use for thrust. In reactions between protons and antiprotons, their energy is converted largely into relativistic neutral and charged pions. The neutral pions decay almost immediately (with a lifetime of 85 attoseconds) into high-energy photons, but the charged pions decay more slowly (with a lifetime of 26 nanoseconds) and can be deflected magnetically to produce thrust.\nCharged pions ultimately decay into a combination of neutrinos (carrying about 22% of the energy of the charged pions) and unstable charged muons (carrying about 78% of the charged pion energy), with the muons then decaying into a combination of electrons, positrons and neutrinos (cf. muon decay; the neutrinos from this decay carry about 2/3 of the energy of the muons, meaning that from the original charged pions, the total fraction of their energy converted to neutrinos by one route or another would be about 0.22 + (2/3)\u22c50.78 = 0.74).\nWeapons.\nAntimatter has been considered as a trigger mechanism for nuclear weapons. A major obstacle is the difficulty of producing antimatter in large enough quantities, and there is no evidence that it will ever be feasible. Nonetheless, the U.S. Air Force funded studies of the physics of antimatter in the Cold War, and began considering its possible use in weapons, not just as a trigger, but as the explosive itself.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1321", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1321", "title": "Antonio Gaudi/Sagrada Familia", "text": ""}
{"id": "1322", "revid": "36064032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1322", "title": "Casa Batll\u00f3", "text": "Building by Antoni Gaud\u00ed in Barcelona, Spain\n (]) is a building in the center of Barcelona. It was designed by Antoni Gaud\u00ed, and is considered one of his masterpieces. A remodel of a previously built house, it was redesigned in 1904 by Gaud\u00ed and has been refurbished several times after that. Gaud\u00ed's assistants Dom\u00e8nec Sugra\u00f1es i Gras, Josep Canaleta and Joan Rubi\u00f3 also contributed to the renovation project.\nThe local name for the building is ' (House of Bones), as it has a visceral, skeletal organic quality. It is located on the in the Eixample district, and forms part of a row of houses known as the ' (or ', the \"Block of Discord\"), which consists of four buildings by noted ' architects of Barcelona.\nLike everything Gaud\u00ed designed, is only identifiable as in the broadest sense. The ground floor, in particular, has unusual tracery, irregular oval windows and flowing sculpted stone work. There are few straight lines, and much of the fa\u00e7ade is decorated with a colorful mosaic made of broken ceramic tiles (). The roof is arched and was likened to the back of a dragon or dinosaur. A common theory about the building is that the rounded feature to the left of centre, terminating at the top in a turret and cross, represents the lance of Saint George (patron saint of Catalonia, Gaud\u00ed's home), which has been plunged into the back of the dragon.\nIn 2005, became an UNESCO World Heritage Site among the other Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed, and is visited by people from around the world.\nHistory.\nInitial construction (1877).\nThe building that is now was built in 1877, commissioned by Llu\u00eds Sala S\u00e1nchez. It was a classical building without remarkable characteristics within the eclecticism traditional by the end of the 19th century. The building had a basement, a ground floor, four other floors and a garden in the back.\nBatll\u00f3 family.\nThe house was bought by Josep Batll\u00f3 in 1903. The design of the house made the home undesirable to buyers but the Batll\u00f3 family decided to buy the place due to its centralized location. It is located in the middle of , which in the early 20th century was known as a very prestigious and fashionable area. It was an area where the prestigious family could draw attention to themselves.\nIn 1906, Josep Batll\u00f3 still owned the home. The Batll\u00f3 family was very well known in Barcelona for its contribution to the textile industry in the city. Mr. Josep Batll\u00f3 i Casanovas was a textile industrialist who owned a few factories in the city. Mr. Batll\u00f3 married Am\u00e0lia God\u00f3 Belaunzar\u00e1n, from the family that founded the newspaper \"La Vanguardia\". Josep wanted an architect that would design a house that was like no other and stood out as being audacious and creative. Both Josep and his wife were open to anything and they decided not to limit Gaud\u00ed. Josep did not want his house to resemble any of the houses of the rest of the Batll\u00f3 family, such as Casa P\u00eda, built by the Josep Vilaseca. He chose the architect who had designed Park G\u00fcell because he wanted him to come up with a risky plan. The family lived on the principal floor of until the middle of the 1950s.\nRenovation (1904-1906).\nIn 1904, Josep Batll\u00f3 hired Gaud\u00ed to design his home; at first his plans were to tear down the building and construct a completely new house. Gaud\u00ed convinced Josep that a renovation was sufficient and was also able to submit the planning application the same year. The building was completed and refurbished in 1906. He completely changed the main apartment which became the residence for the Batll\u00f3 family. He expanded the central well in order to supply light to the whole building and also added new floors. In the same year the Barcelona City Council selected the house as a candidate for that year's best building award. The award was given to another architect that year despite Gaud\u00ed's design.\nRefurbishments.\nJosep Batll\u00f3 died in 1934 and the house was kept in order by the wife until her death in 1940. After the death of the two parents, the house was kept and managed by the children until 1954. In 1954, an insurance company named Seguros Iberia acquired Casa Batll\u00f3 and set up offices there. In 1970, the first refurbishment occurred mainly in several of the interior rooms of the house. In 1983, the exterior balconies were restored to their original colour and a year later the exterior fa\u00e7ade was illuminated in the ceremony of La Merc\u00e8.\nMultiple uses.\nIn 1993, the current owners of Casa Batll\u00f3 bought the home and continued refurbishments throughout the whole building. Two years later, in 1995, Casa Batll\u00f3 began to hire out its facilities for different events. More than 2,500 square meters of rooms within the building were rented out for many different functions. Due to the building's location and the beauty of the facilities being rented, the rooms of Casa Batll\u00f3 were in very high demand and hosted many important events for the city.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe local name for the building is \"Casa dels ossos\" (House of Bones), as it has a visceral, skeletal organic quality. The building looks very remarkable \u2014 like everything Gaud\u00ed designed, only identifiable as Modernisme or Art Nouveau in the broadest sense. The ground floor, in particular, is rather astonishing with tracery, irregular oval windows and flowing sculpted stone work.\nIt seems that the goal of the designer was to avoid straight lines completely. Much of the fa\u00e7ade is decorated with a mosaic made of broken ceramic tiles (trencad\u00eds) that starts in shades of golden orange moving into greenish blues. The roof is arched and was likened to the back of a dragon or dinosaur. A common theory about the building is that the rounded feature to the left of centre, terminating at the top in a turret and cross, represents the lance of Saint George (patron saint of Catalonia, Gaud\u00ed's home), which has been plunged into the back of the dragon.\nLoft.\nThe loft is considered to be one of the most unusual spaces. It was formerly a service area for the tenants of the different apartments in the building which contained laundry rooms and storage areas. It is known for its simplicity of shapes and its Mediterranean influence through the use of white on the walls. It contains a series of sixty catenary arches that creates a space which represents the ribcage of an animal. Some people believe that the \u201cribcage\u201d design of the arches is a ribcage for the dragon's spine that is represented in the roof.\nNoble floor and museum.\nThe noble floor is larger than seven-hundred square meters. It is the main floor of the building. The noble floor is accessed through a private entrance hall that utilizes skylights resembling tortoise shells and vaulted walls in curving shapes. On the noble floor, there is a spacious landing with direct views to the blue tiling of the building well. On the Passeig de Gracia side is Mr. Batll\u00f3's study, a dining room, and a secluded spot for courting couples, decorated with a mushroom-shaped fireplace. The elaborate and animal-like d\u00e9cor continues throughout the whole noble floor.\nIn 2002, the house opened its doors to the public, and people were allowed to visit the noble floor. The building was opened to the public as part of the celebration of the International Year of Gaud\u00ed. Casa Batll\u00f3 met with very much unanticipated success, and visitors became eager to see the rest of the house. Two years later, in celebration of the one hundredth anniversary of the beginning of work on Casa Batll\u00f3, the fifth floor was restored and the house extended its visit to the loft and the well. In 2005, Casa Batll\u00f3 became a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nRoof.\nThe roof terrace is one of the most popular features of the entire house due to its famous dragon back design. Gaud\u00ed represents an animal's spine by using tiles of different colors on one side. The roof is decorated with four chimney stacks, that are designed to prevent backdraughts.\nExterior fa\u00e7ade.\nThe fa\u00e7ade has three distinct sections which are harmoniously integrated. The lower ground floor with the main floor and two first-floor galleries are contained in a structure of Montju\u00efc sandstone with undulating lines. The central part, which reaches the last floor, is a multicolored section with protruding balconies. The top of the building is a crown, like a huge gable, which is at the same level as the roof and helps to conceal the room where there used to be water tanks. This room is currently empty. The top displays a trim with ceramic pieces that has attracted multiple interpretations.\nThe roof's arched profile recalls the spine of a dragon with ceramic tiles for scales, and a small triangular window towards the right of the structure simulates the eye. Legend has it that it was once possible to see the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia through this window, which was being built simultaneously. As of 2022, the partial view of the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia is available from this vantage point, with its spires visible over newer buildings. The tiles were given a metallic sheen to simulate the varying scales of the monster, with the color grading from green on the right side, where the head begins, to deep blue and violet in the center, to red and pink on the left side of the building.\nOne of the highlights of the fa\u00e7ade is a tower topped with a cross of four arms oriented to the cardinal directions. It is a bulbous, root-like structure that evokes plant life. There is a second bulb-shaped structure similarly reminiscent of a thalamus flower, which is represented by a cross with arms that are actually buds announcing the next flowering. The tower is decorated with monograms of Jesus (JHS), Maria (M with the ducal crown) and Joseph (JHP), made of ceramic pieces that stand out golden on the green background that covers the fa\u00e7ade. These symbols show the deep religiosity of Gaud\u00ed, who was inspired by the contemporaneous construction of his basilica to choose the theme of the holy family.\nThe bulb was broken when it was delivered, perhaps during transportation. Although the manufacturer committed to re-do the broken parts, Gaud\u00ed liked the aesthetic of the broken masonry and asked that the pieces be stuck to the main structure with lime mortar and held in with a brass ring.\nThe central part of the fa\u00e7ade evokes the surface of a lake with water lilies, reminiscent of Monet's \"Nymph\u00e9as\", with gentle ripples and reflections caused by the glass and ceramic mosaic. It is a great undulating surface covered with plaster fragments of colored glass discs combined with 330 rounds of polychrome pottery. The discs were designed by Gaud\u00ed and Jujol between tests during their stay in Majorca, while working on the restoration of the Cathedral of Palma.\nFinally, above the central part of the fa\u00e7ade is a smaller balcony, also iron, with a different exterior aesthetic, closer to a local type of lily. Two iron arms were installed here to support a pulley to raise and lower furniture.\nThe fa\u00e7ade of the main floor, made entirely in sandstone, and is supported by two columns. The design is complemented by joinery windows set with multicolored stained glass. In front of the large windows, as if they were pillars that support the complex stone structure, there are six fine columns that seem to simulate the bones of a limb, with an apparent central articulation; in fact, this is a floral decoration. The rounded shapes of the gaps and the lip-like edges carved into the stone surrounding them create a semblance of a fully open mouth, for which the Casa Batll\u00f3 has been nicknamed the \"house of yawns\". The structure repeats on the first floor and in the design of two windows at the ends forming galleries, but on the large central window there are two balconies as described above.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nBuildings of the Illa de la Disc\u00f2rdia, Barcelona"}
{"id": "1324", "revid": "45999398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1324", "title": "Park G\u00fcell", "text": "Public park system in Barcelona, Spain\nPark G\u00fcell ( ]; ) is a privatized park system composed of gardens and architectural elements located on Carmel Hill, in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. Carmel Hill belongs to the mountain range of Collserola \u2013 the Parc del Carmel is located on the northern face. Park G\u00fcell is located in La Salut, a neighborhood in the Gr\u00e0cia district of Barcelona. With urbanization in mind, Eusebi G\u00fcell assigned the design of the park to Antoni Gaud\u00ed, a renowned architect and the face of Catalan modernism.\nThe park was built from 1900 to 1914 and was officially opened as a public park in 1926. In 1984, UNESCO declared the park a World Heritage Site under \"Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed\".\nDescription.\nPark G\u00fcell is the reflection of Gaud\u00ed's artistic plenitude, which belongs to his naturalist phase (first decade of the 20th century). During this period, the architect perfected his personal style through inspiration from organic shapes. He put into practice a series of new structural solutions rooted in the analysis of geometry. To that, the Catalan artist adds creative liberty and an imaginative, ornamental creation. Starting from a sort of baroquism, his works acquire a structural richness of forms and volumes, free of the rational rigidity or any sort of classic premises. In the design of Park G\u00fcell, Gaud\u00ed unleashed all his architectonic genius and put to practice much of his innovative structural solutions that would become the symbol of his organic style, and that would culminate in the creation of the Basilica and Expiatory Church of the Holy Family (Catalan: Sagrada Fam\u00edlia).\nG\u00fcell and Gaud\u00ed conceived this park, situated within a natural park. They imagined an organized grouping of high-quality homes, decked out with all the latest technological advancements to ensure maximum comfort, finished off with an artistic touch. They also envisioned a community strongly influenced by symbolism, since, in the common elements of the park, they were trying to synthesize many of the political and religious ideals shared by both the patron and the architect: therefore there are noticeable concepts originating from political Catalanism \u2013 especially in the entrance stairway where the Catalan countries are represented \u2013 and from Catholicism \u2013 the Monumento al Calvario, originally designed to be a chapel. The mythological elements are so important: apparently G\u00fcell and Gaud\u00ed's conception of the park was also inspired by the Temple of Apollo of Delphi.\nOn the other hand, many experts have tried to link the park to various symbols because of the complex iconography that Gaud\u00ed applied to the urban project. Such references go from political vindication to religious exaltation, passing through mythology, history and philosophy. Specifically, many studies claim to see references to Freemasonry, despite the deep religious beliefs of both Gaud\u00ed and Count G\u00fcell. These references have not been proven in the historiography of the modern architect. The multiplicity of symbols found in the Park G\u00fcell is, as previously mentioned, associated with political and religious signs, with a touch of mystery according to the preferences of that time for enigmas and puzzles.\nOrigins as a housing development.\nThe park was originally part of a commercially unsuccessful housing site, the idea of Count Eusebi G\u00fcell, after whom the park was named. It was inspired by the English garden city movement; the original English name \"Park\" (in Catalan the name is \"Parc G\u00fcell\"; in Spanish, \"Parque G\u00fcell\"). The site was a rocky hill with little vegetation and few trees, called \"Muntanya Pelada\" (Bare Mountain). It already included a large country house called Larrard House or Muntaner de Dalt House and was next to a neighbourhood of upper-class houses called \"La Salut\" (The Health). The intention was to exploit the fresh air (well away from smoky factories) and beautiful views from the site, with sixty triangular lots being provided for luxury houses. Count Eusebi G\u00fcell added to the prestige of the development by moving in 1906 to live in Larrard House. Ultimately, only two houses were built, neither designed by Gaud\u00ed. One was intended to be a show house, but on being completed in 1904 was put up for sale, and as no buyers came forward, Gaud\u00ed, at G\u00fcell's suggestion, bought it with his savings and moved in with his family and his father in 1906. This house, where Gaud\u00ed lived from 1906 to 1926 (his death), was built by Francesc Berenguer in 1904. It contains original works by Gaud\u00ed and several of his collaborators. It has been the Gaud\u00ed House Museum (Casa Museu Gaud\u00ed) since 1963. In 1969, it was declared a historical artistic monument of national interest.\nMunicipal garden.\nIt has since been converted into a municipal garden. It can be reached by underground railway (although the stations are at a distance from the Park and at a much lower level below the hill), by city buses, or by commercial tourist buses. Since October 2013 there is an entrance fee to visit the Monumental Zone (main entrance, terrace, viaducts, and the parts containing mosaics), so the entrance to the Park is no longer free. Limited tickets are available that often sell out in advance. Gaud\u00ed's house, \"la Torre Rosa,\" \u2013 containing furniture that he designed \u2013 can be only visited for another entrance fee. There is a reduced rate for those wishing to see both Gaud\u00ed's house and the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia Church.\nPark G\u00fcell is designed and composed to bring the peace and calm that one would expect from a park. The buildings flanking the entrance, though very original and remarkable with fantastically shaped roofs with unusual pinnacles, fit in well with the use of the park as pleasure gardens and seem relatively inconspicuous in the landscape when one considers the flamboyance of other buildings designed by Gaud\u00ed. These two buildings make up the Porter's Lodge pavilion. One of these buildings contains a small room with a telephone booth. The other, while once being the porter's house, is now a permanent exhibition of the Barcelona City History Museum MUHBA focused on the building itself, the park and the city.\nThe focal point of the park is the main terrace, surrounded by a long bench in the form of a sea serpent. The curves of the serpent bench form a number of enclaves, creating a more social atmosphere. Gaud\u00ed incorporated many motifs of Catalan nationalism, and elements from religious mysticism and ancient poetry, into the Park. Much of the design of the benches was the work not of Gaud\u00ed but of his often overlooked collaborator Josep Maria Jujol.\nRoadways around the park to service the intended houses were designed by Gaud\u00ed as structures jutting out from the steep hillside or running on viaducts, with separate footpaths in arcades formed under these structures. This minimized the intrusion of the roads, and Gaud\u00ed designed them using local stone in a way that integrates them closely into the landscape. His structures echo natural forms, with columns like tree trunks supporting branching vaulting under the roadway, and the curves of vaulting and alignment of sloping columns designed in a similar way to his Church of Col\u00f2nia G\u00fcell so that the inverted catenary arch shapes form perfect compression structures.\nAt the park's high-point, there is a stone hill composed of steps leading up to a platform which holds three large crosses. The official name of this is \"El Tur\u00f3 de les Tres Creus,\" however many tourists choose to call it Calvary. Two of the crosses point north\u2013south and east\u2013west, the third, and tallest cross, points skyward. This lookout offers the most complete view of Barcelona and the bay. It is possible to view the main city in panorama, with the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia (another one of Antoni Guad\u00ed's famous creations), the Agbar Tower, and the Montju\u00efc area visible at a distance.\nThe park supports a wide variety of wildlife, notably several of the non-native species of parrot found in the Barcelona area. Other birds can be seen from the park, with records including short-toed eagle. The park also supports a population of hummingbird hawk moths.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1325", "revid": "1160443603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1325", "title": "Casa Mil\u00e0", "text": "Building in Barcelona, Spain\nCasa Mil\u00e0 (], ]), popularly known as \"La Pedrera\" (], ]; \"the stone quarry\") in reference to its unconventional rough-hewn appearance, is a \"Modernista\" building in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. It was the last private residence designed by architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed and was built between 1906 and 1912.\nThe building was commissioned in 1906 by Pere Mil\u00e0 and his wife Roser Segimon. At the time, it was controversial because of its undulating stone facade, twisting wrought iron balconies, and design by Josep Maria Jujol. Several structural innovations include a self-supporting stone fa\u00e7ade, and a free-plan floor, underground garage and the spectacular terrace on the roof.\nIn 1984, it was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. Since 2013 it has been the headquarters of the Fundaci\u00f3 Catalunya La Pedrera, which manages visits to the building, exhibitions and other cultural and educational activities at Casa Mil\u00e0.\nBuilding history.\nArchitect.\nAntoni Gaud\u00ed i Cornet was born on June 25, 1852 in Catalonia, Spain. As a child, Gaud\u00ed's health was poor, suffering from rheumatism. Because of this, he was afforded lengthy periods of time resting at his summer house in Riudoms. Here he spent a large portion of his time outdoors, allowing him to deeply study nature. This would become one of the major influences in his architecture to come.\nGaud\u00ed was a very practical man and a craftsman at his core. In his work he followed impulses and turned creative plans into reality. His openness to embrace new styles combined with a vivid imagination helped mold new styles of architecture and consequently helped push the limits of construction. Today he is regarded as a pioneer of the modern architecture style.\nIn 1870, Gaud\u00ed moved to Barcelona to study architecture. He was an inconsistent student who showed flashes of brilliance. It took him eight years to graduate due to a mix of health complications, military service as well as other activities.\nAfter completion of his education he became a prolific architect as well as designing gardens, sculptures and all other decorative arts. Gaud\u00ed's most famous works consisted of several buildings: Parque G\u00fcell; Palacio G\u00fcell; Casa Mila; Casa Vicens. He also is contributed for his work on the Crypt of La Sagrada Familia and the Nativity facade. Gaud\u00ed's work at the time was both admired and criticized for his bold, innovative solutions.\nGaud\u00ed was injured on June 7, 1926 when he was run over by a tram. He later died in the hospital due to his injuries on June 10, 1926 at the age of 73. A few years after his death, his fame became renowned by critics and the general public alike.\nBuilding owners.\nCasa Mil\u00e0 was built for Roser Segim\u00f3n and her husband Pere Mil\u00e0. Roser Segim\u00f3n was the wealthy widow of Josep Guardiola, an \"Indiano\" or \"Americano\", or former colonist returned from South America, who had made his fortune with a coffee plantation in Guatemala. Her second husband, Pere Mil\u00e0 was a developer known for his flamboyant lifestyle.\nConstruction process.\nIn 1905, Mil\u00e0 and Segim\u00f3n married and on June 9, Roser Segim\u00f3n bought a house with garden which occupied an area of 1,835 square meters, located on Paseo de Gracia, 92. In September, they commissioned Gaud\u00ed for building them a new house with the idea of living in the main floor and renting out the rest of the apartments. On February 2, 1906, the project was presented to the Barcelona City Council and the works began, demolishing the pre-existing building instead of reforming it, as in the case of the Casa Batll\u00f3.\nThe building was completed in December 1910 and the owner asked Gaud\u00ed to make a certificate to inhabit the main floor, which the City Council authorized in October 1911, and the couple moved in. On October 31, 1912, Gaud\u00ed issued the certificate stating that, in accordance with his plans and his direction, the work had been completed and the whole house was ready to be rented.\nCritics and controversies.\nThe building did not respect any rules of conventional style, for which Gaud\u00ed received much criticism. To begin with, the name \"La Pedrera\" is in fact a nickname assigned by the citizens who disapproved of its unusualness. The unique structure of the building and the relationship between the building's architect and Pere Mil\u00e0 became the object of ridicule for the people of Barcelona and many humorous publications of the time.\nCatholic symbols.\nGaud\u00ed, a Catholic and a devotee of the Virgin Mary, planned for the Casa Mil\u00e0 to be a spiritual symbol. Overt religious elements include an excerpt from the Rosary on the cornice and planned statues of Mary, specifically Our Lady of the Rosary, and two archangels, St. Michael and St. Gabriel.\nHowever, the Casa Mil\u00e0 was not built entirely to Gaud\u00ed's specifications. The local government ordered the demolition of elements that exceeded the height standard for the city, and fined the Mil\u00e0s for many infractions of building codes. After Semana Tr\u00e1gica, an outbreak of anticlericalism in the city, Mil\u00e0 prudently decided to forgo the religious statues. Gaud\u00ed contemplated abandoning the project but a priest persuaded him to continue.\nChange of ownership.\nIn 1940, Mil\u00e0 died. Segimon sold the property in 1946 for 18 million pesetas to Josep Ballv\u00e9 i Pellis\u00e9, known for his department stores on Ronda de Sant Antoni, in partnership with the family of P\u00edo Rubert Laporta. The Compa\u00f1\u00eda Inmobiliaria Provenza, SA (CIPSA) was founded to administer the building. Roser Segimon continued to live on the main floor until her death in 1964.\nThe new owners divided the first floor facing Carrer de Proven\u00e7a into five apartments instead of the original two. In 1953, they commissioned Francisco Juan Barba Corsini to convert 13 rubbish-filled attic laundry rooms to street-facing apartments, leaving a communal hallway on the side facing the courtyards. Some of these two or three room apartments had a loft and were designed and furnished in a typical early 1950s style using brick, ceramic and wood. Items of furniture, such as the Pedrera chair, were reminiscent of Eero Saarinen's work.\nThe insurance company Northern took over the main floor in 1966. By then, Casa Mil\u00e0 had housed a bingo hall, an academy and the offices of Cementos Molins and Inoxcrom among others. Maintenance costs were high and the owners had allowed the building to become dilapidated, causing stones to loosen in 1971. Josep Anton Comas made some emergency repairs, especially to the paintings in the courtyards, while respecting the original design.\nRestoration.\nGaud\u00ed's work was designated a historic and artistic monument on July 24, 1969. Casa Mil\u00e0 was in poor condition in the early 1980s. It had been painted a dreary brown and many of its interior color schemes had been abandoned or allowed to deteriorate, but it has been restored since and many of the original colors revived.\nIn 1984, the building became part of a World Heritage Site encompassing some of Gaud\u00ed's works. The Barcelonan city council tried to rent the main floor as an office for the 1992 Olympic bid. Finally, the day before Christmas 1986, Caixa Catalunya bought La Pedrera for 900 million pesetas. On February 19, 1987, urgently needed work began on the restoration and cleaning of the fa\u00e7ade. The work was done by the architects Joseph Emilio Hern\u00e1ndez-Cros and Rafael Vila. The renovated main floor opened in 1990 as part of the Cultural Olympiad of Barcelona. The floor became an exhibition room with an example of modernism in the Eixample.\nDesign.\nThe building is 1,323 m2 per floor on a plot of 1,620 m2. Gaud\u00ed made the first sketches in his workshop in the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia. He designed the house as a constant curve, both outside and inside, incorporating ruled geometry and naturalistic elements.\nCasa Mil\u00e0 consists of two buildings, which are structured around two courtyards that provide light to the nine stories: basement, ground floor, mezzanine, main (or noble) floor, four upper floors, and an attic. The basement was intended to be the garage, the main floor the residence of the Mil\u00e0s (a flat of all 1,323 m2), and the rest distributed over 20 apartments. The resulting layout is shaped like an asymmetrical \"8\" because of the different shapes and sizes of the courtyards. The attic housed the laundry and drying areas, forming an insulating space for the building and simultaneously determining the levels of the roof.\nOne of the most notable elements of the building is the roof, crowned with skylights, staircase exits, fans, and chimneys. All of these elements, constructed out of brick covered with lime, broken marble, or glass have a specific architectural function but are also real sculptures integrated into the building.\nThe apartments feature plastered ceilings with dynamic reliefs, handcrafted wooden doors, windows, and furniture, as well as hydraulic tiles and various ornamental elements.\nThe stairways were intended as service entries, with the main access to the apartments by elevator except for the noble floor, where Gaud\u00ed added a prominent interior staircase. Gaud\u00ed wanted the people who lived in the flats to all know each other. Therefore, there were only elevators on every other floor, so people on different floors would meet one another.\nStructure.\nCasa Mil\u00e0 is characterized by its self-supporting stone facade, meaning that it is free of load-bearing walls. The facade connects to the internal structure of each floor by means of curved iron beams surrounding the perimeter of each floor. This construction system allows, on one hand, large openings in the facade which give light to the homes, and on the other, free structuring of the different levels, so that internal walls can be added and demolished without affecting the stability of the building. This allows the owners to change their minds at will and to modify, without problems, the interior layout of the homes.\nConstructive and decorative items.\nFacade.\nThe facade is composed of large blocks of limestone from the Garraf Massif on the first floor and from the Villefranche quarry for the higher levels. The blocks were cut to follow the plot of the projection of the model, then raised to their location and adjusted to align in a continuous curve to the pieces around them.\nThe windows of La Pedrera are an integral part of the overall facade design. Gaud\u00ed made sure that the windows were of varying sizes, designed to optimize the amount of natural light that could enter the building.\nViewed from the outside the building has three parts: the main body of the six-storey blocks with winding stone floors, two floors set a block back with a different curve, similar to waves, a smoother texture and whiter color, and with small holes that look like embrasures, and finally the body of the roof.\nGaud\u00ed's original facade had some of its lower-level ironwork removed. In 1928, the tailor Mosella opened the first store in La Pedrera, and he eliminated the bars. This did not concern anyone, because in the middle of twentieth century, wrought ironwork had little importance. The ironwork was lost until a few years later, when Americans donated one of them to the MoMa, where it is on display.\nWith restoration initiatives launched in 1987, the facade was rejoined to some pieces of stone that had fallen. In order to respect the fidelity of the original, material was obtained from the Villefranche quarry, even though by then it was no longer operating.\nHall and courtyards.\nThe building uses a completely original solution to solve the issue of a lobby being too closed and dark. Its open and airy courtyards provide a place of transit and are directly visible to those accessing the building. There are two patios on the side of the Passeig de Gracia and of the street Provence.\nPatios, structurally, are key as supporting loads of interior facades. The floor of the courtyard is supported by pillars of cast iron. In the courtyard, there are traditional elliptical beams and girders but Gaud\u00ed applied an ingenious solution of using two concentric cylindrical beams with stretched radial beams, like the spokes of a bicycle. They form a point outside of the beam to two points above and below, making the function of the central girder a keystone and working in tension and compression simultaneously. This supported structure is twelve feet in diameter and is considered \"the soul of the building\" with a clear resemblance to Gothic crypts. The centerpiece was built in a shipyard by Josep Maria Carandell who copied a steering wheel, interpreting Gaud\u00ed's intent as to represent the helm of the ship of life.\nAccess is protected by a massive iron gate with a design attributed to Jujol. It was originally used by both people and cars, as access to the garage is in the basement, now an auditorium.\nThe two halls are fully polychrome with oil paintings on the plaster surfaces, with eclectic references to mythology and flowers.\nDuring construction there was a problem including a basement as a garage for cars, the new invention that was thrilling the bourgeois at the time. The future neighbor Felix Anthony Meadows, owner of Industrial Linera, requested a change because his Rolls-Royce could not access it. Gaud\u00ed agreed to remove a pillar on the ramp that led into the garage so that Felix, who was establishing sales and factory in Parets del Vall\u00e8s, could go to both places with his car from La Pedrera.\nFor the floors of Casa Mil\u00e0, Gaud\u00ed used a model of floor forms of square timbers with two colors, and the hydraulic pavement hexagonal pieces of blue and sea motifs that had originally been designed for the Batllo house. The wax was designed in gray by John Bertrand under the supervision of Gaud\u00ed who \"touched up with their own fingers,\" in the words of the manufacturer Josep Bay.\nLoft.\nLike in Casa Batll\u00f3, Gaud\u00ed shows the application of the catenary arch as a support structure for the roof, a form which he had already used shortly after graduating in the wood frameworks of Matar\u00f3's cooperative known as \"L'Obrera Mataronense.\" In this case, Gaud\u00ed used the Catalan technique of timbrel, imported from Italy in the fourteenth century.\nThe attic, where the laundry rooms were located, was a clear room under a Catalan vault roof supported by 270 parabolic vaults of different heights and spaced by about 80\u00a0cm. The roof resembles both the ribs of a huge animal and a palm, giving the roof-deck a very unconventional shape similar to a landscape of hills and valleys. The shape and location of the courtyards makes the arches higher when the space is narrowed and lower when the space expands.\nThe builder Bay\u00f3 explained its construction: \"First the face of a wide wall was filled with mortar and plastered. Then Canaleta indicated the opening of each arch and Bay\u00f3 put a nail at each starting point of the arch at the top of the wall. From these nails was dangled a chain so that the lowest point coincided with the deflection of the arch. Then the profile displayed on the wall by the chain was drawn and on this profile the carpenter marked and placed the corresponding centering, and the timbrel vault was started with three rows of plane bricks. Gaud\u00ed wanted to add a longitudinal axis of bricks connecting all vaults at their keystones\".\nRoof and chimneys.\nThe work of Gaud\u00ed on the rooftop of La Pedrera brought his experience at Palau G\u00fcell together with solutions that were clearly more innovative\u00a0\u2013 this time creating shapes and volumes with more body, more prominence, and less polychromasia.\nOn the rooftop there are six skylights/staircase exits (four of which were covered with broken pottery and some that ended in a double cross typical of Gaud\u00ed), twenty-eight chimneys in several groupings, two half-hidden vents whose function is to renew the air in the building, and four domes that discharged to the facade. The staircases also house the water tanks; some of which are snail-shaped.\nThe stepped roof of La Pedrera, called \"the garden of warriors\" by the poet Pere Gimferrer because the chimneys appear to be protecting the skylights, has undergone a radical restoration, removing chimneys added in interventions after Gaud\u00ed, television antennas, and other elements that degraded the space. The restoration brought back the splendor to the chimneys and the skylights that were covered with fragments of marble and broken Valencia tiles. One of the chimneys was topped with glass pieces\u00a0\u2013 it was said that Gaud\u00ed did that the day after the inauguration of the building, taking advantage of the empty bottles from the party. It was restored with the bases of champagne bottles from the early twentieth century. The repair work has enabled the restoration of the original impact of the overhangs made of stone from Ulldecona with fragments of tiles. This whole set is more colorful than the facade, although here the creamy tones are dominant.\nFurniture.\nGaud\u00ed, as he had done in Casa Batll\u00f3, designed furniture specifically for the main floor. This was part of the concept artwork itself integral to modernism in which the architect assumed responsibility for global issues such as the structure and the facade, as well as every detail of the decor, designing furniture and accessories such as lamps, planters, floors or ceilings.\nThis was another point of friction with Segimon, who complained that there was no straight wall to place her Steinway piano. Gaud\u00ed's response was blunt: \"So play the violin.\" The result of these disagreements has been the loss of the decorative legacy of Gaud\u00ed, as most of the furniture was removed due to climate change and the changes she made to the main floor when Gaud\u00ed died. Some remain in private collections, including a curtain made of oak 4 m. long by 1.96 m. high in the Museum of Catalan Modernism; and a chair and desktop of Mil\u00e0.\nGaud\u00ed carved oak doors similar to what he had done for the Casa y Bardes, but these were only included on two floors as when Segimon discovered the price, she decided there would be no more at that quality.\nArchitecture.\n\"Casa Mil\u00e0\" is part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site \"Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed\". It was a predecessor of some buildings with a similar biomorphic appearance:\nFree exhibitions often are held on the first floor, which also provides some opportunity to see the interior design. There is a charge for entrance to the apartment on the fourth floor and the roof. The other floors are not open to visitors.\nConstructive similarities.\nGaud\u00ed's La Pedrera was inspired by a mountain, but there is no agreement as to which mountain was the reference model. Joan Berg\u00f3s thought it was the rocks of Fray Guerau in Prades mountains. Joan Matamala thought that the model could have been St. Miquel del Fai, while the sculptor Vicente Vilarubias believed it was inspired by the cliffs Torrent Pareis in Menorca. Other options include the mountains of U\u00e7hisar in Cappadocia, suggested by Juan Goytisolo, or Mola Gallifa, suggested by Louis Permanyer, based on the fact that Gaud\u00ed visited the area in 1885 to escape an outbreak of cholera in Barcelona.\nSome people say that the interior layout of La Pedrera comes from studies that Gaud\u00ed made of medieval fortresses. This image is reinforced by the seeming appearance of the rooftop chimneys as \"sentinels\" with great helmets. The structure of the iron door in the lobby does not follow any symmetry, straight or repetitive pattern. Rather, it evokes bubbles of soap that are formed between the hands or the structures of a plant cell.\nCriticism and controversy.\nThe building's unconventional style made it the subject of much criticism. It was given the nickname \"La Pedrera\", meaning \"the quarry\". Casa Mil\u00e0 appeared in many satirical magazines. Joan Junceda presented it as a traditional \"Easter cake\" by means of cartoons in \"Patufet\". Joaquim Garcia made a joke about the difficulty of setting the damask wrought iron balconies in his magazine. Homeowners in Passeig de Gracia became angry with Mil\u00e0 and ceased to greet him, arguing that the weird building by Gaud\u00ed would lower the price of land in the area.\nAdministrative problems.\nCasa Mil\u00e0 also caused some administrative problems. In December 1907 the City Hall stopped work on the building because of a pillar which occupied part of the sidewalk, not respecting the alignment of facades. Again on August 17, 1908, more problems occurred when the building surpassed the predicted height and borders of its construction site by . The Council called for a fine of 100,000 pesetas (approximately 25% of the cost of work) or for the demolition of the attic and roof. The dispute was resolved a year and a half later, December 28, 1909, when the Commission certified that it was a monumental building and thus not required to have a 'strict compliance' with the bylaws.\nDesign competitions.\nThe owner entered La Pedrera in the annual Barcelona Artistic Buildings Competition sponsored by the Barcelona City Council (\"Ayuntament\"). Other entries in the competition included two works by Sagnier (Calle Mallorca 264, and one on Corsica and Av. Diagonal), the Casa Gust\u00e0 by architect Jaume Gust\u00e0, and the Casa P\u00e9rez Samanillo, designed by Joan Josep Herv\u00e0s. Although the most dramatic and clear favorite was Casa Mil\u00e0, the jury opined that even though the facades were complete, \"there's still a lot left to do before it's fully completed, finalized and in a perfect state of appreciation.\" The winner in 1910 was Samanillo Perez, for his building which now houses the headquarters of the Circulo Ecuestre.\nDesign disagreements.\nGaud\u00ed's relations with Segimon deteriorated during the construction and decoration of the house. There were many disagreements between them, one example was the monumental bronze virgin del Rosario, which Gaud\u00ed wanted as the statue on the front of the building in homage to the name of the owner, that the artist Carles Mani i Roig was to sculpt. The statue was not made although the words \"Ave gratia M plena Dominus tecum\" were written at the top of the facade. Continuing disagreements led Gaud\u00ed to take Mil\u00e0 to court over his fees. The lawsuit was won by Gaud\u00ed in 1916, and he gave the 105,000 pesetas he won in the case to charity, stating that \"the principles mattered more than money.\" Mil\u00e0 was having to pay the mortgage.\nAfter Gaud\u00ed's death in 1926, Segimon got rid of most of the furniture that Gaud\u00ed had designed and covered over parts of Gaud\u00ed's designs with new decorations in the style of Louis XVI. La Pedrera was acquired in 1986 by Caixa Catalunya and when restoration was done four years later, some of the original decorations re-emerged.\nWhen the Civil War broke out in July 1936, the Mil\u00e0s were on vacation. Part of the building was collectivized by the Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia; the Mil\u00e0s fled the area with some artwork.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1327", "revid": "33145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1327", "title": "Antiparticle", "text": "Particle with opposite charges\nIn particle physics, every type of particle is associated with an antiparticle with the same mass but with opposite physical charges (such as electric charge). For example, the antiparticle of the electron is the positron (also known as an antielectron). While the electron has a negative electric charge, the positron has a positive electric charge, and is produced naturally in certain types of radioactive decay. The opposite is also true: the antiparticle of the positron is the electron.\nSome particles, such as the photon, are their own antiparticle. Otherwise, for each pair of antiparticle partners, one is designated as the normal particle (the one that occurs in matter usually interacted with in daily life). The other (usually given the prefix \"anti-\") is designated the \"antiparticle\".\nParticle\u2013antiparticle pairs can annihilate each other, producing photons; since the charges of the particle and antiparticle are opposite, total charge is conserved. For example, the positrons produced in natural radioactive decay quickly annihilate themselves with electrons, producing pairs of gamma rays, a process exploited in positron emission tomography.\nThe laws of nature are very nearly symmetrical with respect to particles and antiparticles. For example, an antiproton and a positron can form an antihydrogen atom, which is believed to have the same properties as a hydrogen atom. This leads to the question of why the formation of matter after the Big Bang resulted in a universe consisting almost entirely of matter, rather than being a half-and-half mixture of matter and antimatter. The discovery of charge parity violation helped to shed light on this problem by showing that this symmetry, originally thought to be perfect, was only approximate.\nBecause charge is conserved, it is not possible to create an antiparticle without either destroying another particle of the same charge (as is for instance the case when antiparticles are produced naturally via beta decay or the collision of cosmic rays with Earth's atmosphere), or by the simultaneous creation of both a particle \"and\" its antiparticle, which can occur in particle accelerators such as the Large Hadron Collider at CERN.\nAlthough particles and their antiparticles have opposite charges, electrically neutral particles need not be identical to their antiparticles. The neutron, for example, is made out of quarks, the antineutron from antiquarks, and they are distinguishable from one another because neutrons and antineutrons annihilate each other upon contact. However, other neutral particles are their own antiparticles, such as photons, Z0\u00a0bosons, \u00a0mesons, and hypothetical gravitons and some hypothetical WIMPs.\nHistory.\nExperiment.\nIn 1932, soon after the prediction of positrons by Paul Dirac, Carl D. Anderson found that cosmic-ray collisions produced these particles in a cloud chamber\u2014 a particle detector in which moving electrons (or positrons) leave behind trails as they move through the gas. The electric charge-to-mass ratio of a particle can be measured by observing the radius of curling of its cloud-chamber track in a magnetic field. Positrons, because of the direction that their paths curled, were at first mistaken for electrons travelling in the opposite direction. Positron paths in a cloud-chamber trace the same helical path as an electron but rotate in the opposite direction with respect to the magnetic field direction due to their having the same magnitude of charge-to-mass ratio but with opposite charge and, therefore, opposite signed charge-to-mass ratios.\nThe antiproton and antineutron were found by Emilio Segr\u00e8 and Owen Chamberlain in 1955 at the University of California, Berkeley. Since then, the antiparticles of many other subatomic particles have been created in particle accelerator experiments. In recent years, complete atoms of antimatter have been assembled out of antiprotons and positrons, collected in electromagnetic traps.\nDirac hole theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n... the development of quantum field theory made the interpretation of antiparticles as holes unnecessary, even though it lingers on in many textbooks.\nSteven Weinberg\nSolutions of the Dirac equation contain negative energy quantum states. As a result, an electron could always radiate energy and fall into a negative energy state. Even worse, it could keep radiating infinite amounts of energy because there were infinitely many negative energy states available. To prevent this unphysical situation from happening, Dirac proposed that a \"sea\" of negative-energy electrons fills the universe, already occupying all of the lower-energy states so that, due to the Pauli exclusion principle, no other electron could fall into them. Sometimes, however, one of these negative-energy particles could be lifted out of this Dirac sea to become a positive-energy particle. But, when lifted out, it would leave behind a \"hole\" in the sea that would act exactly like a positive-energy electron with a reversed charge. These holes were interpreted as \"negative-energy electrons\" by Paul Dirac and mistakenly identified with protons in his 1930 paper \"A Theory of Electrons and Protons\" However, these \"negative-energy electrons\" turned out to be positrons, and not protons.\nThis picture implied an infinite negative charge for the universe\u2014a problem of which Dirac was aware. Dirac tried to argue that we would perceive this as the normal state of zero charge. Another difficulty was the difference in masses of the electron and the proton. Dirac tried to argue that this was due to the electromagnetic interactions with the sea, until Hermann Weyl proved that hole theory was completely symmetric between negative and positive charges. Dirac also predicted a reaction \u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u00a0+\u00a0, where an electron and a proton annihilate to give two photons. Robert Oppenheimer and Igor Tamm, however, proved that this would cause ordinary matter to disappear too fast. A year later, in 1931, Dirac modified his theory and postulated the positron, a new particle of the same mass as the electron. The discovery of this particle the next year removed the last two objections to his theory.\nWithin Dirac's theory, the problem of infinite charge of the universe remains. Some bosons also have antiparticles, but since bosons do not obey the Pauli exclusion principle (only fermions do), hole theory does not work for them. A unified interpretation of antiparticles is now available in quantum field theory, which solves both these problems by describing antimatter as negative energy states of the same underlying matter field, i.e. particles moving backwards in time.\nParticle\u2013antiparticle annihilation.\nIf a particle and antiparticle are in the appropriate quantum states, then they can annihilate each other and produce other particles. Reactions such as \u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0\u2192\u00a0 (the two-photon annihilation of an electron-positron pair) are an example. The single-photon annihilation of an electron-positron pair, \u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0\u2192\u00a0, cannot occur in free space because it is impossible to conserve energy and momentum together in this process. However, in the Coulomb field of a nucleus the translational invariance is broken and single-photon annihilation may occur. The reverse reaction (in free space, without an atomic nucleus) is also impossible for this reason. In quantum field theory, this process is allowed only as an intermediate quantum state for times short enough that the violation of energy conservation can be accommodated by the uncertainty principle. This opens the way for virtual pair production or annihilation in which a one particle quantum state may \"fluctuate\" into a two particle state and back. These processes are important in the vacuum state and renormalization of a quantum field theory. It also opens the way for neutral particle mixing through processes such as the one pictured here, which is a complicated example of mass renormalization.\nProperties.\nQuantum states of a particle and an antiparticle are interchanged by the combined application of charge conjugation formula_1, parity formula_2 and time reversal formula_3.\nformula_1 and formula_2 are linear, unitary operators, formula_3 is antilinear and antiunitary, \nformula_7. \nIf formula_8 denotes the quantum state of a particle formula_9 with momentum formula_10 and spin formula_11 whose component in the z-direction is formula_12, then one has\nformula_13\nwhere formula_14 denotes the charge conjugate state, that is, the antiparticle. In particular a massive particle and its antiparticle transform under the same irreducible representation of the Poincar\u00e9 group which means the antiparticle has the same mass and the same spin.\nIf formula_15, formula_16 and formula_17 \ncan be defined separately on the particles and antiparticles, then\nformula_18\nformula_19\nformula_20\nwhere the proportionality sign indicates that there might be a phase on the right hand side.\nAs formula_21 anticommutes with the charges, formula_22, particle and antiparticle have opposite electric charges q and -q.\n\"This section draws upon the ideas, language and notation of canonical quantization of a quantum field theory.\"\nQuantum field theory.\nOne may try to quantize an electron field without mixing the annihilation and creation operators by writing\nformula_23\nwhere we use the symbol \"k\" to denote the quantum numbers \"p\" and \u03c3 of the previous section and the sign of the energy, \"E(k)\", and \"ak\" denotes the corresponding annihilation operators. Of course, since we are dealing with fermions, we have to have the operators satisfy canonical anti-commutation relations. However, if one now writes down the Hamiltonian\nformula_24\nthen one sees immediately that the expectation value of \"H\" need not be positive. This is because \"E(k)\" can have any sign whatsoever, and the combination of creation and annihilation operators has expectation value 1 or 0.\nSo one has to introduce the charge conjugate \"antiparticle\" field, with its own creation and annihilation operators satisfying the relations\nformula_25\nwhere \"k\" has the same \"p\", and opposite \u03c3 and sign of the energy. Then one can rewrite the field in the form\nformula_26\nwhere the first sum is over positive energy states and the second over those of negative energy. The energy becomes\nformula_27\nwhere \"E0\" is an infinite negative constant. The vacuum state is defined as the state with no particle or antiparticle, \"i.e.\", formula_28 and formula_29. Then the energy of the vacuum is exactly \"E0\". Since all energies are measured relative to the vacuum, H is positive definite. Analysis of the properties of \"ak\" and \"bk\" shows that one is the annihilation operator for particles and the other for antiparticles. This is the case of a fermion.\nThis approach is due to Vladimir Fock, Wendell Furry and Robert Oppenheimer. If one quantizes a real scalar field, then one finds that there is only one kind of annihilation operator; therefore, real scalar fields describe neutral bosons. Since complex scalar fields admit two different kinds of annihilation operators, which are related by conjugation, such fields describe charged bosons.\nFeynman\u2013Stueckelberg interpretation.\nBy considering the propagation of the negative energy modes of the electron field backward in time, Ernst Stueckelberg reached a pictorial understanding of the fact that the particle and antiparticle have equal mass m and spin J but opposite charges q. This allowed him to rewrite perturbation theory precisely in the form of diagrams. Richard Feynman later gave an independent systematic derivation of these diagrams from a particle formalism, and they are now called Feynman diagrams. Each line of a diagram represents a particle propagating either backward or forward in time. In Feynman diagrams, anti-particles are shown traveling backwards in time relative to normal matter, and vice versa. This technique is the most widespread method of computing amplitudes in quantum field theory today.\nSince this picture was first developed by Stueckelberg, and acquired its modern form in Feynman's work, it is called the Feynman\u2013Stueckelberg interpretation of antiparticles to honor both scientists.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1328", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1328", "title": "A.D.", "text": ""}
{"id": "1331", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1331", "title": "Arabian Prince", "text": "American rapper\nKim Renard Nazel (born June 17, 1965), better known by his stage names Arabian Prince or Professor X, is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, record producer, and DJ. He is best known as a founding member of N.W.A.\nEarly life.\nNazel was born in Compton, California to the son of Joseph \"Skippy\" Nazel Jr., a prominent African-American author and radio talk show host. His musical background came from his mother, a piano teacher and classical musician. His family tried its best to shelter him, sending him to a Catholic school and keeping him busy with football to keep him away from the gangs. The younger Nazel got his first experience with making music at the radio station his father hosted his talk show on; Nazel used the radio station's equipment to put together mixtapes that he would sell at school. Nazel went on to graduate from Jun\u00edpero Serra High School in nearby Gardena.\nMusic career.\nNazel took the stage name of DJ Prince and started selling mixtapes at school. While working at a luggage store at the Del Amo Mall, its owner, Sam Nassif, asked him to DJ a party at a community center. He kept performing there for several weekends and the success persuaded Nassif to invest even more in the place, renaming it \"The Cave\", where Nazel would continue to host for over three years and even after his N.W.A days. Nassif also funded DJ Prince's first record, \"Strange Life\".\nHe changed his stage name when he was 15 years old at the Skateland USA, the same skating venue credited for launching N.W.A a few years later, due to a fan's suggestion. He said about his name:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I called myself DJ Prince at first; back in the day, I always used to dress like Prince. That was the thing in the early '80s\u200a\u2014\u200aeither you dressed like Prince or you dressed like Michael Jackson. I used to wear the tight parachute pants, and I had the trim moustache, the whole thing. One day I was DJing at a skating rink. I was with Egyptian Lover, that was my boy, still is. This girl comes up to us and asks us our names. And he's like, \"I'm Egyptian Lover.\" And I'm like, \"I'm DJ Prince.\" She looks at me and goes, \"I always see you two together. You should call yourself Arabian Prince.\" And I guess that just stuck.\nArabian Prince started working with Bobby Jimmy &amp; the Critters in 1984. He also produced the hit single and album for J.J. Fad, \"Supersonic\".\nIn 1986, he was a founding member of N.W.A, but soon after fellow member Ice Cube came back from the Phoenix Institute of Technology in 1988, Arabian Prince left over royalty and contract disagreements. \"I started off as a solo artist\", he said, \"so I was aware of what a royalty statement was. I knew that when these many records were sold, there is a quarterly statement. When you look at it, you can see how much money was paid and then share it. This was not the case. We were also never paid for touring.\" Eazy-E, Ice Cube and MC Ren remained as the main performers, DJ Yella was the turntablist and Dr. Dre was the main producer.\nAfter leaving N.W.A, Arabian Prince began a solo career. His first album, \"Brother Arab\", was released in 1989 with the single \"She's Got A Big Posse\"; \"Where's My Bytches\" followed in 1993.\nIn the mid-2000s, he started releasing music again, with his Professor X project on the Dutch label Clone Records. \"I could not release the record under Arabian Prince\", he said, \"because I already had a single out, so I called myself Professor X on that record.\" In 2007, he performed as a DJ on the 2K Sports Holiday Bounce Tour with artists from the Stones Throw label. In 2008, Stones Throw released a compilation of his electro-rap material from the 1980s. One of his songs was included on the 2007 video game, \"College Hoops 2K8\".\nIn 2015, a biopic about N.W.A. titled \"Straight Outta Compton\" was released; however, Arabian Prince was not portrayed in the film, and his role was omitted completely. The following year, N.W.A. was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, but again, Arabian Prince was not included nor mentioned.\nIn 2018, Arabian Prince appeared on the \"AmeriKKKant\" album of industrial-metal band Ministry. He made a second appearance on Ministry's 2021 album \"Moral Hygiene\".\nOther ventures.\nAside from his music career, he worked in special effects, 3D animation and video games.\nComments on \"Straight Outta Compton\" film.\nAfter the release of the N.W.A film, \"Straight Outta Compton\", in 2015, Arabian Prince said to VladTV: \"A lot of the scenes in real life, I was there\u2014I'm just not there in the film, which I'm like, if you're gonna write me out of a movie, shoot some other scenes. Don't write scenes where I was there.\" Some of the pivotal scenes would be choosing the name for the band, the tour and the infamous Detroit concert. He also remembers himself as the main opposer to Jerry Heller about the royalties and the money, a role that in the film was instead given to Ice Cube.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1332", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1332", "title": "August 7", "text": "Day of the yearAugust 7 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1333", "revid": "1169382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1333", "title": "August 8", "text": "Day of the yearAugust 8 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1334", "revid": "19000765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1334", "title": "April 16", "text": "Day of the yearApril 16 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1335", "revid": "12022193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1335", "title": "Associative property", "text": "Property of a mathematical operation\nIn mathematics, the associative property is a property of some binary operations, which means that rearranging the parentheses in an expression will not change the result. In propositional logic, associativity is a valid rule of replacement for expressions in logical proofs.\nWithin an expression containing two or more occurrences in a row of the same associative operator, the order in which the operations are performed does not matter as long as the sequence of the operands is not changed. That is (after rewriting the expression with parentheses and in infix notation if necessary), rearranging the parentheses in such an expression will not change its value. Consider the following equations:\nformula_1\nEven though the parentheses were rearranged on each line, the values of the expressions were not altered. Since this holds true when performing addition and multiplication on any real numbers, it can be said that \"addition and multiplication of real numbers are associative operations\".\nAssociativity is not the same as commutativity, which addresses whether the order of two operands affects the result. For example, the order does not matter in the multiplication of real numbers, that is, a \u00d7 b = b \u00d7 a, so we say that the multiplication of real numbers is a commutative operation. However, operations such as function composition and matrix multiplication are associative, but (generally) not commutative.\nAssociative operations are abundant in mathematics; in fact, many algebraic structures (such as semigroups and categories) explicitly require their binary operations to be associative.\nHowever, many important and interesting operations are non-associative; some examples include subtraction, exponentiation, and the vector cross product. In contrast to the theoretical properties of real numbers, the addition of floating point numbers in computer science is not associative, and the choice of how to associate an expression can have a significant effect on rounding error.\nDefinition.\nFormally, a binary operation \u2217 on a set S is called associative if it satisfies the associative law:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;(x \u2217 y) \u2217 z = x \u2217 (y \u2217 z) for all x, y, z in S.\nHere, \u2217 is used to replace the symbol of the operation, which may be any symbol, and even the absence of symbol (juxtaposition) as for multiplication.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe associative law can also be expressed in functional notation thus: f(f(x, y), z) = f(x, f(y, z)).\nGeneralized associative law.\nIf a binary operation is associative, repeated application of the operation produces the same result regardless of how valid pairs of parentheses are inserted in the expression. This is called the generalized associative law. For instance, a product of four elements may be written, without changing the order of the factors, in five possible ways:\nIf the product operation is associative, the generalized associative law says that all these expressions will yield the same result. So unless the expression with omitted parentheses already has a different meaning (see below), the parentheses can be considered unnecessary and \"the\" product can be written unambiguously as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs the number of elements increases, the number of possible ways to insert parentheses grows quickly, but they remain unnecessary for disambiguation.\nAn example where this does not work is the logical biconditional \u2194. It is associative; thus, is equivalent to , but most commonly means , which is not equivalent.\nExamples.\nSome examples of associative operations include the following.\nPropositional logic.\nRule of replacement.\nIn standard truth-functional propositional logic, \"association\", or \"associativity\" are two valid rules of replacement. The rules allow one to move parentheses in logical expressions in logical proofs. The rules (using logical connectives notation) are:\nformula_2\nand\nformula_3\nwhere \"formula_4\" is a metalogical symbol representing \"can be replaced in a proof with\".\nTruth functional connectives.\n\"Associativity\" is a property of some logical connectives of truth-functional propositional logic. The following logical equivalences demonstrate that associativity is a property of particular connectives. The following (and their converses, since \u2194 is commutative) are truth-functional tautologies.\nformula_5\nformula_6\nformula_7\nJoint denial is an example of a truth functional connective that is \"not\" associative.\nNon-associative operation.\nA binary operation formula_8 on a set \"S\" that does not satisfy the associative law is called non-associative. Symbolically,\nformula_9\nFor such an operation the order of evaluation \"does\" matter. For example:\nformula_10\nformula_11\nformula_12\nformula_13\nAlso although addition is associative for finite sums, it is not associative inside infinite sums (series). For example,\nformula_14\nwhereas\nformula_15\nSome non-associative operations are fundamental in mathematics. They appear often as the multiplication in structures called non-associative algebras, which have also an addition and a scalar multiplication. Examples are the octonions and Lie algebras. In Lie algebras, the multiplication satisfies Jacobi identity instead of the associative law; this allows abstracting the algebraic nature of infinitesimal transformations.\nOther examples are quasigroup, quasifield, non-associative ring, and commutative non-associative magmas.\nNonassociativity of floating point calculation.\nIn mathematics, addition and multiplication of real numbers is associative. By contrast, in computer science, the addition and multiplication of floating point numbers is \"not\" associative, as rounding errors are introduced when dissimilar-sized values are joined together.\nTo illustrate this, consider a floating point representation with a 4-bit mantissa:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;(1.0002\u00d720 + 1.0002\u00d720) +\n1.0002\u00d724 = 1.0002\u00d721 + 1.0002\u00d724 = 1.0012\u00d724\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;1.0002\u00d720 + (1.0002\u00d720 +\n1.0002\u00d724) = 1.0002\u00d720 + 1.0002\u00d724 = 1.0002\u00d724\nEven though most computers compute with 24 or 53 bits of mantissa, this is an important source of rounding error, and approaches such as the Kahan summation algorithm are ways to minimise the errors. It can be especially problematic in parallel computing.\nNotation for non-associative operations.\nIn general, parentheses must be used to indicate the order of evaluation if a non-associative operation appears more than once in an expression (unless the notation specifies the order in another way, like formula_16). However, mathematicians agree on a particular order of evaluation for several common non-associative operations. This is simply a notational convention to avoid parentheses.\nA left-associative operation is a non-associative operation that is conventionally evaluated from left to right, i.e.,\nformula_17\nwhile a right-associative operation is conventionally evaluated from right to left:\nformula_18\nBoth left-associative and right-associative operations occur. Left-associative operations include the following:\nformula_19\nformula_20\nformula_21\nThis notation can be motivated by the currying isomorphism, which enables partial application.\nRight-associative operations include the following:\nformula_22Exponentiation is commonly used with brackets or right-associatively because a repeated left-associative exponentiation operation is of little use. Repeated powers would mostly be rewritten with multiplication:\nformula_23Formatted correctly, the superscript inherently behaves as a set of parentheses; e.g. in the expression formula_24 the addition is performed before the exponentiation despite there being no explicit parentheses formula_25 wrapped around it. Thus given an expression such as formula_26, the full exponent formula_27 of the base formula_28 is evaluated first. However, in some contexts, especially in handwriting, the difference between formula_29, formula_30 and formula_22 can be hard to see. In such a case, right-associativity is usually implied.\nformula_32\nformula_33Using right-associative notation for these operations can be motivated by the Curry\u2013Howard correspondence and by the currying isomorphism.\nNon-associative operations for which no conventional evaluation order is defined include the following.\nformula_34\nformula_35\nformula_36\nformula_37\nformula_38\nformula_39.(Compare material nonimplication in logic.)\nHistory.\nWilliam Rowan Hamilton seems to have coined the term \"associative property\" around 1844, a time when he was contemplating the non-associative algebra of the octonions he had learned about from John T. Graves.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1336", "revid": "36142788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1336", "title": "The Apache Software Foundation", "text": "Nonprofit open source software community\nThe Apache Software Foundation (ASF) is an American nonprofit corporation (classified as a 501(c)(3) organization in the United States) to support a number of open source software projects. The ASF was formed from a group of developers of the Apache HTTP Server, and incorporated on March 25, 1999. As of 2021, it includes approximately 1000 members.\nThe Apache Software Foundation is a decentralized open source community of developers. The software they produce is distributed under the terms of the Apache License, a permissive open-source license for free and open-source software (FOSS). The Apache projects are characterized by a collaborative, consensus-based development process and an open and pragmatic software license, which is to say that it allows developers who receive the software freely, to re-distribute it under nonfree terms. Each project is managed by a self-selected team of technical experts who are active contributors to the project. The ASF is a meritocracy, implying that membership of the foundation is granted only to volunteers who have actively contributed to Apache projects. The ASF is considered a second generation open-source organization, in that commercial support is provided without the risk of platform lock-in.\nAmong the ASF's objectives are: to provide legal protection to volunteers working on Apache projects; to prevent the \"Apache\" brand name from being used by other organizations without permission.\nThe ASF also holds several ApacheCon conferences each year, highlighting Apache projects and related technology.\nHistory.\nThe history of the Apache Software Foundation is linked to the Apache HTTP Server, development beginning in February 1993. A group of eight developers started working on enhancing the NCSA HTTPd daemon. They came to be known as the Apache Group. On March 25, 1999, the Apache Software Foundation was formed. The first official meeting of the Apache Software Foundation was held on April 13, 1999. The initial members of the Apache Software Foundation consisted of the Apache Group: Brian Behlendorf, Ken Coar, Miguel Gonzales, Mark Cox, Lars Eilebrecht, Ralf S. Engelschall, Roy T. Fielding, Dean Gaudet, Ben Hyde, Jim Jagielski, Alexei Kosut, Martin Kraemer, Ben Laurie, Doug MacEachern, Aram Mirzadeh, Sameer Parekh, Cliff Skolnick, Marc Slemko, William (Bill) Stoddard, Paul Sutton, Randy Terbush and Dirk-Willem van Gulik. After a series of additional meetings to elect board members and resolve other legal matters regarding incorporation, the effective incorporation date of the Apache Software Foundation was set to June 1, 1999.\nCo-founder Brian Behlendorf states how the name 'Apache' was chosen: \"I suggested the name Apache partly because the web technologies at the time that were launching were being called cyber this or spider that or something on those themes and I was like we need something a little more interesting, a little more romantic, not to be a cultural appropriator or anything like that, I had just seen a documentary about Geronimo and the last days of a Native American tribe called the Apaches, right, who succumbed to the invasion from the West, from the United States, and they were the last tribe to give up their territory and for me that almost romantically represented what I felt we were doing with this web-server project...\"\nProjects.\nApache divides its software development activities into separate semi-autonomous areas called \"top-level projects\" (formally known as a \"Project Management Committee\" in the bylaws), some of which have a number of sub-projects. Unlike some other organizations that host FOSS projects, before a project is hosted at Apache it has to be licensed to the ASF with a grant or contributor agreement. In this way, the ASF gains the necessary intellectual property rights for the development and distribution of all its projects.\nBoard of directors.\nThe Board of Directors of The Apache Software Foundation (ASF) is responsible for management and oversight of the business and affairs of the corporation in accordance with the Bylaws. This includes management of the corporate assets (funds, intellectual property, trademarks, and support equipment), appointment of a President and corporate officers managing the core operations of the ASF, and allocation of corporate resources for the benefit of Apache projects. Technical decision-making authority for every Apache project is assigned to their independent project management committee; the participants in each project provide direction, not the board.\nThe board is elected annually by the ASF membership.\nSince March 17, 2021, the board of directors has been:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1338", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1338", "title": "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990", "text": "1990 U.S. civil rights law prohibiting discrimination based on disabilities\nThe Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 or ADA (\u00a0\u00a7\u00a012101) is a civil rights law that prohibits discrimination based on disability. It affords similar protections against discrimination to Americans with disabilities as the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which made discrimination based on race, religion, sex, national origin, and other characteristics illegal, and later sexual orientation and gender identity. In addition, unlike the Civil Rights Act, the ADA also requires covered employers to provide reasonable accommodations to employees with disabilities, and imposes accessibility requirements on public accommodations.\nIn 1986, the National Council on Disability had recommended the enactment of an Americans with Disabilities Act and drafted the first version of the bill which was introduced in the House and Senate in 1988. A broad bipartisan coalition of legislators supported the ADA, while the bill was opposed by business interests (who argued the bill imposed costs on business) and conservative evangelicals (who opposed protection for individuals with HIV). The final version of the bill was signed into law on July 26, 1990, by President George H. W. Bush. It was later amended in 2008 and signed by President George W. Bush with changes effective as of January 1, 2009.\nDisabilities included.\nADA disabilities include both mental and physical medical conditions. A condition does not need to be severe or permanent to be a disability. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission regulations provide a list of conditions that should easily be concluded to be disabilities: amputation, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism, bipolar disorder, blindness, cancer, cerebral palsy, deafness, diabetes, epilepsy, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), intellectual disability (formerly termed mental retardation), major depressive disorder, mobility impairments (often requiring a wheelchair), multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and schizophrenia. Other mental or physical health conditions also may be disabilities, depending on what the individual's symptoms would be in the absence of \"mitigating measures\" (medication, therapy, assistive devices, or other means of restoring function), during an \"active episode\" of the condition (if the condition is episodic).\nCertain specific conditions that are widely considered anti-social, or tend to result in illegal activity, such as kleptomania, pedophilia, exhibitionism, voyeurism, etc. are excluded under the definition of \"disability\" in order to prevent abuse of the statute's purpose. Additionally, sexual orientation is no longer considered a disorder and is also excluded under the definition of \"disability\". However, in 2022, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit stated that the ADA covers individuals with gender dysphoria, which may aid transgender people in accessing legal protections they otherwise may be unable to.\n \"See also US labor law and \u00a0\u00a7\u00a7\u00a012111\u201312117.\"\nTitles.\nTitle I\u2014employment.\nThe ADA states that a \"covered entity\" shall not discriminate against \"a qualified individual with a disability\". This applies to job application procedures, hiring, advancement and discharge of employees, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment. \"Covered entities\" include employers with 15 or more employees, as well as employment agencies, labor organizations, and joint labor-management committees. There are strict limitations on when a covered entity can ask job applicants or employees disability-related questions or require them to undergo medical examination, and all medical information must be kept confidential.\nProhibited discrimination may include, among other things, firing or refusing to hire someone based on a real or perceived disability, segregation, and harassment based on a disability. Covered entities are also required to provide reasonable accommodations to job applicants and employees with disabilities. A reasonable accommodation is a change in the way things are typically done that the person needs because of a disability, and can include, among other things, special equipment that allows the person to perform the job, scheduling changes, and changes to the way work assignments are chosen or communicated. An employer is not required to provide an accommodation that would involve undue hardship (excessive difficulty or expense), and the individual who receives the accommodation must still perform the essential functions of the job and meet the normal performance requirements. An employee or applicant who currently engages in the illegal use of drugs is not considered qualified when a covered entity takes adverse action based on such use.\nThere are many ways to discriminate against people based on disabilities, including psychological ones. Anyone known to have a history of mental disorders can be considered disabled. Employers with more than 15 employees must take care to treat all employees fairly and with any accommodations needed. Even when an employee is doing a job exceptionally well, they are not necessarily no longer disabled; employers must continue to follow all policies for disabled people.\nPart of Title I was found unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court as it pertains to states in the case of \"Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett\" as violating the sovereign immunity rights of the several states as specified by the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court determined that state employees cannot sue their employer for violating ADA rules. State employees can, however, file complaints at the Department of Justice or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, who can sue on their behalf.\nTitle II\u2014public entities (and public transportation).\nTitle II prohibits disability discrimination by all public entities at the local level, e.g., school district, municipal, city, or county, and at state level. Public entities must comply with Title II regulations by the U.S. Department of Justice. These regulations cover access to all programs and services offered by the entity. Access includes physical access described in the ADA Standards for Accessible Design and programmatic access that might be obstructed by discriminatory policies or procedures of the entity.\nTitle II applies to public transportation provided by public entities through regulations by the U.S. Department of Transportation. It includes the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak), along with all other commuter authorities. This section requires the provision of paratransit services by public entities that provide fixed-route services. ADA also sets minimum requirements for space layout in order to facilitate wheelchair securement on public transport.\nTitle II also applies to all state and local public housing, housing assistance, and housing referrals. The Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity is charged with enforcing this provision.\nTitle III\u2014public accommodations (and commercial facilities).\nUnder Title III, no individual may be discriminated against on the basis of disability with regards to the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation by any person who owns, leases, or operates a place of public accommodation. Public accommodations include most places of lodging (such as inns and hotels), recreation, transportation, education, and dining, along with stores, care providers, and places of public displays.\nUnder Title III of the ADA, all new construction (construction, modification or alterations) after the effective date of the ADA (approximately July 1992) must be fully compliant with the Americans With Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) found in the Code of Federal Regulations at 28\u00a0C.F.R., Part 36, Appendix \"A\".\nTitle III also has applications to existing facilities. One of the definitions of \"discrimination\" under Title III of the ADA is a \"failure to remove\" architectural barriers in existing facilities. See \u00a0\u00a7\u00a012182(b)(2)(A)(iv). This means that even facilities that have not been modified or altered in any way after the ADA was passed still have obligations. The standard is whether \"removing barriers\" (typically defined as bringing a condition into compliance with the ADAAG) is \"readily achievable\", defined as \"...easily accomplished without much difficulty or expense\".\nThe statutory definition of \"readily achievable\" calls for a balancing test between the cost of the proposed \"fix\" and the wherewithal of the business and/or owners of the business. Thus, what might be \"readily achievable\" for a sophisticated and financially capable corporation might not be readily achievable for a small or local business.\nThere are exceptions to this title; many private clubs and religious organizations may not be bound by Title III. With regard to historic properties (those properties that are listed or that are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or properties designated as historic under state or local law), those facilities must still comply with the provisions of Title III of the ADA to the \"maximum extent feasible\" but if following the usual standards would \"threaten to destroy the historic significance of a feature of the building\" then alternative standards may be used.\nUnder 2010 revisions of Department of Justice regulations, newly constructed or altered swimming pools, wading pools, and spas must have an accessible means of entrance and exit to pools for disabled people. However, the requirement is conditioned on whether providing access through a fixed lift is \"readily achievable\". Other requirements exist, based on pool size, include providing a certain number of accessible means of entry and exit, which are outlined in Section 242 of the standards. However, businesses are free to consider the differences in the application of the rules depending on whether the pool is new or altered, or whether the swimming pool was in existence before the effective date of the new rule. Full compliance may not be required for existing facilities; Section 242 and 1009 of the 2010 Standards outline such exceptions.\nService animals.\nThe ADA provides explicit coverage for service animals. Guidelines have been developed not only to protect persons with disabilities but also to indemnify businesses from damages related to granting access to service animals on their premises. Businesses are allowed to ask if the animal is a service animal and ask what tasks it is trained to perform, but they are not allowed to ask the service animal to perform the task nor ask for a special ID of the animal. They cannot ask what the person's disabilities are. A person with a disability cannot be removed from the premises unless either of two things happen: the animal is out of control and its owner cannot get it under control (e.g. a dog barking uncontrollably in a restaurant), or the animal is a direct threat to people's health and safety. Allergies and fear of animals would not be considered a threat to people's health and safety, so it would not be a valid reason to deny access to people with service animals. Businesses that prepare or serve food must allow service animals and their owners on the premises even if state or local health laws otherwise prohibit animals on the premises. In this case, businesses that prepare or serve food are not required to provide care or food for service animals, nor do they have to provide a designated area for the service animal to relieve itself. Lastly, people that require service dogs cannot be charged an extra fee for their service dog or be treated unfairly, for example, being isolated from people at a restaurant. People with disabilities cannot be treated as \"less than\" other customers. However, if a business normally charges for damages caused by the person to property, the customer with a disability will be charged for their service animal's damages to the property.\nAuxiliary aids.\nThe ADA provides explicit coverage for auxiliary aids.\nAuxiliary aids and services are items, equipment or services that assist in effective communication between a person who has a hearing, vision or speech disability and a person who does not.\nADA says that a public accommodation shall take those steps that may be necessary to ensure that no individual with a disability is excluded, denied services, segregated or otherwise treated differently than other individuals because of the absence of auxiliary aids and services, unless the public accommodation can demonstrate that taking those steps would fundamentally alter the nature of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations being offered or would result in an undue burden, i.e., significant difficulty or expense. The term \"auxiliary aids and services\" includes:\nCaptions are considered one type of auxiliary aid. Since the passage of the ADA, the use of captioning has expanded. Entertainment, educational, informational, and training materials are captioned for deaf and hard-of-hearing audiences at the time they are produced and distributed. The Television Decoder Circuitry Act of 1990 requires that all televisions larger than 13 inches sold in the United States after July 1993 have a special built-in decoder that enables viewers to watch closed-captioned programming. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 directs the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to adopt rules requiring closed captioning of most television programming. The FCC's rules on closed captioning became effective January 1, 1998.\nTitle IV\u2014telecommunications.\nTitle IV of the ADA amended the landmark Communications Act of 1934 primarily by adding section \u00a0\u00a7\u00a0225. This section requires that all telecommunications companies in the U.S. take steps to ensure functionally equivalent services for consumers with disabilities, notably those who are deaf or hard of hearing and those with speech impairments. When Title IV took effect in the early 1990s, it led to the installation of public teletypewriter (TTY) machines and other TDD (telecommunications devices for the deaf). Title IV also led to the creation, in all 50 states and the District of Columbia, of what was then called dual-party relay services and now are known as Telecommunications Relay Services (TRS), such as STS relay. Today, many TRS-mediated calls are made over the Internet by consumers who use broadband connections. Some are Video Relay Service (VRS) calls, while others are text calls. In either variation, communication assistants translate between the signed or typed words of a consumer and the spoken words of others. In 2006, according to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), VRS calls averaged two million minutes a month.\nTitle V\u2014miscellaneous provisions.\nTitle V includes technical provisions. It discusses, for example, the fact that nothing in the ADA amends, overrides or cancels anything in Section 504. Additionally, Title V includes an anti-retaliation or coercion provision. The \"Technical Assistance Manual\" for the ADA explains this provision:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;III-3.6000 Retaliation or coercion. Individuals who exercise their rights under the ADA, or assist others in exercising their rights, are protected from retaliation. The prohibition against retaliation or coercion applies broadly to any individual or entity that seeks to prevent an individual from exercising his or her rights or to retaliate against him or her for having exercised those rights ... Any form of retaliation or coercion, including threats, intimidation, or interference, is prohibited if it is intended to interfere.\nHistory.\nThe ADA has roots in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.\nDrafting.\nIn 1986, the National Council on Disability (NCD), an independent federal agency, issued a report, Towards Independence, in which the Council examined incentives and disincentives in federal laws towards increasing the independence and full integration of people with disabilities into U.S. society. Among the disincentives to independence the Council identified was the existence of large remaining gaps in civil rights coverage for people with disabilities in the United States. A principal conclusion of the report was to recommend the adoption of comprehensive civil rights legislation, which became the ADA.\nThe idea of federal legislation enhancing and extending civil rights legislation to millions of Americans with disabilities gained bipartisan support in late 1988 and early 1989. In early 1989 both Congress and the newly inaugurated Bush White House worked separately, then jointly, to write legislation capable of expanding civil rights without imposing undue harm or costs on those already in compliance with existing rules and laws.\nLobbying.\nOver the years, key activists and advocates played an important role in lobbying members of the U.S. Congress to develop and pass the ADA, including Justin Whitlock Dart Jr., Patrisha Wright and others.\nMs. Wright is known as \"the General\" for her work in coordinating the campaign to enact the ADA. She is widely considered the main force behind the campaign lobbying for the ADA.\nSupport and opposition.\nSupport.\nSenator Bob Dole was a supporter and advocate for the bill.\nAbout the importance of making employment opportunities inclusive, Shirley Davis, director of global diversity and inclusion at the Society for Human Resource Management, said: \"People with disabilities represent a critical talent pool that is underserved and underutilized\".\nOpposition from religious groups.\nConservative evangelicals opposed the ADA because the legislation protected individuals with HIV, which they associated with homosexuality.\nThe debate over the Americans with Disabilities Act led some religious groups to take opposite positions. The Association of Christian Schools International opposed the ADA in its original form, primarily because the ADA labeled religious institutions \"public accommodations\" and thus would have required churches to make costly structural changes to ensure access for all. The cost argument advanced by ACSI and others prevailed in keeping religious institutions from being labeled as \"public accommodations\". Church groups such as the National Association of Evangelicals testified against the ADA's Title I employment provisions on grounds of religious liberty. The NAE believed the regulation of the internal employment of churches was \"... an improper intrusion [of] the federal government.\"\nOpposition from business interests.\nMany companies and corporations, and business groups, opposed the Americans with Disabilities Act, arguing that the legislation would impose costs on businesses. Testifying before Congress, Greyhound Bus Lines stated that the act had the potential to \"deprive millions of people of affordable intercity public transportation and thousands of rural communities of their only link to the outside world.\" The US Chamber of Commerce argued that the costs of the ADA would be \"enormous\" and have \"a disastrous impact on many small businesses struggling to survive.\" The National Federation of Independent Businesses, an organization that lobbies for small businesses, called the ADA \"a disaster for small business.\" Pro-business conservative commentators joined in opposition, writing that the Americans with Disabilities Act was \"an expensive headache to millions\" that would not necessarily improve the lives of people with disabilities.\n\"Capitol Crawl\".\nShortly before the act was passed, disability rights activists with physical disabilities coalesced in front of the Capitol Building, shed their crutches, wheelchairs, powerchairs and other assistive devices, and immediately proceeded to crawl and pull their bodies up all 100 of the Capitol's front steps, without warning. As the activists did so, many of them chanted \"ADA now\", and \"Vote, Now\". Some activists who remained at the bottom of the steps held signs and yelled words of encouragement at the \"Capitol Crawlers\". Jennifer Keelan, a second grader with cerebral palsy, was videotaped as she pulled herself up the steps, using mostly her hands and arms, saying \"I'll take all night if I have to.\" This direct action is reported to have \"inconvenienced\" several senators and to have pushed them to approve the act. While there are those who do not attribute much overall importance to this action, the \"Capitol Crawl\" of 1990 is seen by some present-day disability activists in the United States as a central act for encouraging the ADA into law.\nFinal passage.\nSenator Tom Harkin (D-IA) authored what became the final bill and was its chief sponsor in the Senate. Harkin delivered part of his introduction speech in sign language, saying it was so his deaf brother could understand.\nGeorge H. W. Bush, on signing the measure on July 26, 1990, said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know there may have been concerns that the ADA may be too vague or too costly, or may lead endlessly to litigation. But I want to reassure you right now that my administration and the United States Congress have carefully crafted this Act. We've all been determined to ensure that it gives flexibility, particularly in terms of the timetable of implementation; and we've been committed to containing the costs that may be incurred... Let the shameful wall of exclusion finally come tumbling down.\nADA Amendments Act, 2008.\nThe ADA defines a covered disability as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a history of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) was charged with interpreting the 1990 law with regard to discrimination in employment. The EEOC developed regulations limiting an individual's impairment to one that \"severely or significantly restricts\" a major life activity. The ADAAA directed the EEOC to amend its regulations and replace \"severely or significantly\" with \"substantially limits\", a more lenient standard.\nOn September 25, 2008, President George W. Bush signed the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAAA) into law. The amendment broadened the definition of \"disability\", thereby extending the ADA's protections to a greater number of people. The ADAAA also added to the ADA examples of \"major life activities\" including, but not limited to, \"caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working\" as well as the operation of several specified \"major bodily functions\". The act overturned a 1999 US Supreme Court case that held that an employee was not disabled if the impairment could be corrected by mitigating measures; it specifically provides that such impairment must be determined without considering such ameliorative measures. It also overturned the court restriction that an impairment that substantially limits one major life activity must also limit others to be considered a disability.\nIn 2008, the United States House Committee on Education and Labor stated that the amendment \"makes it absolutely clear that the ADA is intended to provide broad coverage to protect anyone who faces discrimination on the basis of disability.\" Thus the ADAAA led to broader coverage of impaired employees.\nWeb Content Accessibility Guidelines, 2019.\nIn October 2019, the Supreme Court declined to resolve a circuit split as to whether websites are covered by the ADA. The Court turned down an appeal from Domino's Pizza and let stand a U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals ruling which held that the Americans With Disabilities Act protects access not just to brick-and-mortar public accommodations, but also to the websites and apps of those businesses.\nImpact.\nThe ADA led to significant improvements in terms of access to public services, accessibility in the built environment, and societal understanding of disability.\nEmployment.\nBetween 1991 (after the enactment of the ADA) and 1995, the employment rate of men with disabilities dropped by 7.8% regardless of age, educational level, or type of disability, with the most affected being young, less-educated and intellectually disabled men. While no causal link between the ADA and that trend has been definitively identified, some researchers have characterized the ADA as ineffectual and argued that it caused this decline by raising the cost of doing business for employers, who quietly avoid hiring people with disabilities for fear of lawsuit. To these employers, hiring people with disabilities became too expensive as they had to spend extra on assistive technology.\nIn 2001, for men of all working ages and women under 40, Current Population Survey data showed a sharp drop in the employment of disabled workers, leading at least two economists to attribute the cause to the Act. By contrast, a study in 2003 found that while the Act may have led to short term reactions by employers, in the long term, there were either positive or neutral consequences for wages and employment. In 2005, the rate of employment among disabled people increased to 45% of the population of disabled people.\n\"Professional plaintiffs\".\nSince enforcement of the act began in July 1992, it has quickly become a major component of employment law. The ADA allows private plaintiffs to receive only injunctive relief (a court order requiring the public accommodation to remedy violations of the accessibility regulations) and attorneys' fees, and does not provide monetary rewards to private plaintiffs who sue non-compliant businesses. Unless a state law, such as the California Unruh Civil Rights Act, provides for monetary damages to private plaintiffs, persons with disabilities do not obtain direct financial benefits from suing businesses that violate the ADA.\nThe attorneys' fees provision of Title III does provide incentive for lawyers to specialize and engage in serial ADA litigation, but a disabled plaintiff does not obtain a financial reward from attorneys' fees unless they act as their own attorney, or as mentioned above, a disabled plaintiff resides in a state that provides for minimum compensation and court fees in lawsuits. Moreover, there may be a benefit to these private attorneys general who identify and compel the correction of illegal conditions: they may increase the number of public accommodations accessible to persons with disabilities. \"Civil rights law depends heavily on private enforcement. Moreover, the inclusion of penalties and damages is the driving force that facilitates voluntary compliance with the ADA.\" Courts have noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a result, most ADA suits are brought by a small number of private plaintiffs who view themselves as champions of the disabled. For the ADA to yield its promise of equal access for the disabled, it may indeed be necessary and desirable for committed individuals to bring serial litigation advancing the time when public accommodations will be compliant with the ADA.\nHowever, in states that have enacted laws that allow private individuals to win monetary awards from non-compliant businesses (as of 2008, these include California, Florida, Hawaii, and Illinois), \"professional plaintiffs\" are typically found. At least one of these plaintiffs in California has been barred by courts from filing lawsuits unless he receives prior court permission. Through the end of fiscal year 1998, 86% of the 106,988 ADA charges filed with and resolved by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, were either dropped or investigated and dismissed by EEOC but not without imposing opportunity costs and legal fees on employers.\nCase law.\nThere have been some notable cases regarding the ADA. For example, a major hotel room marketer (Hotels.com) with their business presence on the Internet was sued because their customers with disabilities could not reserve hotel rooms through their website without substantial extra efforts that persons without disabilities were not required to perform. Such lawsuits represent a major potential expansion of the ADA in that they (known as \"bricks vs. clicks\"), seek to expand the ADA's authority to cyberspace, where entities may not have actual physical facilities that are required to comply.\n\"Green v. State of California\".\n\"Green v. State of California, No. S137770 (Cal. Aug. 23, 2007)\" was a case in which the majority of the Supreme Court in California was faced with deciding whether the employee suing the state is required to prove they are able to perform \"essential\" job duties, regardless of whether or not there was \"reasonable accommodation,\" or if the employer must prove the person suing was unable to do so. The court ruled the burden was on the employee, not the employer, and reversed a disputed decision by the courts. Plaintiff attorney David Greenberg brought forth considerations of the concept that, even in the state of California, employers do not have to employ a worker who is unable to perform \"essential job functions\" with \"reasonable accommodation.\" Forcing employers to do so \"would defy logic and establish a poor public policy in employment matters.\"\n\"National Federation of the Blind v. Target Corporation\".\n\"National Federation of the Blind v. Target Corp.\" was a case where a major retailer, Target Corp., was sued because their web designers failed to design its website to enable persons with low or no vision to use it.\n\"Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett\".\n\"Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett\" was a United States Supreme Court case about Congress's enforcement powers under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. It decided that Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act was unconstitutional insofar as it allowed private citizens to sue states for money damages.\n\"Barden v. The City of Sacramento\".\n\"Barden v. The City of Sacramento\", filed in March 1999, claimed that the City of Sacramento failed to comply with the ADA when, while making public street improvements, it did not bring its sidewalks into compliance with the ADA. Certain issues were resolved in Federal Court. One issue, whether sidewalks were covered by the ADA, was appealed to the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, which ruled that sidewalks were a \"program\" under ADA and must be made accessible to persons with disabilities. The ruling was later appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which refused to hear the case, letting stand the ruling of the 9th Circuit Court.\n\"Bates v. United Parcel Service, Inc\".\n\"Bates v. United Parcel Service, Inc (UPS;\" begun in 1999) was the first equal opportunity employment class action brought on behalf of Deaf and Hard of Hearing (d/Deaf/HoH) workers throughout the country concerning workplace discrimination. It established legal precedence for d/Deaf/HoH Employees and Customers to be fully covered under the ADA. Key findings included\nThe outcome was that UPS agreed to pay a $5.8 million award and agreed to a comprehensive accommodations program that was implemented in their facilities throughout the country.\n\"Spector v. Norwegian Cruise Line Ltd.\".\n\"Spector v. Norwegian Cruise Line Ltd.\" was a case that was decided by the United States Supreme Court in 2005. The defendant argued that as a vessel flying the flag of a foreign nation it was exempt from the requirements of the ADA. This argument was accepted by a federal court in Florida and, subsequently, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals. However, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the ruling of the lower courts on the basis that Norwegian Cruise Lines was a business headquartered in the United States whose clients were predominantly Americans and, more importantly, operated out of port facilities throughout the United States.\n\"Olmstead v. L.C.\".\n\"Olmstead v. L.C.\" was a case before the United States Supreme Court in 1999. The two plaintiffs, Lois Curtis and E.W., were institutionalized in Georgia for diagnosed \"mental retardation\" and schizophrenia. Clinical assessments by the state determined that the plaintiffs could be appropriately treated in a community setting rather than the state institution. The plaintiffs sued the state of Georgia and the institution for being inappropriately treated and housed in the institutional setting rather than being treated in one of the state's community-based treatment facilities.\nThe Supreme Court decided under Title II of the ADA that mental illness is a form of disability and therefore covered under the ADA, and that unjustified institutional isolation of a person with a disability is a form of discrimination because it \"...perpetuates unwarranted assumptions that persons so isolated are incapable or unworthy of participating in community life.\" The court added, \"Confinement in an institution severely diminishes the everyday life activities of individuals, including family relations, social contacts, work options, economic independence, educational advancement, and cultural enrichment.\"\nTherefore, under Title II no person with a disability can be unjustly excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of services, programs or activities of any public entity.\n\"Michigan Paralyzed Veterans of America v. The University of Michigan\".\n\"Michigan Paralyzed Veterans of America v. The University of Michigan\" was a case filed before The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Southern Division. It was filed on behalf of the Michigan Paralyzed Veterans of America against University of Michigan \u2013 Michigan Stadium claiming that Michigan Stadium violated the Americans with Disabilities Act in its $226-million renovation by failing to add enough seats for disabled fans or accommodate the needs for disabled restrooms, concessions and parking. Additionally, the distribution of the accessible seating was at issue, with nearly all the seats being provided in the end-zone areas. The U.S. Department of Justice assisted in the suit filed by attorney Richard Bernstein of The Law Offices of Sam Bernstein in Farmington Hills, Michigan, which was settled in March 2008. The settlement required the stadium to add 329 wheelchair seats throughout the stadium by 2010, and an additional 135 accessible seats in clubhouses to go along with the existing 88 wheelchair seats. This case was significant because it set a precedent for the uniform distribution of accessible seating and gave the DOJ the opportunity to clarify previously unclear rules. The agreement now is a blueprint for all stadiums and other public facilities regarding accessibility.\n\"Paralyzed Veterans of America v. Ellerbe Becket Architects and Engineers\".\nOne of the first major ADA lawsuits, \"Paralyzed Veterans of America v. Ellerbe Becket Architects and Engineers\" (PVA 1996) was focused on the wheelchair accessibility of a stadium project that was still in the design phase, MCI Center (now known as Capital One Arena) in Washington, D.C. Previous to this case, which was filed only five years after the ADA was passed, the DOJ was unable or unwilling to provide clarification on the distribution requirements for accessible wheelchair locations in large assembly spaces. While Section 4.33.3 of ADAAG makes reference to lines of sight, no specific reference is made to seeing over standing patrons. The MCI Center, designed by Ellerbe Becket Architects &amp; Engineers, was designed with too few wheelchair and companion seats, and the ones that were included did not provide sight lines that would enable the wheelchair user to view the playing area while the spectators in front of them were standing. This case and another related case established precedent on seat distribution and sight lines issues for ADA enforcement that continues to present day.\n\"Toyota Motor Manufacturing, Kentucky, Inc. v. Williams\".\n\"Toyota Motor Manufacturing, Kentucky, Inc. v. Williams\", was a case in which the Supreme Court interpreted the meaning of the phrase \"substantially impairs\" as used in the Americans with Disabilities Act. It reversed a Sixth Court of Appeals decision to grant a partial summary judgment in favor of the respondent, Ella Williams, that qualified her inability to perform manual job-related tasks as a disability. The Court held that the \"major life activity\" definition in evaluating the performance of manual tasks focuses the inquiry on whether Williams was unable to perform a range of tasks central to most people in carrying out the activities of daily living. The issue is not whether Williams was unable to perform her specific job tasks. Therefore, the determination of whether an impairment rises to the level of a disability is not limited to activities in the workplace solely, but rather to manual tasks in life in general. When the Supreme Court applied this standard, it found that the Court of Appeals had incorrectly determined the presence of a disability because it relied solely on her inability to perform specific manual work tasks, which was insufficient in proving the presence of a disability. The Court of Appeals should have taken into account the evidence presented that Williams retained the ability to do personal tasks and household chores, such activities being the nature of tasks most people do in their daily lives, and placed too much emphasis on her job disability. Since the evidence showed that Williams was performing normal daily tasks, it ruled that the Court of Appeals erred when it found that Williams was disabled. This ruling has since been invalidated by the ADAAA. In fact, Congress explicitly cited \"Toyota v. Williams\" in the text of the ADAAA itself as one of its driving influences for passing the ADAAA.\n\"US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett\".\n\"US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett\" was decided by the US Supreme Court in 2002. This case held that even requests for accommodation that might seem reasonable on their face, e.g., a transfer to a different position, can be rendered unreasonable because it would require a violation of the company's seniority system. While the court held that, in general, a violation of a seniority system renders an otherwise reasonable accommodation unreasonable, a plaintiff can present evidence that, despite the seniority system, the accommodation is reasonable in the specific case at hand, e.g., the plaintiff could offer evidence that the seniority system is so often disregarded that another exception would not make a difference.\nImportantly, the court held that the defendant need not provide proof that this particular application of the seniority system should prevail, and that, once the defendant showed that the accommodation violated the seniority system, it fell to Barnett to show it was nevertheless reasonable.\nIn this case, Barnett was a US Airways employee who injured his back, rendering him physically unable to perform his cargo-handling job. Invoking seniority, he transferred to a less-demanding mailroom job, but this position later became open to seniority-based bidding and was bid on by more senior employees. Barnett requested the accommodation of being allowed to stay on in the less-demanding mailroom job. US Airways denied his request, and he lost his job.\nThe Supreme Court decision invalidated both the approach of the district court, which found that the mere presence and importance of the seniority system was enough to warrant a summary judgment in favor of US Airways, as well as the circuit court's approach that interpreted 'reasonable accommodation' as 'effective accommodation.'\n\"Access Now v. Southwest Airlines\".\n\"Access Now, Inc. v. Southwest Airlines Co.\" was a 2002 case where the District Court decided that the website of Southwest Airlines was not in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, because the ADA is concerned with things with a physical existence and thus cannot be applied to cyberspace. Judge Patricia A. Seitz found that the \"virtual ticket counter\" of the website was a virtual construct, and hence not a \"public place of accommodation.\" As such, \"To expand the ADA to cover 'virtual' spaces would be to create new rights without well-defined standards.\"\n\"Ouellette v. Viacom International Inc.\".\n\"Ouellette v. Viacom International Inc.\" (2011) held that a mere online presence does not subject a website to the ADA guidelines. Thus Myspace and YouTube were not liable for a dyslexic man's inability to navigate the site regardless of how impressive the \"online theater\" is.\n\"Authors Guild v. HathiTrust\".\n\"Authors Guild v. HathiTrust\" was a case in which the District Court decided that the HathiTrust digital library was a transformative, fair use of copyrighted works, making a large number of written text available to those with print disability.\n\"Zamora-Quezada v. HealthTexas Medical Group\".\n\"Zamora-Quezada v. HealthTexas Medical Group\" (begun in 1998) was the first time this act was used against HMOs when a novel lawsuit was filed by Texas attorney Robert Provan against five HMOs for their practice of revoking the contracts of doctors treating disabled patients. In 1999, these HMOs sought to dismiss Provan's lawsuit, but a federal court ruled against them, and the case was settled out of court. Many decisions relating to Provan's unique lawsuit against these HMOs have been cited in other court cases since.\n\"Campbell v. General Dynamics Government Systems Corp.\".\n\"Campbell v. General Dynamics Government Systems Corp.\" (2005) concerned the enforceability of a mandatory arbitration agreement, contained in a dispute resolution policy linked to an e-mailed company-wide announcement, insofar as it applies to employment discrimination claims brought under the Americans with Disabilities Act.\n\"Tennessee v. Lane\".\n\"Tennessee v. Lane\", 541 U.S. 509 (2004), was a case in the Supreme Court of the United States involving Congress's enforcement powers under section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. George Lane was unable to walk after a 1997 car accident in which he was accused of driving on the wrong side of the road. A woman was killed in the crash, and Lane faced misdemeanor charges of reckless driving. The suit was brought about because he was denied access to appear in criminal court because the courthouse had no elevator, even though the court was willing to carry him up the stairs and then willing to move the hearing to the first floor. He refused, citing he wanted to be treated as any other citizen, and was subsequently charged with failure to appear, after appearing at a previous hearing where he dragged himself up the stairs. The court ruled that Congress did have enough evidence that disabled people were being denied those fundamental rights that are protected by the Due Process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and had the enforcement powers under section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. It further ruled that \"reasonable accommodations\" mandated by the ADA were not unduly burdensome and disproportionate to the harm.\nGender dysphoria.\nIn 2022, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit stated that the ADA covers individuals with gender dysphoria, which may aid transgender people in accessing legal protections they otherwise may be unable to.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1339", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1339", "title": "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990/Findings and Purposes", "text": ""}
{"id": "1340", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1340", "title": "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990/Definitions", "text": ""}
{"id": "1341", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1341", "title": "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990/Title III", "text": ""}
{"id": "1342", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1342", "title": "A.D", "text": ""}
{"id": "1344", "revid": "1159400965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1344", "title": "Apple I", "text": "First computer model built by Apple\nThe Apple Computer 1, originally released as the Apple Computer and known later as the Apple I or Apple-1, is an 8-bit desktop computer released by the Apple Computer Company (now Apple Inc.) in 1976. It was designed by Steve Wozniak. The idea of selling the computer came from Wozniak's friend and Apple co-founder Steve Jobs. The Apple I was Apple's first product, and to finance its creation, Wozniak sold his HP-65 calculator for $500 and Jobs sold a second hand VW Microbus, for a few hundred dollars (Wozniak later said that Jobs planned instead to use his bicycle to get around). Wozniak demonstrated the first prototype in July 1976 at the Homebrew Computer Club in Palo Alto, California.\nProduction was discontinued on September 30, 1977, after the June 10, 1977 introduction of its successor, the Apple II, which \"Byte\" magazine referred to as part of the \"1977 Trinity\" of personal computing (along with the PET 2001 from Commodore Business Machines and the TRS-80 Model I from Tandy Corporation).\nHistory.\nOn March 5, 1975, Steve Wozniak attended the first meeting of the Homebrew Computer Club in Gordon French's garage. He was so inspired that he immediately set to work on what would eventually become the Apple I computer. After building it for himself and showing it at the club, he and Steve Jobs gave out schematics (technical designs) for the computer to interested club members and even helped some of them build and test out copies. Then, Steve Jobs suggested that they design and sell a single etched and silkscreened circuit board\u2014just the bare board, with no electronic parts\u2014that people could use to build the computers. Wozniak calculated that having the board design laid out would cost $ and manufacturing would cost another $ per board; he hoped to recoup his costs if 50 people bought the boards for $ each. To fund this small venture\u2014their first company\u2014Jobs sold his van and Wozniak sold his HP-65 calculator. Very soon after, Steve Jobs arranged to sell \"something like 50\" completely-built computers to the Byte Shop (a computer store in Mountain View, California) at $ each. To fulfill the $ order, they obtained $ in parts at 30 days net and delivered the finished product in 10 days.\nThe Apple I went on sale in July 1976 at a price of US$, because Wozniak \"liked repeating digits\" and because of a one-third markup on the $ wholesale price. Jobs had managed to get the inventory into the nation's first four storefront microcomputer retailers: Byte Shop (Palo Alto, California), itty bitty machine company (Evanston, Illinois), Data Domain (Bloomington, Indiana), and Computer Mart (New York City).\nThe first unit produced was used in a high school math class, and donated to Liza Loop's public-access computer center. About 200 units were produced, and all but 25 were sold within nine or ten months.\nIn April 1977, the price was dropped to $. It continued to be sold through August 1977, despite the introduction of the Apple II in April 1977, which began shipping in June of that year. In October 1977, the Apple I was officially discontinued and removed from Apple's price list. As Wozniak was the only person who could answer most customer support questions about the computer, the company offered Apple I owners discounts and trade-ins for Apple IIs to persuade them to return their computers. These recovered boards were then destroyed by Apple, contributing to their later rarity.\nOverview.\nWozniak's design originally used a Motorola 6800 processor, which cost $175, but when MOS Technology introduced the much cheaper 6502 microprocessor ($25) he switched. The Apple I CPU ran at , a fraction (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20447) of the NTSC color carrier which simplified video circuitry. Memory used the new 4-Kbit DRAM chips, and was , expandable to on board, or externally. The board was designed to use the next generation of 16-Kbit memory chips when they became available. An optional $75 plug-in cassette interface card allowed users to store programs on ordinary audio cassette tapes. A BASIC interpreter, originally written by Wozniak, was provided that let users easily write programs and play simple games. An onboard AC power supply was included.\nThe Apple I's built-in computer terminal circuitry with TV composite output used shift registers and a character generator. All one needed was a television set and a ASCII keyboard. The Apple 1 did not come with a case. It was either used as-is or some chose to build custom (mostly wooden) cases. Competing machines such as the Altair 8800 generally were programmed with front-mounted toggle switches and used indicator lights (red LEDs, most commonly) for output, and had to be extended with separate hardware to allow connection to a computer terminal or a teletypewriter machine. This made the Apple I, along with earlier introduced Sphere 1 and other hobbyist microcomputers, an innovative machine for its day.\nApple I character set.\nThe computer used a Signetics 2513 64\u00d78\u00d75 Character Generator, capable of displaying uppercase characters, numbers and basic punctuation and math symbols with a 5x8 pixel font:\nCollectors' item.\nAs of \u00a02022[ [update]], 62 Apple I computers have been confirmed to exist, and, according to unverified information, 20 more are likely to exist. From these, 41 were produced in the first batch, 39 in the second batch, and 2 unknown versions, potentially from other batches, also exist. Most are now in working condition.\nSerial numbers.\nBoth Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak have stated that Apple did not assign serial numbers to the Apple l. Several boards have been found with numbered stickers affixed to them, which appear to be inspection stickers from the PCB manufacturer/assembler. A batch of boards is known to have numbers hand-written in black permanent marker on the back; these usually appear as \"01-00##\". As of January 2022, 29 Apple-1s with a serial number are known. The highest known number is 01\u20130079. Two original Apple-1s have been analyzed by PSA, Los Angeles, concluding the serial numbers had been hand-written by Steve Jobs.\nClones and replicas.\nSeveral Apple I clones and replicas have been released in recent years. These are all created by hobbyists and marketed to the hobbyist/collector community. Availability is usually limited to small runs in response to demand.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1345", "revid": "6264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1345", "title": "Apache webserver", "text": ""}
{"id": "1346", "revid": "38427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1346", "title": "Apatosaurus", "text": "Sauropod dinosaur genus from Late Jurassic period\nApatosaurus (; meaning \"deceptive lizard\") is a genus of herbivorous sauropod dinosaur that lived in North America during the Late Jurassic period. Othniel Charles Marsh described and named the first-known species, A. ajax, in 1877, and a second species, A. louisae, was discovered and named by William H. Holland in 1916. \"Apatosaurus\" lived about 152 to 151 million years ago (mya), during the late Kimmeridgian to early Tithonian age, and are now known from fossils in the Morrison Formation of modern-day Colorado, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Utah in the United States. \"Apatosaurus\" had an average length of , and an average mass of . A few specimens indicate a maximum length of 11\u201330% greater than average and a mass of approximately .\nThe cervical vertebrae of \"Apatosaurus\" are less elongated and more heavily constructed than those of \"Diplodocus\", a diplodocid like \"Apatosaurus\", and the bones of the leg are much stockier despite being longer, implying that \"Apatosaurus\" was a more robust animal. The tail was held above the ground during normal locomotion. \"Apatosaurus\" had a single claw on each forelimb and three on each hindlimb. The \"Apatosaurus\" skull, long thought to be similar to \"Camarasaurus\", is much more similar to that of \"Diplodocus\". \"Apatosaurus\" was a generalized browser that likely held its head elevated. To lighten its vertebrae, \"Apatosaurus\" had air sacs that made the bones internally full of holes. Like that of other diplodocids, its tail may have been used as a whip to create loud noises, or, as more recently suggested, as a sensory organ.\nThe skull of \"Apatosaurus\" was confused with that of \"Camarasaurus\" and \"Brachiosaurus\" until 1909, when the holotype of \"A. louisae\" was found, and a complete skull just a few meters away from the front of the neck. Henry Fairfield Osborn disagreed with this association, and went on to mount a skeleton of \"Apatosaurus\" with a \"Camarasaurus\" skull cast. \"Apatosaurus\" skeletons were mounted with speculative skull casts until 1970, when McIntosh showed that more robust skulls assigned to \"Diplodocus\" were more likely from \"Apatosaurus\".\n\"Apatosaurus\" is a genus in the family Diplodocidae. It is one of the more basal genera, with only \"Amphicoelias\" and possibly a new, unnamed genus more primitive. Although the subfamily Apatosaurinae was named in 1929, the group was not used validly until an extensive 2015 study. Only \"Brontosaurus\" is also in the subfamily, with the other genera being considered synonyms or reclassified as diplodocines. \"Brontosaurus\" has long been considered a junior synonym of \"Apatosaurus\"; its type species was reclassified as \"A.excelsus\" in 1903. A 2015 study concluded that \"Brontosaurus\" is a valid genus of sauropod distinct from \"Apatosaurus\", but not all paleontologists agree with this division. As it existed in North America during the late Jurassic, \"Apatosaurus\" would have lived alongside dinosaurs such as \"Allosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", and \"Stegosaurus\".\nDescription.\n\"Apatosaurus\" was a large, long-necked, quadrupedal animal with a long, whip-like tail. Its forelimbs were slightly shorter than its hindlimbs. Most size estimates are based on specimen CM3018, the type specimen of \"A.louisae\", reaching in length and in body mass. A 2015 study that estimated the mass of volumetric models of \"Dreadnoughtus\", \"Apatosaurus\", and \"Giraffatitan\" estimates CM3018 at , similar in mass to \"Dreadnoughtus\". Some specimens of \"A.ajax\" (such as OMNH1670) represent individuals 11\u201330% longer, suggesting masses twice that of CM3018 or , potentially rivaling the largest titanosaurs. However, the upper size estimate of OMNH1670 is likely an exaggeration, with the size estimates revised in 2020 at in length and in body mass based on volumetric analysis.\nThe skull is small in relation to the size of the animal. The jaws are lined with spatulate (chisel-like) teeth suited to an herbivorous diet. The snout of \"Apatosaurus\" and similar diplodocoids is squared, with only \"Nigersaurus\" having a squarer skull. The braincase of \"Apatosaurus\" is well preserved in specimen BYU17096, which also preserved much of the skeleton. A phylogenetic analysis found that the braincase had a morphology similar to those of other diplodocoids. Some skulls of \"Apatosaurus\" have been found still in articulation with their teeth. Those teeth that have the enamel surface exposed do not show any scratches on the surface; instead, they display a sugary texture and little wear.\nLike those of other sauropods, the neck vertebrae are deeply bifurcated; they carried neural spines with a large trough in the middle, resulting in a wide, deep neck. The vertebral formula for the holotype of \"A.louisae\" is 15cervicals, 10dorsals, 5sacrals, and 82caudals. The caudal vertebra number may vary, even within species. The cervical vertebrae of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Brontosaurus\" are stouter and more robust than those of other diplodocids and were found to be most similar to \"Camarasaurus\" by Charles Whitney Gilmore. In addition, they support cervical ribs that extend farther towards the ground than in diplodocines, and have vertebrae and ribs that are narrower towards the top of the neck, making the neck nearly triangular in cross-section. In \"Apatosaurus louisae\", the atlas-axis complex of the first cervicals is nearly fused. The dorsal ribs are not fused or tightly attached to their vertebrae and are instead loosely articulated. \"Apatosaurus\" has ten dorsal ribs on either side of the body. The large neck was filled with an extensive system of weight-saving air sacs. \"Apatosaurus\", like its close relative \"Supersaurus\", has tall neural spines, which make up more than half the height of the individual bones of its vertebrae. The shape of the tail is unusual for a diplodocid; it is comparatively slender because of the rapidly decreasing height of the vertebral spines with increasing distance from the hips. \"Apatosaurus\" also had very long ribs compared to most other diplodocids, giving it an unusually deep chest. As in other diplodocids, the tail transformed into a whip-like structure towards the end.\nThe limb bones are also very robust. Within Apatosaurinae, the scapula of \"Apatosaurus louisae\" is intermediate in morphology between those of \"A.ajax\" and \"Brontosaurus excelsus\". The arm bones are stout, so the humerus of \"Apatosaurus\" resembles that of \"Camarasaurus\", as well as \"Brontosaurus\". However, the humeri of \"Brontosaurus\" and \"A.ajax\" are more similar to each other than they are to \"A.louisae\". In 1936, Charles Gilmore noted that previous reconstructions of \"Apatosaurus\" forelimbs erroneously proposed that the radius and ulna could cross; in life they would have remained parallel. \"Apatosaurus\" had a single large claw on each forelimb, a feature shared by all sauropods more derived than \"Shunosaurus\". The first three toes had claws on each hindlimb. The phalangeal formula is 2-1-1-1-1, meaning the innermost finger (phalanx) on the forelimb has two bones and the next has one. The single manual claw bone (ungual) is slightly curved and squarely truncated on the anterior end. The pelvic girdle includes the robust ilia, and the fused (co-ossified) pubes and ischia. The femora of \"Apatosaurus\" are very stout and represent some of the most robust femora of any member of Sauropoda. The tibia and fibula bones are different from the slender bones of \"Diplodocus\" but are nearly indistinguishable from those of \"Camarasaurus\". The fibula is longer and slenderer than the tibia. The foot of \"Apatosaurus\" has three claws on the innermost digits; the digit formula is 3-4-5-3-2. The first metatarsal is the stoutest, a feature shared among diplodocids.\nDiscovery and species.\nInitial discovery.\nThe first \"Apatosaurus\" fossils were discovered by Arthur Lakes, a local miner, and his friend Henry C. Beckwith in the spring of 1877 in Morrison, a town in the eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains in Jefferson County, Colorado. Arthur Lakes wrote to Othniel Charles Marsh, Professor of Paleontology at Yale University, and Edward Drinker Cope, paleontologist based in Philadelphia, about the discovery until eventually collecting several fossils and sending them to both paleontologists. Marsh named \"Atlantosaurus montanus\" based on some of the fossils sent and hired Lakes to collect the rest of the material at Morrison and send it to Yale, while Cope attempted to hire Lakes as well but was rejected. One of the best specimens collected by Lakes in 1877 was a well preserved partial postcranial skeleton, including many vertebrae, and a partial braincase (YPM VP 1860), which was sent to Marsh and named \"Apatosaurus ajax\" in November 1877. The composite term \"Apatosaurus\" comes from the Greek words ' ()/' () meaning \"deception\"/\"deceptive\", and \"\" () meaning \"lizard\"; thus, \"deceptive lizard\". Marsh gave it this name based on the chevron bones, which are dissimilar to those of other dinosaurs; instead, the chevron bones of \"Apatosaurus\" showed similarities with those of mosasaurs, most likely that of the representative species \"Mosasaurus\". By the end of excavations at Lakes' quarry in Morrison, several partial specimens of \"Apatosaurus\" had been collected, but only the type specimen of \"A. ajax\" can be confidently referred to the species.\nDuring excavation and transportation, the bones of the holotype skeleton were mixed with those of another Apatosaurine individual originally described as \"Atlantosaurus immanis\"; as a consequence, some elements cannot be ascribed to either specimen with confidence. Marsh distinguished the new genus \"Apatosaurus\" from \"Atlantosaurus\" on the basis of the number of sacral vertebrae, with \"Apatosaurus\" possessing three and \"Atlantosaurus\" four. Recent research shows that traits usually used to distinguish taxa at this time were actually widespread across several taxa, causing many of the taxa named to be invalid, like \"Atlantosaurus\". Two years later, Marsh announced the discovery of a larger and more complete specimen (YPM VP 1980) from Como Bluff, Wyoming, he gave this specimen the name \"Brontosaurus excelsus\". Also at Como Bluff, the Hubbell brothers working for Edward Drinker Cope collected a tibia, fibula, scapula, and several caudal vertebrae along with other fragments belonging to \"Apatosaurus\" in 1877\u201378 at Cope's Quarry 5 at the site. Later in 1884, Othniel Marsh named \"Diplodocus lacustris\" based on a chimeric partial dentary, snout, and several teeth collected by Lakes in 1877 at Morrison. In 2013, it was suggested that the dentary of \"D. lacustris\" and its teeth were actually from \"Apatosaurus ajax\" based on its proximity to the type braincase of \"A. ajax\". All specimens currently considered \"Apatosaurus\" were from the Morrison Formation, the location of the excavations of Marsh and Cope.\nSecond Dinosaur Rush and skull issue.\nAfter the end of the Bone Wars, many major institutions in the eastern United States were inspired by the depictions and finds by Marsh and Cope to assemble their own dinosaur fossil collections. The competition to mount the first sauropod skeleton specifically was the most intense, with the American Museum of Natural History, Carnegie Museum of Natural History, and Field Museum of Natural History all sending expeditions to the west to find the most complete sauropod specimen, bring it back to the home institution, and mount it in their fossil halls. The American Museum of Natural History was the first to launch an expedition, finding a well preserved skeleton (AMNH 460), which is occasionally assigned to \"Apatosaurus\", is considered nearly complete; only the head, feet, and sections of the tail are missing, and it was the first sauropod skeleton mounted. The specimen was found north of Medicine Bow, Wyoming, in 1898 by Walter Granger, and took the entire summer to extract. To complete the mount, sauropod feet that were discovered at the same quarry and a tail fashioned to appear as Marsh believed it should\u00a0\u2013 but which had too few vertebrae\u00a0\u2013 were added. In addition, a sculpted model of what the museum thought the skull of this massive creature might look like was made. This was not a delicate skull like that of \"Diplodocus\"\u00a0\u2013 which was later found to be more accurate\u00a0\u2013 but was based on \"the biggest, thickest, strongest skull bones, lower jaws and tooth crowns from three different quarries\". These skulls were likely those of \"Camarasaurus\", the only other sauropod for which good skull material was known at the time. The mount construction was overseen by Adam Hermann, who failed to find \"Apatosaurus\" skulls. Hermann was forced to sculpt a stand-in skull by hand. Osborn said in a publication that the skull was \"largely conjectural and based on that of \"Morosaurus\"\" (now \"Camarasaurus\").\nIn 1903, Elmer Riggs published a study that described a well-preserved skeleton of a diplodocid from the Grand River Valley near Fruita, Colorado, Field Museum of Natural History specimen P25112. Riggs thought that the deposits were similar in age to those of the Como Bluff in Wyoming from which Marsh had described \"Brontosaurus\". Most of the skeleton was found, and after comparison with both \"Brontosaurus\" and \"Apatosaurus ajax\", Riggs realized that the holotype of \"A.ajax\" was immature, and thus the features distinguishing the genera were not valid. Since \"Apatosaurus\" was the earlier name, \"Brontosaurus\" should be considered a junior synonym of \"Apatosaurus\". Because of this, Riggs recombined \"Brontosaurus excelsus\" as \"Apatosaurus excelsus\". Based on comparisons with other species proposed to belong to \"Apatosaurus\", Riggs also determined that the Field Columbian Museum specimen was likely most similar to \"A.excelsus\".\nDespite Riggs' publication, Henry Fairfield Osborn, who was a strong opponent of Marsh and his taxa, labeled the \"Apatosaurus\" mount of the American Museum of Natural History \"Brontosaurus\". Because of this decision the name \"Brontosaurus\" was commonly used outside of scientific literature for what Riggs considered \"Apatosaurus\", and the museum's popularity meant that \"Brontosaurus\" became one of the best known dinosaurs, even though it was invalid throughout nearly all of the 20th and early 21st centuries.\nIt was not until 1909 that an \"Apatosaurus\" skull was found during the first expedition, led by Earl Douglass, to what would become known as the Carnegie Quarry at Dinosaur National Monument. The skull was found a short distance from a skeleton (specimen CM3018) identified as the new species \"Apatosaurus louisae\", named after Louise Carnegie, wife of Andrew Carnegie, who funded field research to find complete dinosaur skeletons in the American West. The skull was designated CM11162; it was very similar to the skull of \"Diplodocus\". Another smaller skeleton of \"A.louisae\" was found nearby CM11162 and CM3018. The skull was accepted as belonging to the \"Apatosaurus\" specimen by Douglass and Carnegie Museum director William H. Holland, although other scientists\u00a0\u2013 most notably Osborn\u00a0\u2013 rejected this identification. Holland defended his view in 1914 in an address to the Paleontological Society of America, yet he left the Carnegie Museum mount headless. While some thought Holland was attempting to avoid conflict with Osborn, others suspected Holland was waiting until an articulated skull and neck were found to confirm the association of the skull and skeleton. After Holland's death in 1934, museum staff placed a cast of a \"Camarasaurus\" skull on the mount.\nWhile most other museums were using cast or sculpted \"Camarasaurus\" skulls on \"Apatosaurus\" mounts, the Yale Peabody Museum decided to sculpt a skull based on the lower jaw of a \"Camarasaurus\", with the cranium based on Marsh's 1891 illustration of the skull. The skull also included forward-pointing nasals\u00a0\u2013 something unusual for any dinosaur\u00a0\u2013 and fenestrae differing from both the drawing and other skulls.\nNo \"Apatosaurus\" skull was mentioned in literature until the 1970s when John Stanton McIntosh and David Berman redescribed the skulls of \"Diplodocus\" and \"Apatosaurus\". They found that though he never published his opinion, Holland was almost certainly correct, that \"Apatosaurus\" had a \"Diplodocus\"-like skull. According to them, many skulls long thought to pertain to \"Diplodocus\" might instead be those of \"Apatosaurus\". They reassigned multiple skulls to \"Apatosaurus\" based on associated and closely associated vertebrae. Even though they supported Holland, it was noted that \"Apatosaurus\" might have possessed a \"Camarasaurus\"-like skull, based on a disarticulated \"Camarasaurus\"-like tooth found at the precise site where an \"Apatosaurus\" specimen was found years before. On October20, 1979, after the publications by McIntosh and Berman, the first true skull of \"Apatosaurus\" was mounted on a skeleton in a museum, that of the Carnegie. In 1998, it was suggested that the Felch Quarry skull that Marsh had included in his 1896 skeletal restoration instead belonged to \"Brachiosaurus\".\nRecent discoveries and reassesment.\nIn 2011, the first specimen of \"Apatosaurus\" where a skull was found articulated with its cervical vertebrae was described. This specimen, CMCVP7180, was found to differ in both skull and neck features from \"A.louisae\", but shared many features of the cervical vertebrae with \"A.ajax\". Another well-preserved skull is Brigham Young University specimen 17096, a well-preserved skull and skeleton, with a preserved braincase. The specimen was found in Cactus Park Quarry in western Colorado. In 2013, Matthew Mossbrucker and several other authors published an abstract that described a premaxilla and maxilla from Lakes' original quarry in Morrison and referred the material to \"Apatosaurus ajax.\" \nAlmost all modern paleontologists agreed with Riggs that the two dinosaurs should be classified together in a single genus. According to the rules of the ICZN (which governs the scientific names of animals), the name \"Apatosaurus\", having been published first, has priority as the official name; \"Brontosaurus\" was considered a junior synonym and was therefore long discarded from formal use. Despite this, at least one paleontologist\u00a0\u2013 Robert T. Bakker\u00a0\u2013 argued in the 1990s that \"A.ajax\" and \"A.excelsus\" were in fact sufficiently distinct for the latter to merit a separate genus.\nIn 2015, Emanuel Tschopp, Oct\u00e1vio Mateus, and Roger Benson released a paper on diplodocoid systematics, and proposed that genera could be diagnosed by thirteen differing characters, and species separated based on six. The minimum number for generic separation was chosen based on the fact that \"A.ajax\" and \"A.louisae\" differ in twelve characters, and \"Diplodocus carnegiei\" and \"D.hallorum\" differ in eleven characters. Thus, thirteen characters were chosen to validate the separation of genera. The six differing features for specific separation were chosen by counting the number of differing features in separate specimens generally agreed to represent one species, with only one differing character in \"D.carnegiei\" and \"A.louisae\", but five differing features in \"B.excelsus\". Therefore, Tschopp etal. argued that \"Apatosaurus excelsus\", originally classified as \"Brontosaurus excelsus\", had enough morphological differences from other species of \"Apatosaurus\" that it warranted being reclassified as a separate genus again. The conclusion was based on a comparison of 477 morphological characteristics across 81 different dinosaur individuals. Among the many notable differences are the wider\u00a0\u2013 and presumably stronger\u00a0\u2013 neck of \"Apatosaurus\" species compared to \"B.excelsus\". Other species previously assigned to \"Apatosaurus\", such as \"Elosaurus parvus\" and \"Eobrontosaurus yahnahpin\" were also reclassified as \"Brontosaurus\". Some features proposed to separate \"Brontosaurus\" from \"Apatosaurus\" include: posterior dorsal vertebrae with the centrum longer than wide; the scapula rear to the acromial edge and the distal blade being excavated; the acromial edge of the distal scapular blade bearing a rounded expansion; and the ratio of the proximodistal length to transverse breadth of the astragalus 0.55 or greater. Sauropod expert Michael D'Emic pointed out that the criteria chosen were to an extent arbitrary and that they would require abandoning the name \"Brontosaurus\" again if newer analyses obtained different results. Mammal paleontologist Donald Prothero criticized the mass media reaction to this study as superficial and premature, concluding that he would keep \"Brontosaurus\" in quotes and not treat the name as a valid genus.\nValid species.\nMany species of \"Apatosaurus\" have been designated from scant material. Marsh named as many species as he could, which resulted in many being based upon fragmentary and indistinguishable remains. In 2005, Paul Upchurch and colleagues published a study that analyzed the species and specimen relationships of \"Apatosaurus\". They found that \"A.louisae\" was the most basal species, followed by FMNHP25112, and then a polytomy of \"A.ajax\", \"A.parvus\", and \"A.excelsus\". Their analysis was revised and expanded with many additional diplodocid specimens in 2015, which resolved the relationships of \"Apatosaurus\" slightly differently, and also supported separating \"Brontosaurus\" from \"Apatosaurus\".\nThe cladogram below is the result of an analysis by Tschopp, Mateus, and Benson (2015). The authors analyzed most diplodocid type specimens separately to deduce which specimen belonged to which species and genus.\nClassification.\n\"Apatosaurus\" is a member of the family Diplodocidae, a clade of gigantic sauropod dinosaurs. The family includes some of the longest creatures ever to walk the earth, including \"Diplodocus\", \"Supersaurus\", and \"Barosaurus\". \"Apatosaurus\" is sometimes classified in the subfamily Apatosaurinae, which may also include \"Suuwassea\", \"Supersaurus\", and \"Brontosaurus\". Othniel Charles Marsh described \"Apatosaurus\" as allied to \"Atlantosaurus\" within the now-defunct group Atlantosauridae. In 1878, Marsh raised his family to the rank of suborder, including \"Apatosaurus\", \"Atlantosaurus\", \"Morosaurus\" (=\"Camarasaurus\") and \"Diplodocus\". He classified this group within Sauropoda, a group he erected in the same study. In 1903, Elmer S. Riggs said the name Sauropoda would be a junior synonym of earlier names; he grouped \"Apatosaurus\" within Opisthocoelia. Sauropoda is still used as the group name. In 2011, John Whitlock published a study that placed \"Apatosaurus\" a more basal diplodocid, sometimes less basal than \"Supersaurus\".\nCladogram of the Diplodocidae after Tschopp, Mateus, and Benson (2015).\nPaleobiology.\nIt was believed throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries that sauropods like \"Apatosaurus\" were too massive to support their own weight on dry land. It was theorized that they lived partly submerged in water, perhaps in swamps. More recent findings do not support this; sauropods are now thought to have been fully terrestrial animals. A study of diplodocid snouts showed that the square snout, large proportion of pits, and fine, subparallel scratches of the teeth of \"Apatosaurus\" suggests it was a ground-height, nonselective browser. It may have eaten ferns, cycadeoids, seed ferns, horsetails, and algae. Stevens and Parish (2005) speculate that these sauropods fed from riverbanks on submerged water plants.\nA 2015 study of the necks of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Brontosaurus\" found many differences between them and other diplodocids, and that these variations may have shown that the necks of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Brontosaurus\" were used for intraspecific combat. Various uses for the single claw on the forelimb of sauropods have been proposed. One suggestion is that they were used for defense, but their shape and size make this unlikely. It was also possible they were for feeding, but the most probable use for the claw was grasping objects such as tree trunks when rearing.\nTrackways of sauropods like \"Apatosaurus\" show that they may have had a range of around per day, and that they could potentially have reached a top speed of per hour. The slow locomotion of sauropods may be due to their minimal muscling, or to recoil after strides. A trackway of a juvenile has led some to believe that they were capable of bipedalism, though this is disputed.\nNeck posture.\nDiplodocids like \"Apatosaurus\" are often portrayed with their necks held high up in the air, allowing them to browse on tall trees. Some studies state diplodocid necks were less flexible than previously believed, because the structure of the neck vertebrae would not have allowed the neck to bend far upward, and that sauropods like \"Apatosaurus\" were adapted to low browsing or ground feeding.\nOther studies by Taylor find that all tetrapods appear to hold their necks at the maximum possible vertical extension when in a normal, alert posture; they argue the same would hold true for sauropods barring any unknown, unique characteristics that set the soft tissue anatomy of their necks apart from that of other animals. \"Apatosaurus\", like \"Diplodocus\", would have held its neck angled upward with the head pointing downward in a resting posture. Kent Stevens and Michael Parrish (1999 and 2005) state \"Apatosaurus\" had a great feeding range; its neck could bend into a U-shape laterally. The neck's range of movement would have also allowed the head to feed at the level of the feet.\nMatthew Cobley \"et al.\" (2013) dispute this, finding that large muscles and cartilage would have limited movement of the neck. They state the feeding ranges for sauropods like \"Diplodocus\" were smaller than previously believed, and the animals may have had to move their whole bodies around to better access areas where they could browse vegetation. As such, they might have spent more time foraging to meet their minimum energy needs. The conclusions of Cobley \"etal.\" are disputed by Taylor, who analyzed the amount and positioning of intervertebral cartilage to determine the flexibility of the neck of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Diplodocus\". He found that the neck of \"Apatosaurus\" was very flexible.\nPhysiology.\nGiven the large body mass and long neck of sauropods like \"Apatosaurus\", physiologists have encountered problems determining how these animals breathed. Beginning with the assumption that, like crocodilians, \"Apatosaurus\" did not have a diaphragm, the dead-space volume (the amount of unused air remaining in the mouth, trachea, and air tubes after each breath) has been estimated at about for a specimen. Paladino calculates its tidal volume (the amount of air moved in or out during a single breath) at with an avian respiratory system, if mammalian, and if reptilian.\nOn this basis, its respiratory system would likely have been parabronchi, with multiple pulmonary air sacs as in avian lungs, and a flow-through lung. An avian respiratory system would need a lung volume of about compared with a mammalian requirement of , which would exceed the space available. The overall thoracic volume of \"Apatosaurus\" has been estimated at , allowing for a , four-chambered heart and a lung capacity. That would allow about for the necessary tissue. Evidence for the avian system in \"Apatosaurus\" and other sauropods is also present in the pneumaticity of the vertebrae. Though this plays a role in reducing the weight of the animal, Wedel (2003) states they are also likely connected to air sacs, as in birds.\nJames Spotila \"et al.\" (1991) concludes that the large body size of sauropods would have made them unable to maintain high metabolic rates because they would not have been able to release enough heat. They assumed sauropods had a reptilian respiratory system. Wedel says that an avian system would have allowed it to dump more heat. Some scientists state that the heart would have had trouble sustaining sufficient blood pressure to oxygenate the brain. Others suggest that the near-horizontal posture of the head and neck would have eliminated the problem of supplying blood to the brain because it would not have been elevated.\nJames Farlow (1987) calculates that an \"Apatosaurus\"-sized dinosaur about would have possessed of fermentation contents. Assuming \"Apatosaurus\" had an avian respiratory system and a reptilian resting-metabolism, Frank Paladino etal. (1997) estimate the animal would have needed to consume only about of water per day.\nGrowth.\nA 1999 microscopic study of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Brontosaurus\" bones concluded the animals grew rapidly when young and reached near-adult sizes in about 10years. In 2008, a study on the growth rates of sauropods was published by Thomas Lehman and Holly Woodward. They said that by using growth lines and length-to-mass ratios, \"Apatosaurus\" would have grown to 25t (25 long tons; 28 short tons) in 15years, with growth peaking at in a single year. An alternative method, using limb length and body mass, found \"Apatosaurus\" grew per year, and reached its full mass before it was about 70years old. These estimates have been called unreliable because the calculation methods are not sound; old growth lines would have been obliterated by bone remodelling. One of the first identified growth factors of \"Apatosaurus\" was the number of sacral vertebrae, which increased to five by the time of the creature's maturity. This was first noted in 1903 and again in 1936.\nLong-bone histology enables researchers to estimate the age that a specific individual reached. A study by Eva Griebeler etal. (2013) examined long-bone histological data and concluded the \"Apatosaurus\" sp.SMA0014 weighed , reached sexual maturity at 21years, and died aged 28. The same growth model indicated \"Apatosaurus\" sp.BYU 601\u201317328 weighed , reached sexual maturity at 19years, and died aged 31.\nJuveniles.\nCompared with most sauropods, a relatively large amount of juvenile material is known from \"Apatosaurus\". Multiple specimens in the OMNH are from juveniles of an undetermined species of \"Apatosaurus\"; this material includes partial shoulder and pelvic girdles, some vertebrae, and limb bones. OMNH juvenile material is from at least two different age groups and based on overlapping bones likely comes from more than three individuals. The specimens exhibit features that distinguish \"Apatosaurus\" from its relatives, and thus likely belong to the genus. Juvenile sauropods tend to have proportionally shorter necks and tails, and a more pronounced forelimb-hindlimb disparity than found in adult sauropods.\nTail.\nAn article published in 1997 reported research of the mechanics of \"Apatosaurus\" tails by Nathan Myhrvold and paleontologist Philip J. Currie. Myhrvold carried out a computer simulation of the tail, which in diplodocids like \"Apatosaurus\" was a very long, tapering structure resembling a bullwhip. This computer modeling suggested diplodocids were capable of producing a whiplike cracking sound of over 200 decibels, comparable to the volume of a cannon being fired.\nA pathology has been identified on the tail of \"Apatosaurus\", caused by a growth defect. Two caudal vertebrae are seamlessly fused along the entire articulating surface of the bone, including the arches of the neural spines. This defect might have been caused by the lack or inhibition of the substance that forms intervertebral disks or joints. It has been proposed that the whips could have been used in combat and defense, but the tails of diplodocids were quite light and narrow compared to \"Shunosaurus\" and mamenchisaurids, and thus to injure another animal with the tail would severely injure the tail itself. More recently, Baron (2020) considers the use of the tail as a bullwhip unlikely because of the potentially catastrophic muscle and skeletal damage such speeds could cause on the large and heavy tail. Instead, he proposes that the tails might have been used as a tactile organ to keep in touch with the individuals behind and on the sides in a group while migrating, which could have augmented cohesion and allowed communication among individuals while limiting more energetically demanding activities like stopping to search for dispersed individuals, turning to visually check on individuals behind, or communicating vocally.\nPaleoecology.\nThe Morrison Formation is a sequence of shallow marine and alluvial sediments which, according to radiometric dating, dates from between 156.3mya at its base, and 146.8mya at the top, placing it in the late Oxfordian, Kimmeridgian, and early Tithonian stages of the Late Jurassic period. This formation is interpreted as originating in a locally semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons. The Morrison Basin, where dinosaurs lived, stretched from New Mexico to Alberta and Saskatchewan; it was formed when the precursors to the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains started pushing up to the west. The deposits from their east-facing drainage basins were carried by streams and rivers and deposited in swampy lowlands, lakes, river channels, and floodplains. This formation is similar in age to the Lourinh\u00e3 Formation in Portugal and the Tendaguru Formation in Tanzania.\n\"Apatosaurus\" was the second most common sauropod in the Morrison Formation ecosystem, after \"Camarasaurus\". \"Apatosaurus\" may have been more solitary than other Morrison Formation dinosaurs. Fossils of the genus have only been found in the upper levels of the formation. Those of \"Apatosaurus ajax\" are known exclusively from the upper Brushy Basin Member, about 152\u2013151 mya. \"A.louisae\" fossils are rare, known only from one site in the upper Brushy Basin Member; they date to the late Kimmeridgian stage, about 151mya. Additional \"Apatosaurus\" remains are known from similarly aged or slightly younger rocks, but they have not been identified as any particular species, and thus may instead belong to \"Brontosaurus\".\nThe Morrison Formation records a time when the local environment was dominated by gigantic sauropod dinosaurs. Dinosaurs known from the Morrison Formation include the theropods \"Allosaurus\", \"Ceratosaurus\", \"Ornitholestes\", \"Saurophaganax\", and \"Torvosaurus\"; the sauropods \"Brontosaurus\", \"Brachiosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", and \"Diplodocus\"; and the ornithischians \"Camptosaurus\", \"Dryosaurus\", and \"Stegosaurus\". \"Apatosaurus\" is commonly found at the same sites as \"Allosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", and \"Stegosaurus\". \"Allosaurus\" accounted for 70\u201375% of theropod specimens and was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food web. Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are of the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks of the Lourinh\u00e3 Formation\u00a0\u2013 mainly \"Allosaurus\", \"Ceratosaurus\", and \"Torvosaurus\"\u00a0\u2013 or have a close counterpart\u00a0\u2013 \"Brachiosaurus\" and \"Lusotitan\", \"Camptosaurus\" and \"Draconyx\", and \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Dinheirosaurus\". Other vertebrates that are known to have shared this paleo-environment include ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles, sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphs, and several species of pterosaur. Shells of bivalves and aquatic snails are also common. The flora of the period has been evidenced in fossils of green algae, fungi, mosses, horsetails, cycads, ginkgoes, and several families of conifers. Vegetation varied from river-lining forests of tree ferns with fern understory (gallery forests), to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the \"Araucaria\"-like conifer \"Brachyphyllum\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1347", "revid": "45514332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1347", "title": "Allosaurus", "text": "Extinct genus of carnosaurian theropod dinosaur\nAllosaurus () is an extinct genus of large carnosaurian theropod dinosaur that lived 155 to 145\u00a0million years ago during the Late Jurassic period (Kimmeridgian to late Tithonian ages). The name \"Allosaurus\" means \"different lizard\", alluding to its unique (at the time of its discovery) concave vertebrae. It is derived from the Greek words (') (\"different\", \"strange\", or \"other\") and (') (\"lizard\" or \"reptile\"). The first fossil remains that could definitively be ascribed to this genus were described in 1877 by famed paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh. As one of the first well-known theropod dinosaurs, it has long attracted attention outside of paleontological circles.\n\"Allosaurus\" was a large bipedal predator for its time. Its skull was light, robust, and equipped with dozens of sharp, serrated teeth. It averaged in length for \"A. fragilis\", with the largest specimens estimated as being long. Relative to the large and powerful legs, its three-fingered hands were small and the body was balanced by a long, muscular tail. It is classified as an allosaurid, a type of carnosaurian theropod dinosaur.\nThe genus has a very complicated taxonomy and includes at least three valid species, the best known of which is \"A. fragilis\". The bulk of \"Allosaurus\" remains have come from North America's Morrison Formation, with material also known from Portugal. It was known for over half of the 20th century as \"Antrodemus\", but a study of the abundant remains from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry brought the name \"Allosaurus\" back to prominence and established it as one of the best-known dinosaurs.\nAs the most abundant large predator of the Morrison Formation, \"Allosaurus\" was at the top of the food chain and probably preyed on contemporaneous large herbivorous dinosaurs, with the possibility of hunting other predators. Potential prey included ornithopods, stegosaurids, and sauropods. Some paleontologists interpret \"Allosaurus\" as having had cooperative social behavior and hunting in packs, while others believe individuals may have been aggressive toward each other and that congregations of this genus are the result of lone individuals feeding on the same carcasses.\nDiscovery and history.\nEarly discoveries and research.\nThe discovery and early study of \"Allosaurus\" is complicated by the multiplicity of names coined during the Bone Wars of the late 19th century. The first described fossil in this history was a bone obtained secondhand by Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden in 1869. It came from Middle Park, near Granby, Colorado, probably from Morrison Formation rocks. The locals had identified such bones as \"petrified horse hoofs\". Hayden sent his specimen to Joseph Leidy, who identified it as half of a tail vertebra and tentatively assigned it to the European dinosaur genus \"Poekilopleuron\" as \"Poicilopleuron\" [\"sic\"] \"valens\". He later decided it deserved its own genus, \"Antrodemus\".\n\"Allosaurus\" itself is based on YPM 1930, a small collection of fragmentary bones including parts of three vertebrae, a rib fragment, a tooth, a toe bone, and (most useful for later discussions) the shaft of the right humerus (upper arm). Othniel Charles Marsh gave these remains the formal name \"Allosaurus fragilis\" in 1877. \"Allosaurus\" comes from the Greek words \"/\", meaning \"strange\" or \"different\", and \"/\", meaning \"lizard\" or \"reptile\". It was named 'different lizard' because its vertebrae were different from those of other dinosaurs known at the time of its discovery. The species epithet \"fragilis\" is Latin for \"fragile\", referring to lightening features in the vertebrae. The bones were collected from the Morrison Formation of Garden Park, north of Ca\u00f1on City. O. C. Marsh and Edward Drinker Cope, who were in scientific competition with each other, went on to coin several other genera based on similarly sparse material that would later figure in the taxonomy of \"Allosaurus\". These include Marsh's \"Creosaurus\" and \"Labrosaurus\", as well as Cope's \"Epanterias\".\nIn their haste, Cope and Marsh did not always follow up on their discoveries (or, more commonly, those made by their subordinates). For example, after the discovery by Benjamin Mudge of the type specimen of \"Allosaurus\" in Colorado, Marsh elected to concentrate work in Wyoming. When work resumed at Garden Park in 1883, M. P. Felch found an almost complete \"Allosaurus\" and several partial skeletons. In addition, one of Cope's collectors, H. F. Hubbell, found a specimen in the Como Bluff area of Wyoming in 1879, but apparently did not mention its completeness and Cope never unpacked it. Upon unpacking it in 1903 (several years after Cope had died), it was found to be one of the most complete theropod specimens then known and the skeleton, now cataloged as AMNH 5753, was put on public view in 1908. This is the well-known mount poised over a partial \"Apatosaurus\" skeleton as if scavenging it, illustrated as such in a painting by Charles R. Knight. Although notable as the first free-standing mount of a theropod dinosaur and often illustrated and photographed, it has never been scientifically described.\nThe multiplicity of early names complicated later research, with the situation compounded by the terse descriptions provided by Marsh and Cope. Even at the time, authors such as Samuel Wendell Williston suggested that too many names had been coined. For example, Williston pointed out in 1901 that Marsh had never been able to adequately distinguish \"Allosaurus\" from \"Creosaurus\". The most influential early attempt to sort out the convoluted situation was produced by Charles W. Gilmore in 1920. He came to the conclusion that the tail vertebra named \"Antrodemus\" by Leidy was indistinguishable from those of \"Allosaurus\" and that \"Antrodemus\" should be the preferred name because, as the older name, it had priority. \"Antrodemus\" became the accepted name for this familiar genus for over 50 years, until James Henry Madsen published on the Cleveland-Lloyd specimens and concluded that \"Allosaurus\" should be used because \"Antrodemus\" was based on material with poor, if any, diagnostic features and locality information. For example, the geological formation that the single bone of \"Antrodemus\" came from is unknown. \"Antrodemus\" has been used informally for convenience when distinguishing between the skull Gilmore restored and the composite skull restored by Madsen.\nCleveland-Lloyd discoveries.\nAlthough sporadic work at what became known as the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Emery County, Utah, had taken place as early as 1927 and the fossil site itself described by William L. Stokes in 1945, major operations did not begin there until 1960. Under a cooperative effort involving nearly 40\u00a0institutions, thousands of bones were recovered between 1960 and 1965, led by James Henry Madsen. The quarry is notable for the predominance of \"Allosaurus\" remains, the condition of the specimens, and the lack of scientific resolution on how it came to be. The majority of bones belong to the large theropod \"Allosaurus fragilis\" (it is estimated that the remains of at least 46\u00a0\"A. fragilis\" have been found there, out of at a minimum 73\u00a0dinosaurs) and the fossils found there are disarticulated and well-mixed. Nearly a dozen scientific papers have been written on the taphonomy of the site, suggesting numerous mutually exclusive explanations for how it may have formed. Suggestions have ranged from animals getting stuck in a bog, becoming trapped in deep mud, falling victim to drought-induced mortality around a waterhole, and getting trapped in a spring-fed pond or seep. Regardless of the actual cause, the great quantity of well-preserved \"Allosaurus\" remains has allowed this genus to be known in great detail, making it among the best-known of all theropods. Skeletal remains from the quarry pertain to individuals of almost all ages and sizes, from less than to long, and the disarticulation is an advantage for describing bones usually found fused. Due to being one of Utah's two fossil quarries where numerous \"Allosaurus\" specimens have been discovered, \"Allosaurus\" was designated as the state fossil of Utah in 1988.\nRecent work: 1980s\u2013present.\nThe period since Madsen's monograph has been marked by a great expansion in studies dealing with topics concerning \"Allosaurus\" in life (paleobiological and paleoecological topics). Such studies have covered topics including skeletal variation, growth, skull construction, hunting methods, the brain, and the possibility of gregarious living and parental care. Reanalysis of old material (particularly of large 'allosaur' specimens), new discoveries in Portugal, and several very complete new specimens have also contributed to the growing knowledge base.\n\"Big Al\" and \"Big Al II\".\nIn 1991, \"Big Al\" (MOR 693), a 95%\u00a0complete, partially articulated specimen of \"Allosaurus\" was discovered, measuring about 8\u00a0meters (about 26\u00a0ft) long. MOR 693 was excavated near Shell, Wyoming, by a joint Museum of the Rockies and University of Wyoming Geological Museum team. This skeleton was discovered by a Swiss team, led by Kirby Siber. Chure and Loewen in 2020 identified the individual as a representative of the species \"Allosaurus jimmadseni\". In 1996, the same team discovered a second \"Allosaurus\", \"Big Al II\". This specimen, the best preserved skeleton of its kind to date, is also referred to \"Allosaurus jimmadseni\".\nThe completeness, preservation, and scientific importance of this skeleton gave \"Big Al\" its name. The individual itself was below the average size for \"Allosaurus fragilis\", as it was a subadult estimated at only 87%\u00a0grown. The specimen was described by Breithaupt in 1996. Nineteen of its bones were broken or showed signs of serious infection, which may have contributed to \"Big Al's\" death. Pathologic bones included five ribs, five vertebrae, and four bones of the feet. Several of its damaged bones showed signs of osteomyelitis, a severe bone infection. A particular problem for the living animal was infection and trauma to the right foot that probably affected movement and may have also predisposed the other foot to injury because of a change in gait. \"Big Al\" had an infection on the first phalanx on the third toe that was afflicted by an involucrum. The infection was long-lived, perhaps up to six months. \u201cBig Al II\u201d is also known to have multiple injuries.\nSpecies.\nSix species of \"Allosaurus\" have been named: \"A. amplus\", \"A. atrox\", \"A. europaeus\", the type species \"A. fragilis\", \"A. jimmadseni\" and \"A. lucasi\". Among these, Daniel Chure and Mark Loewen in 2020 only recognized the species \"A. fragilis\", \"A. europaeus\", and the newly-named \"A. jimmadseni\" as being valid species. However, \"A. europaeus\" does not show any unique characters compared to the North American species, so a reevaluation of its validity is required.\n\"A. fragilis\" is the type species and was named by Marsh in 1877. It is known from the remains of at least 60 individuals, all found in the Kimmeridgian\u2013Tithonian Upper Jurassic-age Morrison Formation of the United States, spread across Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming. Details of the humerus (upper arm) of \"A. fragilis\" have been used as diagnostic among Morrison theropods, but \"A. jimmadseni\" indicates that this is no longer the case at the species level.\n\"A. jimmadseni\" has been scientifically described based on two nearly complete skeletons. The first specimen to wear the identification was unearthed in Dinosaur National Monument in northeastern Utah, with the original \"Big Al\" individual subsequently recognized as belonging to the same species. This species differs from \"A. fragilis\" in several anatomical details, including a jugal (cheekbone) with a straight lower margin. Fossils are confined to the Salt Wash Member of the Morrison Formation, with \"A. fragilis\" only found in the higher Brushy Basin Member.\n\"A. fragilis\", \"A. jimmadseni\", \"A. amplus\", and \"A. lucasi\" are all known from remains discovered in the Kimmeridgian\u2013Tithonian Upper Jurassic-age Morrison Formation of the United States, spread across Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming. \"A. fragilis\" is regarded as the most common, known from the remains of at least 60 individuals. For a while in the late 1980s and early 1990s, it was common to recognize \"A. fragilis\" as the short-snouted species, with the long-snouted taxon being \"A. atrox.\" However, subsequent analysis of specimens from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry, Como Bluff, and Dry Mesa Quarry showed that the differences seen in the Morrison Formation material could be attributed to individual variation. A study of skull elements from the Cleveland-Lloyd site found wide variation between individuals, calling into question previous species-level distinctions based on such features as the shape of the lacrimal horns and the proposed differentiation of \"A. jimmadseni\" based on the shape of the jugal. \"A. europaeus\" was found in the Kimmeridgian-age Porto Novo Member of the Lourinh\u00e3 Formation, but it may be the same as \"A. fragilis\".\n\"Allosaurus\" material from Portugal was first reported in 1999 on the basis of MHNUL/AND.001, a partial skeleton including a quadrate, vertebrae, ribs, gastralia, chevrons, part of the hips, and legs. This specimen was assigned to \"A. fragilis\", but the subsequent discovery of a partial skull and neck (ML 415) near Lourinh\u00e3, in the Kimmeridgian-age Porto Novo Member of the Lourinh\u00e3 Formation, spurred the naming of the new species as \"A. europaeus\" by Oct\u00e1vio Mateus and colleagues. The species appeared earlier in the Jurassic than \"A. fragilis\" and differs from other species of \"Allosaurus\" in cranial details. However, more material may show it to be \"A. fragilis\", as originally described.\nThe issue of species and potential synonyms is complicated by the type specimen of \"Allosaurus fragilis\" (YPM\u00a01930) being extremely fragmentary, consisting of a few incomplete vertebrae, limb fragments, rib fragments, and a single tooth. Because of this, several scientists have interpreted the type specimen as potentially dubious, meaning the genus \"Allosaurus\" itself or at least the species \"A. fragilis\" would be a \"nomen dubium\" (\"dubious name\", based on a specimen too incomplete to compare to other specimens or to classify). To address this situation, Gregory S. Paul and Kenneth Carpenter (2010) submitted a petition to the ICZN to have the name \"A. fragilis\" officially transferred to the more complete specimen USNM4734 (as a neotype).\nSynonyms.\n\"Creosaurus\", \"Epanterias\", and \"Labrosaurus\" are regarded as junior synonyms of \"Allosaurus\". Most of the species that are regarded as synonyms of \"A. fragilis\", or that were misassigned to the genus, are obscure and based on very scrappy remains. One exception is \"Labrosaurus ferox\", named in 1884 by Marsh for an oddly formed partial lower jaw, with a prominent gap in the tooth row at the tip of the jaw, and a rear section greatly expanded and turned down. Later researchers suggested that the bone was pathologic, showing an injury to the living animal, and that part of the unusual form of the rear of the bone was due to plaster reconstruction. It is now regarded as an example of \"A. fragilis\".\nIn his 1988 book, \"Predatory Dinosaurs of the World\", the freelance artist &amp; author Gregory S. Paul proposed that \"A. fragilis\" had tall pointed horns and a slender build compared to a postulated second species \"A. atrox\", as well as not being a different sex due to rarity. \"Allosaurus atrox\" was originally named by Marsh in 1878 as the type species of its own genus, \"Creosaurus\", and is based on YPM 1890, an assortment of bones that includes a couple of pieces of the skull, portions of nine tail vertebrae, two hip vertebrae, an ilium, and ankle and foot bones. Although the idea of two common Morrison allosaur species was followed in some semi-technical and popular works, the 2000 thesis on Allosauridae noted that Charles Gilmore mistakenly reconstructed USNM 4734 as having a shorter skull than the specimens referred by Paul to \"atrox\", refuting supposed differences between USNM 4734 and putative \"A. atrox\" specimens like DINO 2560, AMNH 600, and AMNH 666.\n\"Allosaurus agilis\", seen in Zittel, 1887, and Osborn, 1912, is a typographical error for \"A. fragilis.\" \"Allosaurus ferox\" is a typographical error by Marsh for \"A. fragilis\" in a figure caption for the partial skull YPM 1893 and YPM 1893 has been treated as a specimen of \"A fragilis\". Likewise, \"Labrosaurus fragilis\" is a typographical error by Marsh (1896) for \"Labrosaurus ferox\". \"A. whitei\" is a \"nomen nudum\" coined by Pickering in 1996 for the complete \"Allosaurus\" specimens that Paul referred to \"A. atrox\".\n\"Madsenius\" was coined by David Lambert in 1990, being based on remains from Dinosaur National Monument assigned to \"Allosaurus\" or \"Creosaurus\" (a synonym of \"Allosaurus\"), and was to be described by paleontologist Robert Bakker as \"Madsenius trux\". However, \"Madsenius\" is now seen as yet another synonym of \"Allosaurus\" because Bakker's action was predicated upon the false assumption of USNM 4734 being distinct from long-snouted \"Allosaurus\" due to errors in Gilmore's 1920 reconstruction of USNM 4734.\n\"Wyomingraptor\" was informally coined by Bakker for allosaurid remains from the Morrison Formation of the Late Jurassic. The remains unearthed are labeled as \"Allosaurus\" and are housed in the Tate Geological Museum. However, there has been no official description of the remains and \"Wyomingraptor\" has been dismissed as a \"nomen nudum\", with the remains referable to \"Allosaurus\".\nFormerly assigned species and fossils.\nSeveral species initially classified within or referred to \"Allosaurus\" do not belong within the genus. \"A. medius\" was named by Marsh in 1888 for various specimens from the Early Cretaceous Arundel Formation of Maryland, although most of the remains were removed by Richard Swann Lull to the new ornithopod species \"Dryosaurus grandis\", except for a tooth. It was transferred to \"Antrodemus\" by Oliver Hay in 1902, but Hay later clarified that this was an inexplicable error on his part. Gilmore considered the tooth nondiagnostic but transferred it to \"Dryptosaurus\", as \"D. medius\". The referral was not accepted in the most recent review of basal tetanurans, and \"Allosaurus medius\" was simply listed as a dubious species of theropod. It may be closely related to \"Acrocanthosaurus\".\n\"Allosaurus valens\" is a new combination for \"Antrodemus valens\" used by Friedrich von Huene in 1932; \"Antrodemus valens\" itself may also pertain to \"Allosaurus fragilis\", as Gilmore suggested in 1920.\n\"A. lucaris\", another Marsh name, was given to a partial skeleton in 1878. He later decided it warranted its own genus, \"Labrosaurus\", but this has not been accepted, and \"A. lucaris\" is also regarded as another specimen of \"A. fragilis\". \"Allosaurus lucaris\", is known mostly from vertebrae, sharing characters with \"Allosaurus\". Paul and Carpenter stated that the type specimen of this species, YPM 1931, was from a younger age than \"Allosaurus\", and might represent a different genus. However, they found that the specimen was undiagnostic, and thus \"A. lucaris\" was a \"nomen dubium\".\n\"Allosaurus sibiricus\" was described in 1914 by A. N. Riabinin on the basis of a bone, later identified as a partial fourth metatarsal, from the Early Cretaceous of Buryatia, Russia. It was transferred to \"Chilantaisaurus\" in 1990, but is now considered a \"nomen dubium\" indeterminate beyond Theropoda.\n\"Allosaurus meriani\" was a new combination by George Olshevsky for \"Megalosaurus meriani\" Greppin, 1870, based on a tooth from the Late Jurassic of Switzerland. However, a recent overview of \"Ceratosaurus\" included it in \"Ceratosaurus\" sp.\n\"Apatodon mirus\", based on a scrap of vertebra Marsh first thought to be a mammalian jaw, has been listed as a synonym of \"Allosaurus fragilis\". However, it was considered indeterminate beyond Dinosauria by Chure, and Mickey Mortimer believes that the synonymy of \"Apatodon\" with \"Allosaurus\" was due to correspondence to Ralph Molnar by John McIntosh, whereby the latter reportedly found a paper saying that Othniel Charles Marsh admitted that the \"Apatodon\" holotype was actually an allosaurid dorsal vertebra.\n\"A. amplexus\" was named by Gregory S. Paul for giant Morrison allosaur remains, and included in his conception \"Saurophagus maximus\" (later \"Saurophaganax\"). \"A. amplexus\" was originally coined by Cope in 1878 as the type species of his new genus \"Epanterias\", and is based on what is now AMNH 5767, parts of three vertebrae, a coracoid, and a metatarsal. Following Paul's work, this species has been accepted as a synonym of \"A. fragilis\". A 2010 study by Paul and Kenneth Carpenter, however, indicates that \"Epanterias\" is temporally younger than the \"A. fragilis\" type specimen, so it is a separate species at minimum.\n\"A. maximus\" was a new combination by David K. Smith for Chure's \"Saurophaganax maximus\", a taxon created by Chure in 1995 for giant allosaurid remains from the Morrison of Oklahoma. These remains had been known as \"Saurophagus\", but that name was already in use, leading Chure to propose a substitute. Smith, in his 1998 analysis of variation, concluded that \"S. maximus\" was not different enough from \"Allosaurus\" to be a separate genus, but did warrant its own species, \"A. maximus\". This reassignment was rejected in a review of basal tetanurans.\nThere are also several species left over from the synonymizations of \"Creosaurus\" and \"Labrosaurus\" with \"Allosaurus\". \"Creosaurus potens\" was named by Lull in 1911 for a vertebra from the Early Cretaceous of Maryland. It is now regarded as a dubious theropod. \"Labrosaurus stechowi\", described in 1920 by Janensch based on isolated \"Ceratosaurus\"-like teeth from the Tendaguru beds of Tanzania, was listed by Donald F. Glut as a species of \"Allosaurus\", is now considered a dubious ceratosaurian related to \"Ceratosaurus\". \"L. sulcatus\", named by Marsh in 1896 for a Morrison theropod tooth, which like \"L. stechowi\" is now regarded as a dubious \"Ceratosaurus\"-like ceratosaur.\n\"A. tendagurensis\" was named in 1925 by Werner Janensch for a partial shin (MB.R.3620) found in the Kimmeridgian-age Tendaguru Formation in Mtwara, Tanzania. Although tabulated as a tentatively valid species of \"Allosaurus\" in the second edition of the Dinosauria, subsequent studies place it as indeterminate beyond Tetanurae, either a carcharodontosaurian or megalosaurid. Although obscure, it was a large theropod, possibly around 10\u00a0meters long (33\u00a0ft) and 2.5\u00a0metric tons (2.8\u00a0short tons) in weight.\nKurzanov and colleagues in 2003 designated six teeth from Siberia as \"Allosaurus\" sp. (meaning the authors found the specimens to be most like those of \"Allosaurus\", but did not or could not assign a species to them). They were reclassified as an indeterminate theropod. Also, reports of \"Allosaurus\" in Shanxi, China go back to at least 1982. These were interpreted as \"Torvosaurus\" remains in 2012.\nAn astragalus (ankle bone) thought to belong to a species of \"Allosaurus\" was found at Cape Paterson, Victoria in Early Cretaceous beds in southeastern Australia. It was thought to provide evidence that Australia was a refugium for animals that had gone extinct elsewhere. This identification was challenged by Samuel Welles, who thought it more resembled that of an ornithomimid, but the original authors defended their identification. With fifteen years of new specimens and research to look at, Daniel Chure reexamined the bone and found that it was not \"Allosaurus\", but could represent an allosauroid. Similarly, Yoichi Azuma and Phil Currie, in their description of \"Fukuiraptor\", noted that the bone closely resembled that of their new genus. This specimen is sometimes referred to as \"Allosaurus robustus\", an informal museum name. It likely belonged to something similar to \"Australovenator\", although one study considered it to belong to an abelisaur.\nDescription.\n\"Allosaurus\" was a typical large theropod, having a massive skull on a short neck, a long, slightly sloping tail, and reduced forelimbs. \"Allosaurus fragilis\", the best-known species, had an average length of and mass of , with the largest definitive \"Allosaurus\" specimen (AMNH 680) estimated at long, with an estimated weight of . In his 1976 monograph on \"Allosaurus\", James H. Madsen mentioned a range of bone sizes which he interpreted to show a maximum length of . As with dinosaurs in general, weight estimates are debatable, and since 1980 have ranged between , , and approximately for modal adult weight (not maximum). John Foster, a specialist on the Morrison Formation, suggests that is reasonable for large adults of \"A. fragilis\", but that is a closer estimate for individuals represented by the average-sized thigh bones he has measured. Using the subadult specimen nicknamed \"Big Al\", since assigned to the species \"Allosaurus jimmadseni\", researchers using computer modelling arrived at a best estimate of for the individual, but by varying parameters they found a range from approximately to approximately . \"A. europaeus\" has been measured up to in length and in body mass.\nSeveral gigantic specimens have been attributed to \"Allosaurus\", but may in fact belong to other genera. The closely related genus \"Saurophaganax\" (OMNH 1708) reached perhaps in length, and its single species has sometimes been included in the genus \"Allosaurus\" as \"Allosaurus maximus\", though recent studies support it as a separate genus. Another potential specimen of \"Allosaurus\", once assigned to the genus \"Epanterias\" (AMNH 5767), may have measured in length. A more recent discovery is a partial skeleton from the Peterson Quarry in Morrison rocks of New Mexico; this large allosaurid may be another individual of \"Saurophaganax\".\nDavid K. Smith, examining \"Allosaurus\" fossils by quarry, found that the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry (Utah) specimens are generally smaller than those from Como Bluff (Wyoming) or Brigham Young University's Dry Mesa Quarry (Colorado), but the shapes of the bones themselves did not vary between the sites. A later study by Smith incorporating Garden Park (Colorado) and Dinosaur National Monument (Utah) specimens found no justification for multiple species based on skeletal variation; skull variation was most common and was gradational, suggesting individual variation was responsible. Further work on size-related variation again found no consistent differences, although the Dry Mesa material tended to clump together on the basis of the astragalus, an ankle bone. Kenneth Carpenter, using skull elements from the Cleveland-Lloyd site, found wide variation between individuals, calling into question previous species-level distinctions based on such features as the shape of the horns, and the proposed differentiation of \"A. jimmadseni\" based on the shape of the jugal. A study published by Motani \"et al.,\" in 2020 suggests that \"Allosaurus\" was also sexually dimorphic in the width of the femur's head against its length.\nSkull.\nThe skull and teeth of \"Allosaurus\" were modestly proportioned for a theropod of its size. Paleontologist Gregory S. Paul gives a length of for a skull belonging to an individual he estimates at long. Each premaxilla (the bones that formed the tip of the snout) held five teeth with D-shaped cross-sections, and each maxilla (the main tooth-bearing bones in the upper jaw) had between 14 and 17 teeth; the number of teeth does not exactly correspond to the size of the bone. Each dentary (the tooth-bearing bone of the lower jaw) had between 14 and 17 teeth, with an average count of 16. The teeth became shorter, narrower, and more curved toward the back of the skull. All of the teeth had saw-like edges. They were shed easily, and were replaced continually, making them common fossils. Its skull was light, robust and equipped with dozens of sharp, serrated teeth.\nThe skull had a pair of horns above and in front of the eyes. These horns were composed of extensions of the lacrimal bones, and varied in shape and size. There were also lower paired ridges running along the top edges of the nasal bones that led into the horns. The horns were probably covered in a keratin sheath and may have had a variety of functions, including acting as sunshades for the eyes, being used for display, and being used in combat against other members of the same species (although they were fragile). There was a ridge along the back of the skull roof for muscle attachment, as is also seen in tyrannosaurids.\nInside the lacrimal bones were depressions that may have held glands, such as salt glands. Within the maxillae were sinuses that were better developed than those of more basal theropods such as \"Ceratosaurus\" and \"Marshosaurus\"; they may have been related to the sense of smell, perhaps holding something like Jacobson's organs. The roof of the braincase was thin, perhaps to improve thermoregulation for the brain. The skull and lower jaws had joints that permitted motion within these units. In the lower jaws, the bones of the front and back halves loosely articulated, permitting the jaws to bow outward and increasing the animal's gape. The braincase and frontals may also have had a joint.\nPostcranial skeleton.\n\"Allosaurus\" had nine vertebrae in the neck, 14 in the back, and five in the sacrum supporting the hips. The number of tail vertebrae is unknown and varied with individual size; James Madsen estimated about 50, while Gregory S. Paul considered that to be too many and suggested 45 or less. There were hollow spaces in the neck and anterior back vertebrae. Such spaces, which are also found in modern theropods (that is, the birds), are interpreted as having held air sacs used in respiration. The rib cage was broad, giving it a barrel chest, especially in comparison to less derived theropods like \"Ceratosaurus\". \"Allosaurus\" had gastralia (belly ribs), but these are not common findings, and they may have ossified poorly. In one published case, the gastralia show evidence of injury during life. A furcula (wishbone) was also present, but has only been recognized since 1996; in some cases furculae were confused with gastralia. The ilium, the main hip bone, was massive, and the pubic bone had a prominent foot that may have been used for both muscle attachment and as a prop for resting the body on the ground. Madsen noted that in about half of the individuals from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry, independent of size, the pubes had not fused to each other at their foot ends. He suggested that this was a sexual characteristic, with females lacking fused bones to make egg-laying easier. This proposal has not attracted further attention, however.\nThe forelimbs of \"Allosaurus\" were short in comparison to the hindlimbs (only about 35% the length of the hindlimbs in adults) and had three fingers per hand, tipped with large, strongly curved and pointed claws. The arms were powerful, and the forearm was somewhat shorter than the upper arm (1:1.2\u00a0ulna/humerus ratio). The wrist had a version of the semilunate carpal also found in more derived theropods like maniraptorans. Of the three fingers, the innermost (or thumb) was the largest, and diverged from the others. The phalangeal formula is 2-3-4-0-0, meaning that the innermost finger (phalange) has two bones, the next has three, and the third finger has four. The legs were not as long or suited for speed as those of tyrannosaurids, and the claws of the toes were less developed and more hoof-like than those of earlier theropods. Each foot had three weight-bearing toes and an inner dewclaw, which Madsen suggested could have been used for grasping in juveniles. There was also what is interpreted as the splint-like remnant of a fifth (outermost) metatarsal, perhaps used as a lever between the Achilles tendon and foot.\nSkin.\nSkin impressions from \"Allosaurus\" have been described. One impression, from a juvenile specimen, measures 30\u00a0cm\u00b2 and is associated with the anterior dorsal ribs/pectoral region. The impression show small scales measuring 1\u20133\u00a0mm in diameter. A large skin impression from the \"Big Al Two\" specimen, associated with the base of the tail, measures 20\u00a0cm x 20\u00a0cm, and show large scales measuring up to 2\u00a0cm in diameter. However it has been noted that these scales are more similar to those of sauropods, and due to the presence of non-theropod remains associated with the tail of \"Big Al Two\" there is a possibility that this skin impression is not from \"Allosaurus\".\nAnother \"Allosaurus\" fossil feature a skin impression from the mandible, showing scales measuring 1\u20132\u00a0mm in diameter. The same fossil also preserves skin impressions from the ventral side of the neck, showing broad scutes. A small skin impression from an \"Allosaurus\" skull has been reported, but never described.\nClassification.\n\"Allosaurus\" was an allosaurid, a member of a family of large theropods within the larger group Carnosauria. The family name Allosauridae was created for this genus in 1878 by Othniel Charles Marsh, but the term was largely unused until the 1970s in favor of Megalosauridae, another family of large theropods that eventually became a wastebasket taxon. This, along with the use of \"Antrodemus\" for \"Allosaurus\" during the same period, is a point that needs to be remembered when searching for information on \"Allosaurus\" in publications that predate James Madsen's 1976 monograph. Major publications using the name \"Megalosauridae\" instead of \"Allosauridae\" include Gilmore, 1920, von Huene, 1926, Romer, 1956 and 1966, Steel, 1970, and Walker, 1964.\nFollowing the publication of Madsen's influential monograph, Allosauridae became the preferred family assignment, but it too was not strongly defined. Semi-technical works used Allosauridae for a variety of large theropods, usually those that were larger and better-known than megalosaurids. Typical theropods that were thought to be related to \"Allosaurus\" included \"Indosaurus\", \"Piatnitzkysaurus\", \"Piveteausaurus\", \"Yangchuanosaurus\", \"Acrocanthosaurus\", \"Chilantaisaurus\", \"Compsosuchus\", \"Stokesosaurus\", and \"Szechuanosaurus\". Given modern knowledge of theropod diversity and the advent of cladistic study of evolutionary relationships, none of these theropods is now recognized as an allosaurid, although several, like \"Acrocanthosaurus\" and \"Yangchuanosaurus\", are members of closely related families.\nBelow is a cladogram based on the analysis of Benson \"et al.\" in 2010.\nAllosauridae is one of four families in Allosauroidea; the other three are Neovenatoridae, Carcharodontosauridae and Sinraptoridae. Allosauridae has at times been proposed as ancestral to the Tyrannosauridae (which would make it paraphyletic), one example being Gregory S. Paul's \"Predatory Dinosaurs of the World\", but this has been rejected, with tyrannosaurids identified as members of a separate branch of theropods, the Coelurosauria. Allosauridae is the smallest of the carnosaur families, with only \"Saurophaganax\" and a currently unnamed French allosauroid accepted as possible valid genera besides \"Allosaurus\" in the most recent review. Another genus, \"Epanterias\", is a potential valid member, but it and \"Saurophaganax\" may turn out to be large examples of \"Allosaurus\". Recent reviews have kept the genus \"Saurophaganax\" and included \"Epanterias\" with \"Allosaurus\".\nPaleobiology.\nLife history.\nThe wealth of \"Allosaurus\" fossils, from nearly all ages of individuals, allows scientists to study how the animal grew and how long its lifespan may have been. Remains may reach as far back in the lifespan as eggs\u2014crushed eggs from Colorado have been suggested as those of \"Allosaurus\". Based on histological analysis of limb bones, bone deposition appears to stop at around 22 to 28\u00a0years, which is comparable to that of other large theropods like \"Tyrannosaurus\". From the same analysis, its maximum growth appears to have been at age\u00a015, with an estimated growth rate of about 150\u00a0kilograms (330\u00a0lb) per year.\nMedullary bone tissue (endosteally derived, ephemeral, mineralization located inside the medulla of the long bones in gravid female birds) has been reported in at least one \"Allosaurus\" specimen, a shin bone from the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry. Today, this bone tissue is only formed in female birds that are laying eggs, as it is used to supply calcium to shells. Its presence in the \"Allosaurus\" individual has been used to establish sex and show it had reached reproductive age. However, other studies have called into question some cases of medullary bone in dinosaurs, including this \"Allosaurus\" individual. Data from extant birds suggested that the medullary bone in this \"Allosaurus\" individual may have been the result of a bone pathology instead. However, with the confirmation of medullary tissue indicating sex in a specimen of \"Tyrannosaurus\", it may be possible to ascertain whether or not the \"Allosaurus\" in question was indeed female.\nThe discovery of a juvenile specimen with a nearly complete hindlimb shows that the legs were relatively longer in juveniles, and the lower segments of the leg (shin and foot) were relatively longer than the thigh. These differences suggest that younger \"Allosaurus\" were faster and had different hunting strategies than adults, perhaps chasing small prey as juveniles, then becoming ambush hunters of large prey upon adulthood. The thigh bone became thicker and wider during growth, and the cross-section less circular, as muscle attachments shifted, muscles became shorter, and the growth of the leg slowed. These changes imply that juvenile legs has less predictable stresses compared with adults, which would have moved with more regular forward progression. Conversely, the skull bones appear to have generally grown isometrically, increasing in size without changing in proportion.\nFeeding.\nMany paleontologists accept \"Allosaurus\" as an active predator of large animals. There is dramatic evidence for allosaur attacks on \"Stegosaurus\", including an \"Allosaurus\" tail vertebra with a partially healed puncture wound that fits a \"Stegosaurus\" tail spike, and a \"Stegosaurus\" neck plate with a U-shaped wound that correlates well with an \"Allosaurus\" snout. Sauropods seem to be likely candidates as both live prey and as objects of scavenging, based on the presence of scrapings on sauropod bones fitting allosaur teeth well and the presence of shed allosaur teeth with sauropod bones. However, as Gregory Paul noted in 1988, \"Allosaurus\" was probably not a predator of fully grown sauropods, unless it hunted in packs, as it had a modestly sized skull and relatively small teeth, and was greatly outweighed by contemporaneous sauropods. Another possibility is that it preferred to hunt juveniles instead of fully grown adults. Research in the 1990s and the first decade of the 21st century may have found other solutions to this question. Robert T. Bakker, comparing \"Allosaurus\" to Cenozoic saber-toothed carnivorous mammals, found similar adaptations, such as a reduction of jaw muscles and increase in neck muscles, and the ability to open the jaws extremely wide. Although \"Allosaurus\" did not have saber teeth, Bakker suggested another mode of attack that would have used such neck and jaw adaptations: the short teeth in effect became small serrations on a saw-like cutting edge running the length of the upper jaw, which would have been driven into prey. This type of jaw would permit slashing attacks against much larger prey, with the goal of weakening the victim.\nSimilar conclusions were drawn by another study using finite element analysis on an \"Allosaurus\" skull. According to their biomechanical analysis, the skull was very strong but had a relatively small bite force. By using jaw muscles only, it could produce a bite force of 805 to 8,724\u00a0N, but the skull could withstand nearly 55,500\u00a0N of vertical force against the tooth row. The authors suggested that \"Allosaurus\" used its skull like a machete against prey, attacking open-mouthed, slashing flesh with its teeth, and tearing it away without splintering bones, unlike \"Tyrannosaurus\", which is thought to have been capable of damaging bones. They also suggested that the architecture of the skull could have permitted the use of different strategies against different prey; the skull was light enough to allow attacks on smaller and more agile ornithopods, but strong enough for high-impact ambush attacks against larger prey like stegosaurids and sauropods. Their interpretations were challenged by other researchers, who found no modern analogues to a hatchet attack and considered it more likely that the skull was strong to compensate for its open construction when absorbing the stresses from struggling prey. The original authors noted that \"Allosaurus\" itself has no modern equivalent, that the tooth row is well-suited to such an attack, and that articulations in the skull cited by their detractors as problematic actually helped protect the palate and lessen stress. Another possibility for handling large prey is that theropods like \"Allosaurus\" were \"flesh grazers\" which could take bites of flesh out of living sauropods that were sufficient to sustain the predator so it would not have needed to expend the effort to kill the prey outright. This strategy would also potentially have allowed the prey to recover and be fed upon in a similar way later. An additional suggestion notes that ornithopods were the most common available dinosaurian prey, and that allosaurs may have subdued them by using an attack similar to that of modern big cats: grasping the prey with their forelimbs, and then making multiple bites on the throat to crush the trachea. This is compatible with other evidence that the forelimbs were strong and capable of restraining prey. Studies done by Stephen Lautenschager \"et al.\" from the University of Bristol also indicate \"Allosaurus\" could open its jaws quite wide and sustain considerable muscle force. When compared with \"Tyrannosaurus\" and the therizinosaurid \"Erlikosaurus\" in the same study, it was found that \"Allosaurus\" had a wider gape than either; the animal was capable of opening its jaws to a 92-degree angle at maximum. The findings also indicate that large carnivorous dinosaurs, like modern carnivores, had wider jaw gapes than herbivores.\nA biomechanical study published in 2013 by Eric Snively and colleagues found that \"Allosaurus\" had an unusually low attachment point on the skull for the longissimus capitis superficialis neck muscle compared to other theropods such as \"Tyrannosaurus\". This would have allowed the animal to make rapid and forceful vertical movements with the skull. The authors found that vertical strikes as proposed by Bakker and Rayfield are consistent with the animal's capabilities. They also found that the animal probably processed carcasses by vertical movements in a similar manner to falcons, such as kestrels: the animal could have gripped prey with the skull and feet, then pulled back and up to remove flesh. This differs from the prey-handling envisioned for tyrannosaurids, which probably tore flesh with lateral shakes of the skull, similar to crocodilians. In addition, \"Allosaurus\" was able to \"move its head and neck around relatively rapidly and with considerable control\", at the cost of power.\nOther aspects of feeding include the eyes, arms, and legs. The shape of the skull of \"Allosaurus\" limited potential binocular vision to 20\u00b0 of width, slightly less than that of modern crocodilians. As with crocodilians, this may have been enough to judge prey distance and time attacks. The arms, compared with those of other theropods, were suited for both grasping prey at a distance or clutching it close, and the articulation of the claws suggests that they could have been used to hook things. Finally, the top speed of \"Allosaurus\" has been estimated at 30 to 55\u00a0kilometers per hour (19 to 34\u00a0miles per hour).\nA paper on the cranio-dental morphology of \"Allosaurus\" and how it worked has deemed the hatchet jaw attack unlikely, reinterpreting the unusually wide gape as an adaptation to allow \"Allosaurus\" to deliver a muscle-driven bite to large prey, with the weaker jaw muscles being a trade-off to allow for the widened gape.\nSocial behavior.\nIt has been speculated since the 1970s that \"Allosaurus\" preyed on sauropods and other large dinosaurs by hunting in groups.\nSuch a depiction is common in semitechnical and popular dinosaur literature. Robert T. Bakker has extended social behavior to parental care, and has interpreted shed allosaur teeth and chewed bones of large prey animals as evidence that adult allosaurs brought food to lairs for their young to eat until they were grown, and prevented other carnivores from scavenging on the food. However, there is actually little evidence of gregarious behavior in theropods, and social interactions with members of the same species would have included antagonistic encounters, as shown by injuries to gastralia and bite wounds to skulls (the pathologic lower jaw named \"Labrosaurus ferox\" is one such possible example). Such head-biting may have been a way to establish dominance in a pack or to settle territorial disputes.\nAlthough \"Allosaurus\" may have hunted in packs, it has been argued that \"Allosaurus\" and other theropods had largely aggressive interactions instead of cooperative interactions with other members of their own species. The study in question noted that cooperative hunting of prey much larger than an individual predator, as is commonly inferred for theropod dinosaurs, is rare among vertebrates in general, and modern diapsid carnivores (including lizards, crocodiles, and birds) rarely cooperate to hunt in such a way. Instead, they are typically territorial and will kill and cannibalize intruders of the same species, and will also do the same to smaller individuals that attempt to eat before they do when aggregated at feeding sites. According to this interpretation, the accumulation of remains of multiple \"Allosaurus\" individuals at the same site; e.g., in the Cleveland\u2013Lloyd Quarry, are not due to pack hunting, but to the fact that \"Allosaurus\" individuals were drawn together to feed on other disabled or dead allosaurs, and were sometimes killed in the process. This could explain the high proportion of juvenile and subadult allosaurs present, as juveniles and subadults are disproportionally killed at modern group feeding sites of animals like crocodiles and Komodo dragons. The same interpretation applies to Bakker's lair sites. There is some evidence for cannibalism in \"Allosaurus\", including \"Allosaurus\" shed teeth found among rib fragments, possible tooth marks on a shoulder blade, and cannibalized allosaur skeletons among the bones at Bakker's lair sites.\nBrain and senses.\nThe brain of \"Allosaurus\", as interpreted from spiral CT scanning of an endocast, was more consistent with crocodilian brains than those of the other living archosaurs, birds. The structure of the vestibular apparatus indicates that the skull was held nearly horizontal, as opposed to strongly tipped up or down. The structure of the inner ear was like that of a crocodilian, and so \"Allosaurus\" probably could have heard lower frequencies best, and would have had trouble with subtle sounds. The olfactory bulbs were large and seem to have been well suited for detecting odors, although the area for evaluating smells was relatively small.\nPaleopathology.\nIn 2001, Bruce Rothschild and others published a study examining evidence for stress fractures and tendon avulsions in theropod dinosaurs and the implications for their behavior. Since stress fractures are caused by repeated trauma rather than singular events they are more likely to be caused by the behavior of the animal than other kinds of injury. Stress fractures and tendon avulsions occurring in the forelimb have special behavioral significance since while injuries to the feet could be caused by running or migration, resistant prey items are the most probable source of injuries to the hand. \"Allosaurus\" was one of only two theropods examined in the study to exhibit a tendon avulsion, and in both cases the avulsion occurred on the forelimb. When the researchers looked for stress fractures, they found that \"Allosaurus\" had a significantly greater number of stress fractures than \"Albertosaurus\", \"Ornithomimus\" or \"Archaeornithomimus\". Of the 47 hand bones the researchers studied, three were found to contain stress fractures. Of the feet, 281 bones were studied and 17 were found to have stress fractures. The stress fractures in the foot bones \"were distributed to the proximal phalanges\" and occurred across all three weight-bearing toes in \"statistically indistinguishable\" numbers. Since the lower end of the third metatarsal would have contacted the ground first while an allosaur was running, it would have borne the most stress. If the allosaurs' stress fractures were caused by damage accumulating while walking or running this bone should have experience more stress fractures than the others. The lack of such a bias in the examined \"Allosaurus\" fossils indicates an origin for the stress fractures from a source other than running. The authors conclude that these fractures occurred during interaction with prey, like an allosaur trying to hold struggling prey with its feet. The abundance of stress fractures and avulsion injuries in \"Allosaurus\" provide evidence for \"very active\" predation-based rather than scavenging diets.\nThe left scapula and fibula of an \"Allosaurus fragilis\" specimen catalogued as USNM 4734 are both pathological, both probably due to healed fractures. The specimen USNM 8367 preserved several pathological gastralia which preserve evidence of healed fractures near their middle. Some of the fractures were poorly healed and \"formed pseudoarthroses\". A specimen with a fractured rib was recovered from the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry. Another specimen had fractured ribs and fused vertebrae near the end of the tail. An apparent subadult male \"Allosaurus fragilis\" was reported to have extensive pathologies, with a total of fourteen separate injuries. The specimen MOR 693 had pathologies on five ribs, the sixth neck vertebra, the third, eighth, and thirteenth back vertebrae, the second tail vertebra and its chevron, the gastralia right scapula, manual phalanx I left ilium metatarsals III and V, the first phalanx of the third toe and the third phalanx of the second. The ilium had \"a large hole...caused by a blow from above\". The near end of the first phalanx of the third toe was afflicted by an involucrum.\nOther pathologies reported in \"Allosaurus\" include:\nPaleoecology.\n\"Allosaurus\" was the most common large theropod in the vast tract of Western American fossil-bearing rock known as the Morrison Formation, accounting for 70 to 75% of theropod specimens, and as such was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food chain. The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons, and flat floodplains. Vegetation varied from river-lining forests of conifers, tree ferns, and ferns (gallery forests), to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the \"Araucaria\"-like conifer \"Brachyphyllum\".\nThe Morrison Formation has been a rich fossil hunting ground. The flora of the period has been revealed by fossils of green algae, fungi, mosses, horsetails, ferns, cycads, ginkgoes, and several families of conifers. Animal fossils discovered include bivalves, snails, ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles, sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphs, several species of pterosaur, numerous dinosaur species, and early mammals such as docodonts, multituberculates, symmetrodonts, and triconodonts. Dinosaurs known from the Morrison include the theropods \"Ceratosaurus\", \"Ornitholestes\", \"Tanycolagreus\", and \"Torvosaurus\", the sauropods \"Haplocanthosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Cathetosaurus\", \"Brachiosaurus\", \"Suuwassea\", \"Apatosaurus\", \"Brontosaurus\", \"Barosaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", \"Supersaurus\", \"Amphicoelias\", and \"Maraapunisaurus\", and the ornithischians \"Camptosaurus\", \"Dryosaurus\", and \"Stegosaurus\". \"Allosaurus\" is commonly found at the same sites as \"Apatosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", and \"Stegosaurus\". The Late Jurassic formations of Portugal where \"Allosaurus\" is present are interpreted as having been similar to the Morrison, but with a stronger marine influence. Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks (mainly \"Allosaurus\", \"Ceratosaurus\", \"Torvosaurus\", and \"Stegosaurus\"), or have a close counterpart (\"Brachiosaurus\" and \"Lusotitan\", \"Camptosaurus\" and \"Draconyx\").\n\"Allosaurus\" coexisted with fellow large theropods \"Ceratosaurus\" and \"Torvosaurus\" in both the United States and Portugal. The three appear to have had different ecological niches, based on anatomy and the location of fossils. \"Ceratosaurus\" and \"Torvosaurus\" may have preferred to be active around waterways, and had lower, thinner bodies that would have given them an advantage in forest and underbrush terrains, whereas \"Allosaurus\" was more compact, with longer legs, faster but less maneuverable, and seems to have preferred dry floodplains. \"Ceratosaurus\", better known than \"Torvosaurus\", differed noticeably from \"Allosaurus\" in functional anatomy by having a taller, narrower skull with large, broad teeth. \"Allosaurus\" was itself a potential food item to other carnivores, as illustrated by an \"Allosaurus\" pubic foot marked by the teeth of another theropod, probably \"Ceratosaurus\" or \"Torvosaurus\". The location of the bone in the body (along the bottom margin of the torso and partially shielded by the legs), and the fact that it was among the most massive in the skeleton, indicates that the \"Allosaurus\" was being scavenged.\nA bone assemblage in the Upper Jurassic Mygatt-Moore Quarry preserves an unusually high occurrence of theropod bite marks, most of which can be attributed to \"Allosaurus\" and \"Ceratosaurus\", while others could have been made by \"Saurophaganax\" or \"Torvosaurus\" given the size of the striations. While the position of the bite marks on the herbivorous dinosaurs is consistent with predation or early access to remains, bite marks found on \"Allosaurus\" material suggest scavenging, either from the other theropods or from another \"Allosaurus\". The unusually high concentration of theropod bite marks compared to other assemblages could be explained either by a more complete utilization of resources during a dry season by theropods, or by a collecting bias in other localities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1348", "revid": "44626488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1348", "title": "AK-47", "text": "1949 Soviet 7.62\u00d739mm assault rifle\nThe AK-47, officially known as the Avtomat Kalashnikova (Russian: , 'Kalashnikov's automatic [rifle]'; also known as the Kalashnikov or just AK), is a gas-operated assault rifle that is chambered for the 7.62\u00d739mm cartridge. Developed in the Soviet Union by Russian small-arms designer Mikhail Kalashnikov, it is the originating firearm of the Kalashnikov (or \"AK\") family of rifles. After more than seven decades since its creation, the AK-47 model and its variants remain one of the most popular and widely used firearms in the world.\nDesign work on the AK-47 began in 1945. It was presented for official military trials in 1947, and, in 1948, the fixed-stock version was introduced into active service for selected units of the Soviet Army. In early 1949, the AK was officially accepted by the Soviet Armed Forces and used by the majority of the member states of the Warsaw Pact.\nThe model and its variants owe their global popularity to their reliability under harsh conditions, low production cost (compared to contemporary weapons), availability in virtually every geographic region, and ease of use. The AK has been manufactured in many countries, and has seen service with armed forces as well as irregular forces and insurgencies throughout the world. As of 2004[ [update]], \"of the estimated 500 million firearms worldwide, approximately 100 million belong to the Kalashnikov family, three-quarters of which are AK-47s\". The model is the basis for the development of many other types of individual, crew-served and specialized firearms.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nDuring World War II, the Sturmgewehr 44 rifle used by German forces made a deep impression on their Soviet counterparts. The select-fire rifle was chambered for a new intermediate cartridge, the 7.92\u00d733mm Kurz, and combined the firepower of a submachine gun with the range and accuracy of a rifle. On 15 July 1943, an earlier model of the Sturmgewehr was demonstrated before the People's Commissariat of Arms of the USSR. The Soviets were impressed with the weapon and immediately set about developing an intermediate caliber fully automatic rifle of their own, to replace the PPSh-41 submachine guns and outdated Mosin\u2013Nagant bolt-action rifles that armed most of the Soviet Army.\nThe Soviets soon developed the 7.62\u00d739mm M43 cartridge, used in the semi-automatic SKS carbine and the RPD light machine gun. Shortly after World War II, the Soviets developed the AK-47 rifle, which quickly replaced the SKS in Soviet service. Introduced in 1959, the AKM is a lighter stamped steel version and the most ubiquitous variant of the entire AK series of firearms. In the 1960s, the Soviets introduced the RPK light machine gun, an AK type weapon with a stronger receiver, a longer heavy barrel, and a bipod, that eventually replaced the RPD light machine gun.\nConcept.\nMikhail Kalashnikov began his career as a weapon designer in 1941 while recuperating from a shoulder wound which he received during the Battle of Bryansk. Kalashnikov himself stated...\"I was in the hospital, and a soldier in the bed beside me asked: 'Why do our soldiers have only one rifle for two or three of our men, when the Germans have automatics?' So I designed one. I was a soldier, and I created a machine gun for a soldier. It was called an Avtomat Kalashnikova, the automatic weapon of Kalashnikov\u2014AK\u2014and it carried the year of its first manufacture, 1947.\"\nThe AK-47 is best described as a hybrid of previous rifle technology innovations. \"Kalashnikov decided to design an automatic rifle combining the best features of the American M1 Garand and the German StG 44.\" Kalashnikov's team had access to these weapons and had no need to \"reinvent the wheel\". Kalashnikov himself observed: \"A lot of Russian Army soldiers ask me how one can become a constructor, and how new weaponry is designed. These are very difficult questions. Each designer seems to have his own paths, his own successes and failures. But one thing is clear: before attempting to create something new, it is vital to have a good appreciation of everything that already exists in this field. I myself have had many experiences confirming this to be so.\"\nSome claimed that Kalashnikov copied designs like Bulkin's TKB-415 or Simonov's AVS-31.\nEarly designs.\nKalashnikov started work on a submachine gun design in 1942 and light machine gun design in 1943. Early in 1944, Kalashnikov was given some 7.62\u00d739mm M43 cartridges and informed that other designers were working on weapons for this new Soviet small-arms cartridge. It was suggested that a new weapon might well lead to greater things. He then undertook work on the new rifle. In 1944, he entered a design competition with this new 7.62\u00d739mm, semi-automatic, gas-operated, long-stroke piston carbine, strongly influenced by the American M1 Garand. The new rifle was in the same class as the SKS-45 carbine, with a fixed magazine and gas tube above the barrel. However, the new Kalashnikov design lost out to a Simonov design.\nIn 1946, a new design competition was initiated to develop a new rifle. Kalashnikov submitted a gas-operated rifle with a short-stroke gas piston above the barrel, a breechblock mechanism similar to his 1944 carbine, and a curved 30-round magazine. Kalashnikov's rifles, the AK-1 (with a milled receiver) and AK-2 (with a stamped receiver), proved to be reliable weapons and were accepted to a second round of competition along with other designs.\nThese prototypes (also known as the AK-46) had a rotary bolt, a two-part receiver with separate trigger unit housing, dual controls (separate safety and fire selector switches) and a non-reciprocating charging handle located on the left side of the weapon. This design had many similarities to the StG 44. In late 1946, as the rifles were being tested, one of Kalashnikov's assistants, Aleksandr Zaitsev, suggested a major redesign to improve reliability. At first, Kalashnikov was reluctant, given that their rifle had already fared better than its competitors. Eventually, however, Zaitsev managed to persuade Kalashnikov.\nIn November 1947, the new prototypes (AK-47s) were completed. The rifle used a long-stroke gas piston above the barrel. The upper and lower receivers were combined into a single receiver. The selector and safety were combined into a single control lever/dust cover on the right side of the rifle. And, the bolt-handle was simply attached to the bolt-carrier. This simplified the design and production of the rifle. The first army trial series began in early 1948. The new rifle proved to be reliable under a wide range of conditions and possessed convenient handling characteristics. In 1949, it was adopted by the Soviet Army as \"7.62\u00a0mm Kalashnikov rifle (AK)\".\nFurther development.\nThere were many difficulties during the initial phase of production. The first production models had stamped sheet metal receivers with a milled trunnion and butt stock insert, and a stamped body. Difficulties were encountered in welding the guide and ejector rails, causing high rejection rates. Instead of halting production, a heavy machined receiver was substituted for the sheet metal receiver. Even though production of these milled rifles started in 1951, they were officially referred to as AK-49, based on the date their development started, but they are widely known in the collectors' and current commercial market as \"Type 2 AK-47\". This was a more costly process, but the use of machined receivers accelerated production as tooling and labor for the earlier Mosin\u2013Nagant rifle's machined receiver were easily adapted. Partly because of these problems, the Soviets were not able to distribute large numbers of the new rifle to soldiers until 1956. During this time, production of the interim SKS rifle continued.\nOnce the manufacturing difficulties of non-milled receivers had been overcome, a redesigned version designated the AKM (M for \"modernized\" or \"upgraded\"; in Russian: []) was introduced in 1959. This new model used a stamped sheet metal receiver and featured a slanted muzzle brake on the end of the barrel to compensate for muzzle rise under recoil. In addition, a hammer retarder was added to prevent the weapon from firing out of battery (without the bolt being fully closed), during rapid or fully automatic fire. This is also sometimes referred to as a \"cyclic rate reducer\", or simply \"rate reducer\", as it also has the effect of reducing the number of rounds fired per minute during fully automatic fire. The rifle was also roughly one-third lighter than the previous model.\nMost licensed and unlicensed productions of the Kalashnikov assault rifle abroad were of the AKM variant, partially due to the much easier production of the stamped receiver. This model is the most commonly encountered, having been produced in much greater quantities. All rifles based on the Kalashnikov design are often colloquially referred to as \"AK-47s\" in the West and some parts of Asia, although this is only correct when applied to rifles based on the original three receiver types. In most former Eastern Bloc countries, the weapon is known simply as the \"Kalashnikov\" or \"AK\". The differences between the milled and stamped receivers includes the use of rivets rather than welds on the stamped receiver, as well as the placement of a small dimple above the magazine well for stabilization of the magazine.\nReplacement.\nIn 1974, the Soviets began replacing their AK-47 and AKM rifles with a newer design, the AK-74, which uses 5.45\u00d739mm ammunition. This new rifle and cartridge had only started to be manufactured in Eastern European nations when the Soviet Union collapsed, drastically slowing production of the AK-74 and other weapons of the former Soviet bloc.\nDesign.\nThe AK-47 was designed to be a simple, reliable fully automatic rifle that could be manufactured quickly and cheaply, using mass production methods that were state of the art in the Soviet Union during the late 1940s. The AK-47 uses a long-stroke gas system generally associated with high reliability in adverse conditions. The large gas piston, generous clearance between moving parts, and tapered cartridge case design allow the gun to endure large amounts of foreign matter and fouling without failing to cycle.\nCartridge.\nThe AK fires the 7.62\u00d739mm cartridge with a muzzle velocity of .\nThe cartridge weight is , the projectile weight is . The original Soviet M43 bullets are 123 grain boat-tail bullets with a copper-plated steel jacket, a large steel core, and some lead between the core and the jacket. The AK has excellent penetration when shooting through heavy foliage, walls or a common vehicle's metal body and into an opponent attempting to use these things as cover. The 7.62\u00d739mm M43 projectile does not generally fragment when striking an opponent and has an unusual tendency to remain intact even after making contact with bone. The 7.62\u00d739mm round produces significant wounding in cases where the bullet tumbles (yaws) in tissue, but produces relatively minor wounds in cases where the bullet exits before beginning to yaw. In the absence of yaw, the M43 round can pencil through tissue with relatively little injury.\nMost, if not all, of the 7.62\u00d739mm ammunition found today is of the upgraded M67 variety. This variety deleted the steel insert, shifting the center of gravity rearward, and allowing the projectile to destabilize (or yaw) at about , nearly earlier in tissue than the M43 round. This change also reduces penetration in ballistic gelatin to ~ for the newer M67 round versus ~ for the older M43 round. However, the wounding potential of M67 is mostly limited to the small permanent wound channel the bullet itself makes, especially when the bullet yaws.\nOperating mechanism.\nTo fire, the operator inserts a loaded magazine, pulls back and releases the charging handle, and then pulls the trigger. In semi-automatic, the firearm fires only once, requiring the trigger to be released and depressed again for the next shot. In fully automatic, the rifle continues to fire automatically cycling fresh rounds into the chamber until the magazine is exhausted or pressure is released from the trigger. After ignition of the cartridge primer and propellant, rapidly expanding propellant gases are diverted into the gas cylinder above the barrel through a vent near the muzzle. The build-up of gases inside the gas cylinder drives the long-stroke piston and bolt carrier rearward and a cam guide machined into the underside of the bolt carrier, along with an ejector spur on the bolt carrier rail guide, rotates the bolt approximately 35\u00b0 and unlocks it from the barrel extension via a camming pin on the bolt. The moving assembly has about of free travel, which creates a delay between the initial recoil impulse of the piston and the bolt unlocking sequence, allowing gas pressures to drop to a safe level before the seal between the chamber and the bolt is broken. The AK-47 does not have a gas valve; excess gases are ventilated through a series of radial ports in the gas cylinder. Unlike many other rifle platforms, such as the AR-15 platform, the Kalashnikov platform bolt locking lugs are chamfered allowing for primary extraction upon bolt rotation which aids reliable feeding and extraction, albeit not with that much force due to the short distance the bolt carrier travels before acting on the locking lug. The Kalashnikov platform then uses an extractor claw to eject the spent cartridge case.\nBarrel.\nThe rifle received a barrel with a chrome-lined bore and four right-hand grooves at a 240\u00a0mm (1 in 9.45 in) or 31.5 calibers rifling twist rate. The gas block contains a gas channel that is installed at a slanted angle in relation to the bore axis. The muzzle is threaded for the installation of various muzzle devices such as a muzzle brake or a blank-firing adaptor.\nGas block.\nThe gas block of the AK-47 features a cleaning rod capture or sling loop. Gas relief ports that alleviate gas pressure are placed horizontally in a row on the gas cylinder.\nFire selector.\nThe fire selector is a large lever located on the right side of the rifle; it acts as a dust cover and prevents the charging handle from being pulled fully to the rear when it is on safe. It is operated by the shooter's right fore-fingers and has three settings: safe (up), full-auto (center), and semi-auto (down). The reason for this is that a soldier under stress will push the selector lever down with considerable force, bypassing the full-auto stage and setting the rifle to semi-auto. To set the AK-47 to full-auto requires the deliberate action of centering the selector lever. To operate the fire selector lever, right-handed shooters have to briefly remove their right hand from the pistol grip, which is ergonomically sub-optimal. Some AK-type rifles also have a more traditional selector lever on the left side of the receiver, just above the pistol grip. This lever is operated by the shooter's right thumb and has three settings: safe (forward), full-auto (center), and semi-auto (backward).\nSights.\nThe AK-47 uses a notched rear tangent iron sight calibrated in increments from . The front sight is a post adjustable for elevation in the field. Horizontal adjustment requires a special drift tool and is done by the armory before issue or if the need arises by an armorer after issue. The sight line elements are approximately over the bore axis. The \"point-blank range\" battle zero setting \"\u041f\" standing for \"\u043f\u043e\u0441\u0442\u043e\u044f\u043d\u043d\u0430\u044f\" (constant) on the 7.62\u00d739mm AK-47 rear tangent sight element corresponds to a zero. These settings mirror the Mosin\u2013Nagant and SKS rifles, which the AK-47 replaced. For the AK-47 combined with service cartridges, the 300 m battle zero setting limits the apparent \"bullet rise\" within approximately relative to the line of sight. Soldiers are instructed to fire at any target within this range by simply placing the sights on the center of mass (the belt buckle, according to Russian and former Soviet doctrine) of the enemy target. Any errors in range estimation are tactically irrelevant, as a well-aimed shot will hit the torso of the enemy soldier. Some AK-type rifles have a front sight with a flip-up luminous dot that is calibrated at , for improved night fighting.\nFurniture.\nThe AK-47 was originally equipped with a buttstock, handguard and an upper heat guard made from solid wood. With the introduction of the Type 3 receiver the buttstock, lower handguard and upper heatguard were manufactured from birch plywood laminates. Such engineered woods are stronger and resist warping better than the conventional one-piece patterns, do not require lengthy maturing, and are cheaper. The wooden furniture was finished with the Russian amber shellac finishing process. AKS and AKMS models featured a downward-folding metal butt-stock similar to that of the German MP40 submachine-gun, for use in the restricted space in the BMP infantry combat vehicle, as well as by paratroops. All 100 series AKs use plastic furniture with side-folding stocks.\nMagazines.\nThe standard magazine capacity is 30 rounds. There are also 10, 20, and 40-round box magazines, as well as 75-round drum magazines.\nThe AK-47's standard 30-round magazines have a pronounced curve that allows them to smoothly feed ammunition into the chamber. Their heavy steel construction combined with \"feed-lips\" (the surfaces at the top of the magazine that control the angle at which the cartridge enters the chamber) machined from a single steel billet makes them highly resistant to damage. These magazines are so strong that \"Soldiers have been known to use their mags as hammers, and even bottle openers\". This contributes to the AK-47 magazine being more reliable, but makes it heavier than U.S. and NATO magazines.\nThe early slab-sided steel AK-47 30-round detachable box magazines had sheet-metal bodies and weighed empty. The later steel AKM 30-round magazines had lighter sheet-metal bodies with prominent reinforcing ribs weighing empty. To further reduce weight, a lightweight magazine with an aluminum body with a prominent reinforcing waffle rib pattern weighing empty was developed for the AKM that proved to be too fragile and the small issued amount of these magazines was quickly withdrawn from service. As a replacement steel-reinforced 30-round plastic 7.62\u00d739mm box magazines were introduced. These rust-colored magazines weigh empty and are often mistakenly identified as being made of Bakelite (a phenolic resin), but were actually fabricated from two-parts of AG-S4 molding compound (a glass-reinforced phenol-formaldehyde binder impregnated composite), assembled using an epoxy resin adhesive. Noted for their durability, these magazines did however compromise the rifle's camouflage and lacked the small horizontal reinforcing ribs running down both sides of the magazine body near the front that were added on all later plastic magazine generations. A second generation steel-reinforced dark-brown (color shades vary from maroon to plum to near black) 30-round 7.62\u00d739mm magazine was introduced in the early 1980s, fabricated from ABS plastic. The third generation steel-reinforced 30-round 7.62\u00d739mm magazine is similar to the second generation, but is darker colored and has a matte nonreflective surface finish. The current issue steel-reinforced matte true black nonreflective surface finished 7.62\u00d739mm 30-round magazines, fabricated from ABS plastic weigh empty.\nEarly steel AK-47 magazines are long; the later ribbed steel AKM and newer plastic 7.62\u00d739mm magazines are about shorter.\nThe transition from steel to mainly plastic magazines yields a significant weight reduction and allows a soldier to carry more ammunition for the same weight.\nAll 7.62\u00d739mm AK magazines are backwards compatible with older AK variants.\n10.12\u00a0kg (22.3\u00a0lb) is the maximum amount of ammo that the average soldier can comfortably carry. It also allows for best comparison of the three most common 7.62\u00d739mm AK magazines.\nMost Yugoslavian and some East German AK magazines were made with cartridge followers that hold the bolt open when empty; however, most AK magazine followers allow the bolt to close when the magazine is empty.\nAccessories.\nAccessories supplied with the rifle include a long 6H3 bayonet featuring a long spear point blade. The AK-47 bayonet is installed by slipping the diameter muzzle ring around the muzzle and latching the handle down on the bayonet lug under the front sight base.\nAll current model AKM rifles can mount under-barrel 40\u00a0mm grenade launchers such as the GP-25 and its variants, which can fire up to 20 rounds per minute and have an effective range of up to 400 metres. The main grenade is the VOG-25 (VOG-25M) fragmentation grenade which has a 6\u00a0m (9\u00a0m) (20\u00a0ft (30\u00a0ft)) lethality radius. The VOG-25P/VOG-25PM (\"jumping\") variant explodes above the ground.\nThe AK-47 can also mount a (rarely used) cup-type grenade launcher, the Kalashnikov grenade launcher that fires standard RGD-5 Soviet hand-grenades. The maximum effective range is approximately 150 meters. This launcher can also be used to launch tear-gas and riot control grenades.\nAll current AKs (100 series) and some older models, have side rails for mounting a variety of scopes and sighting devices, such as the PSO-1 Optical Sniper Sight. The side rails allow for the removal and remounting of optical accessories without interfering with the zeroing of the optic. However, the 100 series side folding stocks cannot be folded with the optics mounted.\nCharacteristics.\nService life.\nThe AK-47 and its variants have been and are made in dozens of countries, with \"quality ranging from finely engineered weapons to pieces of questionable workmanship.\" As a result, the AK-47 has a service/system life of approximately 6,000, to 10,000, to 15,000 rounds. The AK-47 was designed to be a cheap, simple, easy to manufacture rifle, perfectly matching Soviet military doctrine that treats equipment and weapons as disposable items. As units are often deployed without adequate logistical support and dependent on \"battlefield cannibalization\" for resupply, it is actually more cost-effective to replace rather than repair weapons.\nThe AK-47 has small parts and springs that need to be replaced every few thousand rounds. However, \"Every time it is disassembled beyond the field stripping stage, it will take some time for some parts to regain their fit, some parts may tend to shake loose and fall out when firing the weapon. Some parts of the AK-47 line are riveted together. Repairing these can be quite a hassle, since the end of the rivet has to be ground off and a new one set after the part is replaced.\"\nVariants.\nFor the further developed AK models, see Kalashnikov rifles.\nProduction.\nManufacturing countries of AK-47 and its variants in alphabetical order.\nA private company Kalashnikov Concern (formerly Izhmash) from Russia has repeatedly claimed that the majority of foreign manufacturers are producing AK-type rifles without proper licensing.\nAccuracy potential.\nWestern method.\nThe AK-47's accuracy has always been considered to be \"good enough\" to hit an adult male torso out to about , though even experts firing from prone or bench rest positions at this range were observed to have difficulty placing ten consecutive rounds on target. Later designs did not significantly improve the rifle's accuracy. An AK can fire a 10-shot group of at , and at The newer stamped-steel receiver AKM models, while more rugged and less prone to metal fatigue, are actually less accurate than the forged/milled receivers of their predecessors: the milled AK-47s are capable of shooting groups at , whereas the stamped AKMs are capable of shooting groups at .\nThe best shooters are able to hit a man-sized target at within five shots (firing from prone or bench rest position) or ten shots (standing).\nThe single-shot hit-probability on the NATO E-type Silhouette Target (a human upper body half and head silhouette) of the AK-47 and the later developed AK-74, M16A1 and M16A2 rifles were measured by the US military under ideal proving ground conditions in the 1980s as follows:\nUnder worst field exercise circumstances, the hit probabilities for all the tested rifles were drastically reduced, 34% at 50m down to 3\u20134% at 600m with no significant differences between weapons at each range.\nRussian method.\nThe following table represents the Russian method for determining accuracy, which is far more complex than Western methods. In the West, one fires a group of shots into the target and then simply measures the overall diameter of the group. The Russians, on the other hand, fire a group of shots into the target. They then draw two circles on the target, one for the maximum vertical dispersion of hits and one for the maximum horizontal dispersion of hits. They then disregard the hits on the outer part of the target and only count half of the hits (50% or R50) on the inner part of the circles. This dramatically reduces the overall diameter of the groups. They then use both the vertical and horizontal measurements of the reduced groups to measure accuracy. This circular error probable method used by the Russians and other European militaries cannot be converted and is not comparable to US military methods for determining rifle accuracy. When the R50 results are doubled the hit probability increases to 93.7%.\nThe vertical and horizontal mean (R50) deviations with service ammunition at for AK platforms are.\nUsers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIllicit trade.\nThroughout the world, the AK and its variants are commonly used by governments, revolutionaries, terrorists, criminals, and civilians alike. In some countries, such as Somalia, Rwanda, Mozambique, Congo and Tanzania, the prices for Black Market AKs are between $30 and $125 per weapon and prices have fallen in the last few decades due to mass counterfeiting. In Kenya, \"an AK-47 fetches five head of cattle (about 10,000 Kenya shillings or 100 U.S. dollars) when offered for barter, but costs almost half that price when cash is paid\". There are places around the world where AK type weapons can be purchased on the black market \"for as little as $6, or traded for a chicken or a sack of grain\".\nThe AK-47 has also spawned a cottage industry of sorts and has been copied and manufactured (one gun at a time) in small shops around the world (see Khyber Pass Copy). The estimated numbers of AK-type weapons vary greatly. The Small Arms Survey suggest that \"between 70 and 100\u00a0million of these weapons have been produced since 1947\". The World Bank estimates that out of the 500\u00a0million total firearms available worldwide, 100\u00a0million are of the Kalashnikov family, and 75\u00a0million are AK-47s. Because AK-type weapons have been made in many countries, often illicitly, it is impossible to know how many really exist.\nConflicts.\nThe AK-47 has been used in the following conflicts:\nCultural influence and impact.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Basically, it's the anti-Western cachet of it\u00a0... And you know, one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter, so we all sort of think, oh boy, we've got a little bit of Che Guevara in us. And this accounts for the popularity of the (AK 47) weapon. Plus I think that in the United States it's considered counterculture, which is always something that citizens in this country kind of like\u00a0... It's kind of sticking a finger in the eye of the man, if you will.\"\n\u2014Larry Kahaner, author of \"AK-47: The Weapon That Changed the Face of War\"\nDuring the Cold War, the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, as well as United States and other NATO nations supplied arms and technical knowledge to numerous countries and rebel forces around the world. During this time the Western countries used relatively expensive automatic rifles, such as the FN FAL, the HK G3, the M14, and the M16. In contrast, the Russians and Chinese used the AK-47; its low production cost and ease of manufacture allow them to make AKs in vast numbers.\nIn the pro-communist states, the AK-47 became a symbol of the Third World revolution. They were utilized in the Cambodian Civil War and the Cambodian\u2013Vietnamese War. During the 1980s, the Soviet Union became the principal arms dealer to countries embargoed by Western nations, including Middle Eastern nations such as Libya and Syria, which welcomed Soviet Union backing against Israel. After the fall of the Soviet Union, AK-47s were sold both openly and on the black market to any group with cash, including drug cartels and dictatorial states, and more recently they have been seen in the hands of Islamic groups such as Al-Qaeda, ISIL, and the Taliban in Afghanistan and Iraq, and FARC, Ej\u00e9rcito de Liberaci\u00f3n Nacional guerrillas in Colombia.\nIn Russia, the Kalashnikov is a tremendous source of national pride. \"The family of the inventor of the world's most famous rifle, Mikhail Kalashnikov, has authorized German engineering company MMI to use the well-known Kalashnikov name on a variety of not-so-deadly goods.\" In recent years, Kalashnikov Vodka has been marketed with souvenir bottles in the shape of the AK-47 Kalashnikov. There are also Kalashnikov watches, umbrellas, and knives.\nThe Kalashnikov Museum (also called the AK-47 museum) opened on 4 November 2004 in Izhevsk, Udmurt Republic. This city is in the Ural Region of Russia. The museum chronicles the biography of General Kalashnikov and documents the invention of the AK-47. The museum complex of Kalashnikov's small arms, a series of halls, and multimedia exhibitions are devoted to the evolution of the AK-47 rifle and attracts 10,000 monthly visitors. Nadezhda Vechtomova, the museum director, stated in an interview that the purpose of the museum is to honor the ingenuity of the inventor and the hard work of the employees and to \"separate the weapon as a weapon of murder from the people who are producing it and to tell its history in our country\".\nOn 19 September 2017 a monument of Kalashnikov was unveiled in central Moscow. A protester, later detained by police, attempted to unfurl a banner reading \"a creator of weapons is a creator of death\".\nThe proliferation of this weapon is reflected by more than just numbers. The AK-47 is included on the flag of Mozambique and its emblem, an acknowledgment that the country gained its independence in large part through the effective use of their AK-47s. It is also found in the coats of arms of East Timor, Zimbabwe and the revolution era Burkina Faso, as well as in the flags of Hezbollah, Syrian Resistance, FARC-EP, the New People's Army, TKP/TIKKO and the International Revolutionary People's Guerrilla Forces.\nU.S. and Western Europe countries frequently associate the AK-47 with their enemies; both Cold War era and present-day. For example, Western works of fiction (movies, television, novels, video games) often portray criminals, gang members, insurgents, and terrorists using AK-47s as the weapon of choice. Conversely, throughout the developing world, the AK-47 can be positively attributed with revolutionaries against foreign occupation, imperialism, or colonialism.\nIn Ireland the AK-47 is associated with The Troubles due to its extensive use by republican paramilitaries during this period. In 2013, a decommissioned AK-47 was included in the \"A History of Ireland in 100 Objects\" collection.\nThe AK-47 made an appearance in U.S. popular culture as a recurring focus in the Nicolas Cage film \"Lord of War\" (2005). Numerous monologues in the movie focus on the weapon, and its effects on global conflict and the gun running market.\nIn Iraq and Afghanistan, private military company contractors from the U.K. and other countries used the AK-47 and its variants along with Western firearms such as the AR-15.\nIn 2006, the Colombian musician and peace activist C\u00e9sar L\u00f3pez devised the \"escopetarra\", an AK converted into a guitar. One sold for US$17,000 in a fundraiser held to benefit the victims of anti-personnel mines, while another was exhibited at the United Nations' Conference on Disarmament.\nIn Mexico, the AK-47 is known as \"Cuerno de Chivo\" (literally \"Goat's Horn\") because of its curved magazine design. It is one of the weapons of choice of Mexican drug cartels. It is sometimes mentioned in Mexican folk music lyrics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1349", "revid": "5662528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1349", "title": "Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer", "text": "Early electronic digital computing device\nThe Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer (ABC) was the first automatic electronic digital computer. Limited by the technology of the day, and execution, the device has remained somewhat obscure. The ABC's priority is debated among historians of computer technology, because it was neither programmable, nor Turing-complete. Conventionally, the ABC would be considered the first electronic ALU (arithmetic logic unit)\u00a0\u2013 which is integrated into every modern processor's design. \nIts unique contribution was to make computing faster by being the first to use vacuum tubes to do the arithmetic calculations. Prior to this, slower electro-mechanical methods were used by Konrad Zuse's Z1 computer, and the simultaneously developed Harvard Mark\u00a0I. The first electronic, programmable, digital machine, the Colossus computer from 1943 to 1945, used similar tube-based technology as ABC.\nOverview.\nConceived in 1937, the machine was built by Iowa State College mathematics and physics professor John Vincent Atanasoff with the help of graduate student Clifford Berry. It was designed only to solve systems of linear equations and was successfully tested in 1942. However, its intermediate result storage mechanism, a paper card writer/reader, was not perfected, and when John Vincent Atanasoff left Iowa State College for World War II assignments, work on the machine was discontinued. The ABC pioneered important elements of modern computing, including binary arithmetic and electronic switching elements, but its special-purpose nature and lack of a changeable, stored program distinguish it from modern computers. The computer was designated an IEEE Milestone in 1990.\nAtanasoff and Berry's computer work was not widely known until it was rediscovered in the 1960s, amidst patent disputes over the first instance of an electronic computer. At that time ENIAC, that had been created by John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert, was considered to be the first computer in the modern sense, but in 1973 a U.S. District Court invalidated the ENIAC patent and concluded that the ENIAC inventors had derived the subject matter of the electronic digital computer from Atanasoff. When, in the mid-1970s, the secrecy surrounding the British World War II development of the Colossus computers that pre-dated ENIAC, was lifted and Colossus was described at a conference in Los Alamos, New Mexico, in June 1976, John Mauchly and Konrad Zuse were reported to have been astonished.\nDesign and construction.\nAccording to Atanasoff's account, several key principles of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer were conceived in a sudden insight after a long nighttime drive to Rock Island, Illinois, during the winter of 1937\u201338. The ABC innovations included electronic computation, binary arithmetic, parallel processing, regenerative capacitor memory, and a separation of memory and computing functions. The mechanical and logic design was worked out by Atanasoff over the next year. A grant application to build a proof of concept prototype was submitted in March 1939 to the Agronomy department, which was also interested in speeding up computation for economic and research analysis. $5,000 of further funding () to complete the machine came from the nonprofit Research Corporation of New York City.\nThe ABC was built by Atanasoff and Berry in the basement of the physics building at Iowa State College during 1939\u20131942. The initial funds were released in September, and the 11-tube prototype was first demonstrated in October 1939. A December demonstration prompted a grant for construction of the full-scale machine. The ABC was built and tested over the next two years. A January 15, 1941, story in the \"Des Moines Register\" announced the ABC as \"an electrical computing machine\" with more than 300 vacuum tubes that would \"compute complicated algebraic equations\" (but gave no precise technical description of the computer). The system weighed more than . It contained approximately of wire, 280 dual-triode vacuum tubes, 31 thyratrons, and was about the size of a desk.\nIt was not programmable, which distinguishes it from more general machines of the same era, such as Konrad Zuse's 1941 Z3 (or earlier iterations) and the Colossus computers of 1943\u20131945. Nor did it implement the stored-program architecture, first implemented in the Manchester Baby of 1948, required for fully general-purpose practical computing machines.\nThe machine was, however, the first to implement:\nThe memory of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer was a system called \"regenerative capacitor memory\", which consisted of a pair of drums, each containing 1600 capacitors that rotated on a common shaft once per second. The capacitors on each drum were organized into 32 \"bands\" of 50 (30 active bands and two spares in case a capacitor failed), giving the machine a speed of 30 additions/subtractions per second. Data was represented as 50-bit binary fixed-point numbers. The electronics of the memory and arithmetic units could store and operate on 60 such numbers at a time (3000\u00a0bits).\nThe alternating current power-line frequency of 60\u00a0Hz was the primary clock rate for the lowest-level operations.\nThe arithmetic logic functions were fully electronic, implemented with vacuum tubes. The family of logic gates ranged from inverters to two- and three-input gates. The input and output levels and operating voltages were compatible between the different gates. Each gate consisted of one inverting vacuum-tube amplifier, preceded by a resistor divider input network that defined the logical function. The control logic functions, which only needed to operate once per drum rotation and therefore did not require electronic speed, were electromechanical, implemented with relays.\nThe ALU operated on only one bit of each number at a time; it kept the carry/borrow bit in a capacitor for use in the next AC cycle.\nAlthough the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer was an important step up from earlier calculating machines, it was not able to run entirely automatically through an entire problem. An operator was needed to operate the control switches to set up its functions, much like the electro-mechanical calculators and unit record equipment of the time. Selection of the operation to be performed, reading, writing, converting to or from binary to decimal, or reducing a set of equations was made by front-panel switches and, in some cases, jumpers.\nThere were two forms of input and output: primary user input and output and an intermediate results output and input. The intermediate results storage allowed operation on problems too large to be handled entirely within the electronic memory. (The largest problem that could be solved without the use of the intermediate output and input was two simultaneous equations, a trivial problem.)\nIntermediate results were binary, written onto paper sheets by electrostatically modifying the resistance at 1500 locations to represent 30 of the 50-bit numbers (one equation). Each sheet could be written or read in one second. The reliability of the system was limited to about 1 error in 100,000 calculations by these units, primarily attributed to lack of control of the sheets' material characteristics. In retrospect, a solution could have been to add a parity bit to each number as written. This problem was not solved by the time Atanasoff left the university for war-related work.\nPrimary user input was decimal, via standard IBM 80-column punched cards, and output was decimal, via a front-panel display.\nFunction.\nThe ABC was designed for a specific purpose\u00a0\u2013 the solution of systems of simultaneous linear equations. It could handle systems with up to 29 equations, a difficult problem for the time. Problems of this scale were becoming common in physics, the department in which John Atanasoff worked. The machine could be fed two linear equations with up to 29 variables and a constant term and eliminate one of the variables. This process would be repeated manually for each of the equations, which would result in a system of equations with one fewer variable. Then the whole process would be repeated to eliminate another variable.\nGeorge W. Snedecor, the head of Iowa State's Statistics Department, was very likely the first user of an electronic digital computer to solve real-world mathematics problems. He submitted many of these problems to Atanasoff.\nPatent dispute.\nOn June 26, 1947, J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly were the first to file for patent on a digital computing device (ENIAC), much to the surprise of Atanasoff. The ABC had been examined by John Mauchly in June 1941, and Isaac Auerbach, a former student of Mauchly's, alleged that it influenced his later work on ENIAC, although Mauchly denied this. The ENIAC patent did not issue until 1964, and by 1967 Honeywell sued Sperry Rand in an attempt to break the ENIAC patents, arguing that the ABC constituted prior art. The United States District Court for the District of Minnesota released its judgement on October 19, 1973, finding in \"Honeywell v. Sperry Rand\" that the ENIAC patent was a derivative of John Atanasoff's invention.\nCampbell-Kelly and Aspray conclude:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The extent to which Mauchly drew on Atanasoff's ideas remains unknown, and the evidence is massive and conflicting. The ABC was quite modest technology, and it was not fully implemented. At the very least we can infer that Mauchly saw the potential significance of the ABC and that this may have led him to propose a similar, electronic solution.\nThe case was legally resolved on October 19, 1973, when U.S. District Judge Earl R.\u00a0Larson held the ENIAC patent invalid, ruling that the ENIAC derived many basic ideas from the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer. Judge Larson explicitly stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Eckert and Mauchly did not themselves first invent the automatic electronic digital computer, but instead derived that subject matter from one Dr. John Vincent Atanasoff.\nHerman Goldstine, one of the original developers of ENIAC wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Atanasoff contemplated storing the coefficients of an equation in capacitors located on the periphery of a cylinder. He apparently had a prototype of his machine working \"early in 1940\". This machine was, it should be emphasized, probably the first use of vacuum tubes to do digital computation and was a special-purpose machine.\nThis machine never saw the light of day as a serious tool for computation since it was somewhat premature in its engineering conception and limited in its logical one. Nonetheless it must be viewed as a great pioneering effort. Perhaps its chief importance was to influence the thinking of another physicist who was much interested in the computational process, John W. Mauchly. During the period of Atanasoff's work on his linear equation solver, Mauchly was at Ursinus College, a small school in the environs of Philadelphia. Somehow he became aware of Atanasoff's project and visited him for a week in 1941. During the visit the two men apparently went into Atanasoff's ideas in considerable detail. The discussion greatly influenced Mauchly and through him the entire history of electronic computers.\nReplica.\nThe original ABC was eventually dismantled in 1948, when the university converted the basement to classrooms, and all of its pieces except for one memory drum were discarded.\nIn 1997, a team of researchers led by Dr. Delwyn Bluhm and John Gustafson from Ames Laboratory (located on the Iowa State University campus) finished building a working replica of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer at a cost of $350,000 (equivalent to $ in 2022). The replica ABC was on display in the first floor lobby of the Durham Center for Computation and Communication at Iowa State University and was subsequently exhibited at the Computer History Museum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1354", "revid": "46091586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1354", "title": "Andes", "text": "Mountain range in South America\nThe Andes ( ), Andes Mountains or Andean Mountain Range (; ) are the longest continental mountain range in the world, forming a continuous highland along the western edge of South America. The range is long, wide (widest between 18\u00b0S \u2013 20\u00b0S latitude), and has an average height of about . The Andes extend from north to south through seven South American countries: Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Chile and Argentina.\nAlong their length, the Andes are split into several ranges, separated by intermediate depressions. The Andes are the location of several high plateaus\u2014some of which host major cities such as Quito, Bogot\u00e1, Cali, Arequipa, Medell\u00edn, Bucaramanga, Sucre, M\u00e9rida, El Alto and La Paz. The Altiplano Plateau is the world's second-highest after the Tibetan Plateau. These ranges are in turn grouped into three major divisions based on climate: the Tropical Andes, the Dry Andes, and the Wet Andes.\nThe Andes Mountains are the highest mountain range outside Asia. The highest mountain outside Asia, Argentina's Mount Aconcagua, rises to an elevation of about above sea level. The peak of Chimborazo in the Ecuadorian Andes is farther from the Earth's center than any other location on the Earth's surface, due to the equatorial bulge resulting from the Earth's rotation. The world's highest volcanoes are in the Andes, including Ojos del Salado on the Chile-Argentina border, which rises to .\nThe Andes are also part of the American Cordillera, a chain of mountain ranges (cordillera) that consists of an almost continuous sequence of mountain ranges that form the western \"backbone\" of the Americas and Antarctica.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word \"Andes\" has been debated. The majority consensus is that it derives from the Quechua word 'east' as in \"Antisuyu\" (Quechua for 'east region'), one of the four regions of the Inca Empire.\nThe term \"cordillera\" comes from the Spanish word \"cordel\" 'rope' and is used as a descriptive name for several contiguous sections of the Andes, as well as the entire Andean range, and the combined mountain chain along the western part of the North and South American continents.\nGeography.\nThe Andes can be divided into three sections:\nThe Leeward Antilles islands Aruba, Bonaire, and Cura\u00e7ao, which lie in the Caribbean Sea off the coast of Venezuela, were formerly thought to represent the submerged peaks of the extreme northern edge of the Andes range, but ongoing geological studies indicate that such a simplification does not do justice to the complex tectonic boundary between the South American and Caribbean plates.\nGeology.\nThe Andes are a Mesozoic\u2013Tertiary orogenic belt of mountains along the Pacific Ring of Fire, a zone of volcanic activity that encompasses the Pacific rim of the Americas as well as the Asia-Pacific region. The Andes are the result of tectonic plate processes, caused by the subduction of oceanic crust beneath the South American Plate as the Nazca Plate and South American Plate converge. These processes were accelerated by the effects of climate. As the uplift of the Andes created a rain shadow on the western fringes of Chile, ocean currents and prevailing winds carried moisture away from the Chilean coast. This caused some areas of the subduction zone to be sediment starved, causing excess friction and an increased rate of compressed coastal uplift. The main cause of the rise of the Andes is the compression of the western rim of the South American Plate due to the subduction of the Nazca Plate and the Antarctic Plate.To the east, the Andes range is bounded by several sedimentary basins, such as Orinoco, Amazon Basin, Madre de Dios and Gran Chaco, that separate the Andes from the ancient cratons in eastern South America. In the south, the Andes share a long boundary with the former Patagonia Terrane. To the west, the Andes end at the Pacific Ocean, although the Peru-Chile trench can be considered their ultimate western limit. From a geographical approach, the Andes are considered to have their western boundaries marked by the appearance of coastal lowlands and less rugged topography. The Andes Mountains also contain large quantities of iron ore located in many mountains within the range.\nThe Andean orogen has a series of bends or oroclines. The Bolivian Orocline is a seaward concave bending in the coast of South America and the Andes Mountains at about 18\u00b0 S. At this point, the orientation of the Andes turns from Northwest in Peru to South in Chile and Argentina. The Andean segment north and south of the Orocline have been rotated 15\u00b0 to 20\u00b0 counter-clockwise and clockwise respectively. The Bolivian Orocline area overlaps with the area of the maximum width of the Altiplano Plateau and according to Isacks (1988) the Orocline is related to crustal shortening. The specific point at 18\u00b0 S where the coastline bends is known as the \"Arica Elbow\". Further south lies the Maipo Orocline a more subtle Orocline between 30\u00b0 S and 38\u00b0S with a seaward-concave break in trend at 33\u00b0 S. Near the southern tip of the Andes lies the Patagonian Orocline.\nOrogeny.\nThe western rim of the South American Plate has been the place of several pre-Andean orogenies since at least the late Proterozoic and early Paleozoic, when several terranes and microcontinents collided and amalgamated with the ancient cratons of eastern South America, by then the South American part of Gondwana.\nThe formation of the modern Andes began with the events of the Triassic when Pangaea began the break up that resulted in developing several rifts. The development continued through the Jurassic Period. It was during the Cretaceous Period that the Andes began to take their present form, by the uplifting, faulting and folding of sedimentary and metamorphic rocks of the ancient cratons to the east. The rise of the Andes has not been constant, as different regions have had different degrees of tectonic stress, uplift, and erosion.\nTectonic forces above the subduction zone along the entire west coast of South America where the Nazca Plate and a part of the Antarctic Plate are sliding beneath the South American Plate continue to produce an ongoing orogenic event resulting in minor to major earthquakes and volcanic eruptions to this day. In the extreme south, a major transform fault separates Tierra del Fuego from the small Scotia Plate. Across the wide Drake Passage lie the mountains of the Antarctic Peninsula south of the Scotia Plate which appear to be a continuation of the Andes chain.\nThe far east regions of the Andes experience a series of changes resulting from the Andean orogeny. Parts of the Suns\u00e1s Orogen in Amazonian craton disappeared from the surface of the earth being overridden by the Andes.\nThe Sierras de C\u00f3rdoba, where the effects of the ancient Pampean orogeny can be observed, owe their modern uplift and relief to the Andean orogeny in the Tertiary. Further south in southern Patagonia the onset of the Andean orogeny caused the Magallanes Basin to evolve from being an extensional back-arc basin in the Mesozoic to being a compressional foreland basin in the Cenozoic.\nVolcanism.\nThe Andes range has many active volcanoes distributed in four volcanic zones separated by areas of inactivity. The Andean volcanism is a result of the subduction of the Nazca Plate and Antarctic Plate underneath the South American Plate. The belt is subdivided into four main volcanic zones that are separated from each other by volcanic gaps. The volcanoes of the belt are diverse in terms of activity style, products and morphology. While some differences can be explained by which volcanic zone a volcano belongs to, there are significant differences inside volcanic zones and even between neighbouring volcanoes. Despite being a typical location for calc-alkalic and subduction volcanism, the Andean Volcanic Belt has a large range of volcano-tectonic settings, such as rift systems and extensional zones, transpressional faults, subduction of mid-ocean ridges and seamount chains apart from a large range of crustal thicknesses and magma ascent paths, and different amount of crustal assimilations.\nOre deposits and evaporates.\nThe Andes Mountains host large ore and salt deposits and some of their eastern fold and thrust belt acts as traps for commercially exploitable amounts of hydrocarbons. In the forelands of the Atacama Desert some of the largest porphyry copper mineralizations occur making Chile and Peru the first- and second-largest exporters of copper in the world. Porphyry copper in the western slopes of the Andes has been generated by hydrothermal fluids (mostly water) during the cooling of plutons or volcanic systems. The porphyry mineralization further benefited from the dry climate that let them largely out of the disturbing actions of meteoric water. The dry climate in the central western Andes has also led to the creation of extensive saltpeter deposits which were extensively mined until the invention of synthetic nitrates. Yet another result of the dry climate are the salars of Atacama and Uyuni, the first one being the largest source of lithium today and the second the world's largest reserve of the element. Early Mesozoic and Neogene plutonism in Bolivia's Cordillera Central created the Bolivian tin belt as well as the famous, now depleted, deposits of Cerro Rico de Potos\u00ed.\nHistory.\nThe Andes Mountains, initially inhabited by hunter-gatherers, experienced the development of agriculture and the rise of politically centralised civilizations, which culminated in the establishment of the century-long Inca Empire. This all changed in the 16th century, when the Spanish conquistadors colonized the mountains in advance of the mining economy.\nIn the tide of anti-imperialist nationalism, the Andes became the scene of a series of independence wars in the 19th century when rebel forces swept through the region to overthrow Spanish colonial rule. Since then, many former Spanish territories have become five independent Andean states.\nClimate and hydrology.\nThe climate in the Andes varies greatly depending on latitude, altitude, and proximity to the sea. Temperature, atmospheric pressure and humidity decrease in higher elevations. The southern section is rainy and cool, the central section is dry. The northern Andes are typically rainy and warm, with an average temperature of in Colombia. The climate is known to change drastically in rather short distances. Rainforests exist just kilometres away from the snow-covered peak of Cotopaxi. The mountains have a large effect on the temperatures of nearby areas. The snow line depends on the location. It is at between in the tropical Ecuadorian, Colombian, Venezuelan, and northern Peruvian Andes, rising to in the drier mountains of southern Peru south to northern Chile south to about 30\u00b0S before descending to on Aconcagua at 32\u00b0S, at 40\u00b0S, at 50\u00b0S, and only in Tierra del Fuego at 55\u00b0S; from 50\u00b0S, several of the larger glaciers descend to sea level.\nThe Andes of Chile and Argentina can be divided into two climatic and glaciological zones: the Dry Andes and the Wet Andes. Since the Dry Andes extend from the latitudes of the Atacama Desert to the area of the Maule River, precipitation is more sporadic and there are strong temperature oscillations. The line of equilibrium may shift drastically over short periods of time, leaving a whole glacier in the ablation area or in the accumulation area.\nIn the high Andes of Central Chile and Mendoza Province, rock glaciers are larger and more common than glaciers; this is due to the high exposure to solar radiation. In these regions glaciers occur typically at higher altitudes than rock glaciers. The lowest active rock glacier occur at 900 m a.s.l. in Aconcagua.\nThough precipitation increases with height, there are semiarid conditions in the nearly highest mountains of the Andes. This dry steppe climate is considered to be typical of the subtropical position at 32\u201334\u00b0 S. The valley bottoms have no woods, just dwarf scrub. The largest glaciers, for example, the Plomo Glacier and the Horcones Glaciers, do not even reach in length and have only insignificant ice thickness. At glacial times, however, c. 20,000 years ago, the glaciers were over ten times longer. On the east side of this section of the Mendozina Andes, they flowed down to and on the west side to about above sea level. The massifs of Cerro Aconcagua (), Cerro Tupungato () and Nevado Juncal () are tens of kilometres away from each other and were connected by a joint ice stream network. The Andes' dendritic glacier arms, i.e. components of valley glaciers, were up to long, over thick and overspanned a vertical distance of . The climatic glacier snowline (ELA) was lowered from to at glacial times.\nFlora.\nThe Andean region cuts across several natural and floristic regions, due to its extension, from Caribbean Venezuela to cold, windy and wet Cape Horn passing through the hyperarid Atacama Desert. Rainforests and tropical dry forests used to encircle much of the northern Andes but are now greatly diminished, especially in the Choc\u00f3 and inter-Andean valleys of Colombia. Opposite of the humid Andean slopes are the relatively dry Andean slopes in most of western Peru, Chile and Argentina. Along with several Interandean Valles, they are typically dominated by deciduous woodland, shrub and xeric vegetation, reaching the extreme in the slopes near the virtually lifeless Atacama Desert.\nAbout 30,000 species of vascular plants live in the Andes, with roughly half being endemic to the region, surpassing the diversity of any other hotspot. The small tree \"Cinchona pubescens\", a source of quinine which is used to treat malaria, is found widely in the Andes as far south as Bolivia. Other important crops that originated from the Andes are tobacco and potatoes. The high-altitude \"Polylepis\" forests and woodlands are found in the Andean areas of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and Chile. These trees, by locals referred to as Que\u00f1ua, Yagual and other names, can be found at altitudes of above sea level. It remains unclear if the patchy distribution of these forests and woodlands is natural, or the result of clearing which began during the Incan period. Regardless, in modern times the clearance has accelerated, and the trees are now considered to be highly endangered, with some believing that as little as 10% of the original woodland remains.\nFauna.\nThe Andes are rich in fauna: With almost 1,000 species, of which roughly 2/3 are endemic to the region, the Andes are the most important region in the world for amphibians.\nThe diversity of animals in the Andes is high, with almost 600 species of mammals (13% endemic), more than 1,700 species of birds (about 1/3 endemic), more than 600 species of reptile (about 45% endemic), and almost 400 species of fish (about 1/3 endemic).\nThe vicu\u00f1a and guanaco can be found living in the Altiplano, while the closely related domesticated llama and alpaca are widely kept by locals as pack animals and for their meat and wool. The crepuscular (active during dawn and dusk) chinchillas, two threatened members of the rodent order, inhabit the Andes' alpine regions. The Andean condor, the largest bird of its kind in the Western Hemisphere, occurs throughout much of the Andes but generally in very low densities. Other animals found in the relatively open habitats of the high Andes include the huemul, cougar, foxes in the genus \"Pseudalopex\", and, for birds, certain species of tinamous (notably members of the genus \"Nothoprocta\"), Andean goose, giant coot, flamingos (mainly associated with hypersaline lakes), lesser rhea, Andean flicker, diademed sandpiper-plover, miners, sierra-finches and diuca-finches.\nLake Titicaca hosts several endemics, among them the highly endangered Titicaca flightless grebe and Titicaca water frog. A few species of hummingbirds, notably some hillstars, can be seen at altitudes above , but far higher diversities can be found at lower altitudes, especially in the humid Andean forests (\"cloud forests\") growing on slopes in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and far northwestern Argentina. These forest-types, which includes the Yungas and parts of the Choc\u00f3, are very rich in flora and fauna, although few large mammals exist, exceptions being the threatened mountain tapir, spectacled bear and yellow-tailed woolly monkey.\nBirds of humid Andean forests include mountain toucans, quetzals and the Andean cock-of-the-rock, while mixed species flocks dominated by tanagers and furnariids commonly are seen \u2013 in contrast to several vocal but typically cryptic species of wrens, tapaculos and antpittas.\nA number of species such as the royal cinclodes and white-browed tit-spinetail are associated with \"Polylepis\", and consequently also threatened.\nHuman activity.\nThe Andes Mountains form a north-south axis of cultural influences. A long series of cultural development culminated in the expansion of the Inca civilization and Inca Empire in the central Andes during the 15th century. The Incas formed this civilization through imperialistic militarism as well as careful and meticulous governmental management. The government sponsored the construction of aqueducts and roads in addition to preexisting installations. Some of these constructions are still in existence today.\nDevastated by European diseases and by civil war, the Incas were defeated in 1532 by an alliance composed of tens of thousands of allies from nations they had subjugated (e.g. Huancas, Chachapoyas, Ca\u00f1aris) and a small army of 180 Spaniards led by Francisco Pizarro. One of the few Inca sites the Spanish never found in their conquest was Machu Picchu, which lay hidden on a peak on the eastern edge of the Andes where they descend to the Amazon. The main surviving languages of the Andean peoples are those of the Quechua and Aymara language families. Woodbine Parish and Joseph Barclay Pentland surveyed a large part of the Bolivian Andes from 1826 to 1827.\nCities.\nIn modern times, the largest cities in the Andes are Bogot\u00e1, with a metropolitan population of over ten million, and Santiago, Medell\u00edn, Cali, and Quito. Lima is a coastal city adjacent to the Andes and is the largest city of all Andean countries. It is the seat of the Andean Community of Nations.\nLa Paz, Bolivia's seat of government, is the highest capital city in the world, at an elevation of approximately . Parts of the La Paz conurbation, including the city of El Alto, extend up to .\nOther cities in or near the Andes include Bariloche, Catamarca, Jujuy, Mendoza, Salta, San Juan, Tucum\u00e1n, and Ushuaia in Argentina; Calama and Rancagua in Chile; Cochabamba, Oruro, Potos\u00ed, Sucre, Sacaba, Tarija, and Yacuiba in Bolivia; Arequipa, Cajamarca, Cusco, Huancayo, Hu\u00e1nuco, Huaraz, Juliaca, and Puno in Peru; Ambato, Cuenca, Ibarra, Latacunga, Loja, Riobamba and Tulc\u00e1n in Ecuador; Armenia, C\u00facuta, Bucaramanga, Duitama, Ibagu\u00e9, Ipiales, Manizales, Palmira, Pasto, Pereira, Popay\u00e1n, Sogamoso, Tunja, and Villavicencio in Colombia; and Barquisimeto, La Grita, M\u00e9rida, San Crist\u00f3bal, Tovar, Trujillo, and Valera in Venezuela. The cities of Caracas, Valencia, and Maracay are in the Venezuelan Coastal Range, which is a debatable extension of the Andes at the northern extremity of South America.\nTransportation.\nCities and large towns are connected with asphalt-paved roads, while smaller towns are often connected by dirt roads, which may require a four-wheel-drive vehicle.\nThe rough terrain has historically put the costs of building highways and railroads that cross the Andes out of reach of most neighboring countries, even with modern civil engineering practices. For example, the main crossover of the Andes between Argentina and Chile is still accomplished through the Paso Internacional Los Libertadores. Only recently the ends of some highways that came rather close to one another from the east and the west have been connected. Much of the transportation of passengers is done via aircraft.\nHowever, there is one railroad that connects Chile with Peru via the Andes, and there are others that make the same connection via southern Bolivia. See railroad maps of that region.\nThere are multiple highways in Bolivia that cross the Andes. Some of these were built during a period of war between Bolivia and Paraguay, in order to transport Bolivian troops and their supplies to the war front in the lowlands of southeastern Bolivia and western Paraguay.\nFor decades, Chile claimed ownership of land on the eastern side of the Andes. However, these claims were given up in about 1870 during the War of the Pacific between Chile and the allied Bolivia and Peru, in a diplomatic deal to keep Peru out of the war. The Chilean Army and Chilean Navy defeated the combined forces of Bolivia and Peru, and Chile took over Bolivia's only province on the Pacific Coast, some land from Peru that was returned to Peru decades later. Bolivia has been a completely landlocked country ever since. It mostly uses seaports in eastern Argentina and Uruguay for international trade because its diplomatic relations with Chile have been suspended since 1978.\nBecause of the tortuous terrain in places, villages and towns in the mountains\u2014to which travel via motorized vehicles is of little use\u2014are still located in the high Andes of Chile, Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador. Locally, the relatives of the camel, the llama, and the alpaca continue to carry out important uses as pack animals, but this use has generally diminished in modern times. Donkeys, mules, and horses are also useful.\nAgriculture.\nThe ancient peoples of the Andes such as the Incas have practiced irrigation techniques for over 6,000 years. Because of the mountain slopes, terracing has been a common practice. Terracing, however, was only extensively employed after Incan imperial expansions to fuel their expanding realm. The potato holds a very important role as an internally consumed staple crop. Maize was also an important crop for these people, and was used for the production of chicha, important to Andean native people. Currently, tobacco, cotton and coffee are the main export crops. Coca, despite eradication programmes in some countries, remains an important crop for legal local use in a mildly stimulating herbal tea, and, both controversially and illegally, for the production of cocaine.\nIrrigation.\nIn unirrigated land, pasture is the most common type of land use. In the rainy season (summer), part of the rangeland is used for cropping (mainly potatoes, barley, broad beans and wheat).\nIrrigation is helpful in advancing the sowing data of the summer crops which guarantees an early yield in the period of food shortage. Also, by early sowing, maize can be cultivated higher up in the mountains (up to ). In addition, it makes cropping in the dry season (winter) possible and allows the cultivation of frost-resistant vegetable crops like onion and carrot.\nMining.\nThe Andes rose to fame for their mineral wealth during the Spanish conquest of South America. Although Andean Amerindian peoples crafted ceremonial jewelry of gold and other metals, the mineralizations of the Andes were first mined on a large scale after the Spanish arrival. Potos\u00ed in present-day Bolivia and Cerro de Pasco in Peru were among the principal mines of the Spanish Empire in the New World. R\u00edo de la Plata and Argentina derive their names from the silver of Potos\u00ed.\nCurrently, mining in the Andes of Chile and Peru places these countries as the first and second major producers of copper in the world. Peru also contains the 4th largest goldmine in the world: the Yanacocha. The Bolivian Andes produce principally tin although historically silver mining had a huge impact on the economy of 17th-century Europe.\nThere is a long history of mining in the Andes, from the Spanish silver mines in Potos\u00ed in the 16th century to the vast current porphyry copper deposits of Chuquicamata and Escondida in Chile and Toquepala in Peru. Other metals including iron, gold, and tin in addition to non-metallic resources are important. The Andes also have a vast supply of lithium unmatched by any other region in the world. as they are home to Argentina, Bolivia, and Chile which have the 3 largest reserves in the world respectively\nPeaks.\nThis list contains some of the major peaks in the Andes mountain range. The highest peak is Aconcagua of Argentina (see below).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1355", "revid": "1338881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1355", "title": "Anderida", "text": ""}
{"id": "1356", "revid": "37078343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1356", "title": "Ancylopoda", "text": "Extinct suborder of mammals\nAncylopoda is a group of browsing, herbivorous, mammals in the Perissodactyla that show long, curved and cleft claws. Morphological evidence indicates the Ancylopoda diverged from the tapirs, rhinoceroses and horses (Euperissodactyla) after the Brontotheria; however, earlier authorities such as Osborn sometimes considered the Ancylopoda to be outside Perissodactyla or, as was popular more recently, to be related to Brontotheriidae.\n\"Macrotherium\", which is typically from the middle Miocene of Sansan, in Gers, France, may indicate a distinct genus. Limb-bones resembling those of Macrotherium, but relatively stouter, have been described from the Pliocene beds of Attica and Samos as \"Ancylotherium\". In the Americas, the names \"Morothorium\" and \"Moropus\" have been applied to similar bones, in the belief that they indicated Xenarthrans. \"Macrotherium magnum\" must have been an animal of about nine feet in length.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1358", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1358", "title": "Anchor", "text": "Device used to secure a vessel to the bed of a body of water to prevent the craft from drifting\nAn anchor is a device, normally made of metal, used to secure a vessel to the bed of a body of water to prevent the craft from drifting due to wind or current. The word derives from Latin \"\", which itself comes from the Greek ().\nAnchors can either be temporary or permanent. Permanent anchors are used in the creation of a mooring, and are rarely moved; a specialist service is normally needed to move or maintain them. Vessels carry one or more temporary anchors, which may be of different designs and weights.\nA sea anchor is a drag device, not in contact with the seabed, used to minimise drift of a vessel relative to the water. A drogue is a drag device used to slow or help steer a vessel running before a storm in a following or overtaking sea, or when crossing a bar in a breaking sea.\nOverview.\nAnchors achieve holding power either by \"hooking\" into the seabed, or weight, or a combination of the two. Permanent moorings use large masses (commonly a block or slab of concrete) resting on the seabed. Semi-permanent mooring anchors (such as mushroom anchors) and large ship's anchors derive a significant portion of their holding power from their weight, while also hooking or embedding in the bottom. Modern anchors for smaller vessels have metal \"flukes\" that hook on to rocks on the bottom or bury themselves in soft seabed.\nThe vessel is attached to the anchor by the \"rode\" (also called a \"cable\" or a \"warp\"). It can be made of rope, chain or a combination of rope and chain. The ratio of the length of rode to the water depth is known as the scope (see below).\nHolding ground.\nHolding ground is the area of sea floor that holds an anchor, and thus the attached ship or boat. Different types of anchor are designed to hold in different types of holding ground. Some bottom materials hold better than others; for instance, hard sand holds well, shell holds poorly. Holding ground may be fouled with obstacles. An anchorage location may be chosen for its holding ground. In poor holding ground, only the weight of an anchor matters; in good holding ground, it is able to dig in, and the holding power can be significantly higher.\nHistory.\nEvolution of the anchor.\nThe earliest anchors were probably rocks, and many rock anchors have been found dating from at least the Bronze Age. Pre-European Maori waka (canoes) used one or more hollowed stones, tied with flax ropes, as anchors. Many modern moorings still rely on a large rock as the primary element of their design. However, using pure weight to resist the forces of a storm works well only as a permanent mooring; a large enough rock would be nearly impossible to move to a new location.\nThe ancient Greeks used baskets of stones, large sacks filled with sand, and wooden logs filled with lead. According to Apollonius Rhodius and Stephen of Byzantium, anchors were formed of stone, and Athenaeus states that they were also sometimes made of wood. Such anchors held the vessel merely by their weight and by their friction along the bottom.\nFluked anchors.\nIron was afterwards introduced for the construction of anchors, and an improvement was made by forming them with teeth, or \"flukes\", to fasten themselves into the bottom. This is the iconic anchor shape most familiar to non-sailors.\nThis form has been used since antiquity. The Roman Nemi ships of the 1st century AD used this form. The Viking Ladby ship (probably 10th century) used a fluked anchor of this type, made of iron, which would have had a wooden stock mounted perpendicular to the shank and flukes to make the flukes contact the bottom at a suitable angle to hook or penetrate.\nAdmiralty anchor.\nThe Admiralty Pattern anchor, or simply \"Admiralty\", also known as a \"Fisherman\", consists of a central shank with a ring or shackle for attaching the rode (the rope, chain, or cable connecting the ship and the anchor). At the other end of the shank there are two arms, carrying the flukes, while the stock is mounted to the shackle end, at ninety degrees to the arms. When the anchor lands on the bottom, it generally falls over with the arms parallel to the seabed. As a strain comes onto the rope, the stock digs into the bottom, canting the anchor until one of the flukes catches and digs into the bottom.\nThe Admiralty Anchor is an entirely independent reinvention of a classical design, as seen in one of the Nemi ship anchors. This basic design remained unchanged for centuries, with the most significant changes being to the overall proportions, and a move from stocks made of wood to iron stocks in the late 1830s and early 1840s.\nSince one fluke always protrudes up from the set anchor, there is a great tendency of the rode to foul the anchor as the vessel swings due to wind or current shifts. When this happens, the anchor may be pulled out of the bottom, and in some cases may need to be hauled up to be re-set. In the mid-19th century, numerous modifications were attempted to alleviate these problems, as well as improve holding power, including one-armed mooring anchors. The most successful of these \"patent anchors\", the Trotman Anchor, introduced a pivot at the centre of the crown where the arms join the shank, allowing the \"idle\" upper arm to fold against the shank. When deployed the lower arm may fold against the shank tilting the tip of the fluke upwards, so each fluke has a tripping palm at its base, to hook on the bottom as the folded arm drags along the seabed, which unfolds the downward oriented arm until the tip of the fluke can engage the bottom.\nHandling and storage of these anchors requires special equipment and procedures. Once the anchor is hauled up to the hawsepipe, the ring end is hoisted up to the end of a timber projecting from the bow known as the cathead. The crown of the anchor is then hauled up with a heavy tackle until one fluke can be hooked over the rail. This is known as \"catting and fishing\" the anchor. Before dropping the anchor, the fishing process is reversed, and the anchor is dropped from the end of the cathead.\nStockless anchor.\nThe stockless anchor, patented in England in 1821, represented the first significant departure in anchor design in centuries. Although their holding-power-to-weight ratio is significantly lower than admiralty pattern anchors, their ease of handling and stowage aboard large ships led to almost universal adoption. In contrast to the elaborate stowage procedures for earlier anchors, stockless anchors are simply hauled up until they rest with the shank inside the hawsepipes, and the flukes against the hull (or inside a recess in the hull).\nWhile there are numerous variations, stockless anchors consist of a set of heavy flukes connected by a pivot or ball and socket joint to a shank. Cast into the crown of the anchor is a set of tripping palms, projections that drag on the bottom, forcing the main flukes to dig in.\nSmall boat anchors.\nUntil the mid-20th century, anchors for smaller vessels were either scaled-down versions of admiralty anchors, or simple grapnels. As new designs with greater holding-power-to-weight ratios were sought, a great variety of anchor designs has emerged. Many of these designs are still under patent, and other types are best known by their original trademarked names.\nGrapnel anchor.\nA traditional design, the grapnel is merely a shank with four or more tines. It has a benefit in that, no matter how it reaches the bottom, one or more tines are aimed to set. In coral, or rock, it is often able to set quickly by hooking into the structure, but may be more difficult to retrieve. A grapnel is often quite light, and may have additional uses as a tool to recover gear lost overboard. Its weight also makes it relatively easy to move and carry, however its shape is generally not compact and it may be awkward to stow unless a collapsing model is used.\nGrapnels rarely have enough fluke area to develop much hold in sand, clay, or mud. It is not unknown for the anchor to foul on its own rode, or to foul the tines with refuse from the bottom, preventing it from digging in. On the other hand, it is quite possible for this anchor to find such a good hook that, without a trip line from the crown, it is impossible to retrieve.\nHerreshoff anchor.\nDesigned by yacht designer L. Francis Herreshoff, this is essentially the same pattern as an admiralty anchor, albeit with small diamond-shaped flukes or palms. The novelty of the design lay in the means by which it could be broken down into three pieces for stowage. In use, it still presents all the issues of the admiralty pattern anchor.\nNorthill anchor.\nOriginally designed as a lightweight anchor for seaplanes, this design consists of two plough-like blades mounted to a shank, with a folding stock crossing through the crown of the anchor.\nCQR plough anchor.\nMany manufacturers produce a plough-type anchor, so-named after its resemblance to an agricultural plough. All such anchors are copied from the original CQR (\"Coastal Quick Release\", or \"Clyde Quick Release\", later rebranded as 'secure' by Lewmar), a 1933 design patented in the UK by mathematician Geoffrey Ingram Taylor.\nPlough anchors stow conveniently in a roller at the bow, and have been popular with cruising sailors and private boaters. Ploughs can be moderately good in all types of seafloor, though not exceptional in any. Contrary to popular belief, the CQR's hinged shank is not to allow the anchor to turn with direction changes rather than breaking out, but actually to prevent the shank's weight from disrupting the fluke's orientation while setting. The hinge can wear out and may trap a sailor's fingers. Some later plough anchors have a rigid shank, such as the Lewmar's \"Delta\".\nA plough anchor has a fundamental flaw: like its namesake, the agricultural plough, it digs in but then tends to break out back to the surface. Plough anchors sometimes have difficulty setting at all, and instead skip across the seafloor. By contrast, modern efficient anchors tend to be \"scoop\" types that dig ever deeper.\nDelta anchor.\nThe Delta anchor was derived from the CQR. It was patented by Philip McCarron, James Stewart, and Gordon Lyall of British marine manufacturer Simpson-Lawrence Ltd in 1992. It was designed as an advance over the anchors used for floating systems such as oil rigs. It retains the weighted tip of the CQR but has a much higher fluke area to weight ratio than its predecessor. The designers also eliminated the sometimes troublesome hinge. It is a plough anchor with a rigid, arched shank. It is described as \"self-launching\" because it can be dropped from a bow roller simply by paying out the rode, without manual assistance. This is an oft copied design with the European Brake and Australian Sarca Excel being two of the more notable ones. Although it is a plough type anchor, it sets and holds reasonably well in hard bottoms.\nDanforth anchor.\nAmerican Richard Danforth invented the Danforth Anchor in the 1940s for use aboard landing craft. It uses a stock at the crown to which two large flat triangular flukes are attached. The stock is hinged so the flukes can orient toward the bottom (and on some designs may be adjusted for an optimal angle depending on the bottom type). Tripping palms at the crown act to tip the flukes into the seabed. The design is a burying variety, and once well set can develop high resistance. Its lightweight and compact flat design make it easy to retrieve and relatively easy to store; some anchor rollers and hawsepipes can accommodate a fluke-style anchor.\nA Danforth does not usually penetrate or hold in gravel or weeds. In boulders and coral it may hold by acting as a hook. If there is much current, or if the vessel is moving while dropping the anchor, it may \"kite\" or \"skate\" over the bottom due to the large fluke area acting as a sail or wing.\nThe FOB HP anchor designed in Brittany in the 1970s is a Danforth variant designed to give increased holding through its use of rounded flukes setting at a 30\u00b0 angle.\nThe Fortress is an American aluminum alloy Danforth variant that can be disassembled for storage and it features an adjustable 32\u00b0 and 45\u00b0 shank/fluke angle to improve holding capability in common sea bottoms such as hard sand and soft mud. This anchor performed well in a 1989 US Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) test and in an August 2014 holding power test that was conducted in the soft mud bottoms of the Chesapeake Bay.\nBruce or claw anchor.\nThis claw-shaped anchor was designed by Peter Bruce from Scotland in the 1970s. Bruce gained his early reputation from the production of large-scale commercial anchors for ships and fixed installations such as oil rigs. It was later scaled down for small boats, and copies of this popular design abound. The Bruce and its copies, known generically as \"claw type anchors\", have been adopted on smaller boats (partly because they stow easily on a bow roller) but they are most effective in larger sizes. Claw anchors are quite popular on charter fleets as they have a high chance to set on the first try in many bottoms. They have the reputation of not breaking out with tide or wind changes, instead slowly turning in the bottom to align with the force.\nBruce anchors can have difficulty penetrating weedy bottoms and grass. They offer a fairly low holding-power-to-weight ratio and generally have to be oversized to compete with newer types.\nScoop type anchors.\nThree time circumnavigator German Rolf Kaczirek invented the B\u00fcgel Anker in the 1980s. Kaczirek wanted an anchor that was self-righting without necessitating a ballasted tip. Instead, he added a roll bar and switched out the plough share for a flat blade design. As none of the innovations of this anchor were patented, copies of it abound.\nAlain Poiraud of France introduced the scoop type anchor in 1996. Similar in design to the B\u00fcgel anchor, Poiraud's design features a concave fluke shaped like the blade of a shovel, with a shank attached parallel to the fluke, and the load applied toward the digging end. It is designed to dig into the bottom like a shovel, and dig deeper as more pressure is applied. The common challenge with all the scoop type anchors is that they set so well, they can be difficult to weigh.\nPermanent anchors.\nThese are used where the vessel is permanently or semi-permanently sited, for example in the case of lightvessels or channel marker buoys. The anchor needs to hold the vessel in all weathers, including the most severe storm, but needs to be lifted only occasionally, at most \u2013 for example, only if the vessel is to be towed into port for maintenance. An alternative to using an anchor under these circumstances, especially if the anchor need never be lifted at all, may be to use a pile that is driven into the seabed.\nPermanent anchors come in a wide range of types and have no standard form. A slab of rock with an iron staple in it to attach a chain to would serve the purpose, as would any dense object of appropriate weight (for instance, an engine block). Modern moorings may be anchored by augers, which look and act like oversized screws drilled into the seabed, or by barbed metal beams pounded in (or even driven in with explosives) like pilings, or by a variety of other non-mass means of getting a grip on the bottom. One method of building a mooring is to use three or more conventional anchors laid out with short lengths of chain attached to a swivel, so no matter which direction the vessel moves, one or more anchors are aligned to resist the force.\nMushroom.\nThe mushroom anchor is suitable where the seabed is composed of silt or fine sand. It was invented by Robert Stevenson, for use by an 82-ton converted fishing boat, \"Pharos\", which was used as a lightvessel between 1807 and 1810 near to Bell Rock whilst the lighthouse was being constructed. It was equipped with a 1.5-ton example.\nIt is shaped like an inverted mushroom, the head becoming buried in the silt. A counterweight is often provided at the other end of the shank to lay it down before it becomes buried.\nA mushroom anchor normally sinks in the silt to the point where it has displaced its own weight in bottom material, thus greatly increasing its holding power. These anchors are suitable only for a silt or mud bottom, since they rely upon suction and cohesion of the bottom material, which rocky or coarse sand bottoms lack. The holding power of this anchor is at best about twice its weight until it becomes buried, when it can be as much as ten times its weight. They are available in sizes from about 5\u00a0kg up to several tons.\nDeadweight.\nA deadweight is an anchor that relies solely on being a heavy weight. It is usually just a large block of concrete or stone at the end of the chain. Its holding power is defined by its weight underwater (i.e. taking its buoyancy into account) regardless of the type of seabed, although suction can increase this if it becomes buried. Consequently, deadweight anchors are used where mushroom anchors are unsuitable, for example in rock, gravel or coarse sand. An advantage of a deadweight anchor over a mushroom is that if it does drag, it continues to provide its original holding force. The disadvantage of using deadweight anchors in conditions where a mushroom anchor could be used is that it needs to be around ten times the weight of the equivalent mushroom anchor.\nAuger.\nAuger anchors can be used to anchor permanent moorings, floating docks, fish farms, etc. These anchors, which have one or more slightly pitched self-drilling threads, must be screwed into the seabed with the use of a tool, so require access to the bottom, either at low tide or by use of a diver. Hence they can be difficult to install in deep water without special equipment.\nWeight for weight, augers have a higher holding than other permanent designs, and so can be cheap and relatively easily installed, although difficult to set in extremely soft mud.\nHigh-holding-types.\nThere is a need in the oil-and-gas industry to resist large anchoring forces when laying pipelines and for drilling vessels. These anchors are installed and removed using a support tug and pennant/pendant wire. Some examples are the Stevin range supplied by Vrijhof Ankers. Large plate anchors such as the Stevmanta are used for permanent moorings.\nAnchoring gear.\nThe elements of anchoring gear include the anchor, the cable (also called a \"rode\"), the method of attaching the two together, the method of attaching the cable to the ship, charts, and a method of learning the depth of the water.\nVessels may carry a number of anchors: \"bower anchors\" are the main anchors used by a vessel and normally carried at the bow of the vessel. A \"kedge anchor\" is a light anchor used for warping an anchor, also known as \"kedging\", or more commonly on yachts for mooring quickly or in benign conditions. A \"stream anchor\", which is usually heavier than a \"kedge anchor\", can be used for kedging or warping in addition to temporary mooring and restraining stern movement in tidal conditions or in waters where vessel movement needs to be restricted, such as rivers and channels.\nCharts are vital to good anchoring. Knowing the location of potential dangers, as well as being useful in estimating the effects of weather and tide in the anchorage, is essential in choosing a good place to drop the hook. One can get by without referring to charts, but they are an important tool and a part of good anchoring gear, and a skilled mariner would not choose to anchor without them.\nAnchor rode.\nThe anchor rode (or \"cable\" or \"warp\") that connects the anchor to the vessel is usually made up of chain, rope, or a combination of those. Large ships use only chain rode. Smaller craft might use a rope/chain combination or an all chain rode. All rodes should have some chain; chain is heavy but it resists abrasion from coral, sharp rocks, or shellfish beds, whereas a rope warp is susceptible to abrasion and can fail in a short time when stretched against an abrasive surface. The weight of the chain also helps keep the direction of pull on the anchor closer to horizontal, which improves holding, and absorbs part of snubbing loads. Where weight is not an issue, a heavier chain provides better holding by forming a catenary curve through the water and resting as much of its length on the bottom as would not be lifted by tension of the mooring load. Any changes to the tension are accommodated by additional chain bing lifted or settling on the bottom, and this absorbs shock loads until the chain is straight, at which point the full load is taken by the anchor. Additional dissipation of shock loads can be achieved by fitting a snubber between the chain and a bollard or cleat on deck. This also reduces shock loads on the deck fittings, and the vessel usually lies more comfortably and quietly. \nBeing strong and elastic, nylon rope is the most suitable as an anchor rode. Polyester (terylene) is stronger but less elastic than nylon. Both materials sink, so they avoid fouling other craft in crowded anchorages and do not absorb much water. Neither breaks down quickly in sunlight. Elasticity helps absorb shock loading, but causes faster abrasive wear when the rope stretches over an abrasive surface, like a coral bottom or a poorly designed chock. Polypropylene (\"polyprop\") is not suited to rodes because it floats and is much weaker than nylon, being barely stronger than natural fibres. Some grades of polypropylene break down in sunlight and become hard, weak, and unpleasant to handle. Natural fibres such as manila or hemp are still used in developing nations but absorb a lot of water, are relatively weak, and rot, although they do give good handling grip and are often relatively cheap. Ropes that have little or no elasticity are not suitable as anchor rodes. Elasticity is partly a function of the fibre material and partly of the rope structure. \nAll anchors should have chain at least equal to the boat's length. Some skippers prefer an all chain warp for greater security on coral or sharp edged rock bottoms. The chain should be shackled to the warp through a steel eye or spliced to the chain using a chain splice. The shackle pin should be securely wired or moused. Either galvanized or stainless steel is suitable for eyes and shackles, galvanised steel being the stronger of the two. Some skippers prefer to add a swivel to the rode. There is a school of thought that says these should not be connected to the anchor itself, but should be somewhere in the chain. However, most skippers connect the swivel directly to the anchor.\nScope.\nScope is the ratio of the depth of the water measured from the highest point (usually the anchor roller or bow chock) to the seabed, making allowance for the highest expected tide. The function of this ratio is to ensure that the pull on the anchor is unlikely to break it out of the bottom if it is embedded, or lift it off a hard bottom, either of which is likely to result in the anchor dragging. A large scope induces a load that is nearly horizontal. \nIn moderate conditions the ratio of rode to water depth should be 4:1 \u2013 where there is sufficient swing-room, a greater scope is always better. In rougher conditions it should be up to twice this with the extra length giving more stretch and a smaller angle to the bottom to resist the anchor breaking out. For example, if the water is deep, and the anchor roller is above the water, then the 'depth' is 9 meters (~30 feet). The amount of rode to let our in moderate conditions is thus 36 meters (120 feet). (For this reason it is important to have a reliable and accurate method of measuring the depth of water.) \nWhen using a rope rode, there is a simple way to estimate the scope: The ratio of bow height of the rode to length of rode above the water while lying back hard on the anchor is the same or less than the scope ratio. The basis for this is simple geometry (Intercept Theorem): The ratio between two sides of a triangle stays the same regardless of the size of the triangle as long as the angles do not change.\nGenerally, the rode should be between 5 and 10 times the depth to the seabed, giving a scope of 5:1 or 10:1; the larger the number, the shallower the angle is between the cable and the seafloor, and the less upwards force is acting on the anchor. A 10:1 scope gives the greatest holding power, but also allows for much more drifting due to the longer amount of cable paid out. Anchoring with sufficient scope and/or heavy chain rode brings the direction of strain close to parallel with the seabed. This is particularly important for light, modern anchors designed to bury in the bottom, where scopes of 5:1 to 7:1 are common, whereas heavy anchors and moorings can use a scope of 3:1, or less. Some modern anchors, such as the Ultra holds with a scope of 3:1; but, unless the anchorage is crowded, a longer scope always reduces shock stresses.\nAnchoring techniques.\nThe basic anchoring consists of determining the location, dropping the anchor, laying out the scope, setting the hook, and assessing where the vessel ends up. The ship seeks a location that is sufficiently protected; has suitable holding ground, enough depth at low tide and enough room for the boat to swing.\nThe location to drop the anchor should be approached from down wind or down current, whichever is stronger. As the chosen spot is approached, the vessel should be stopped or even beginning to drift back. The anchor should initially be lowered quickly but under control until it is on the bottom (see anchor windlass). The vessel should continue to drift back, and the cable should be veered out under control (slowly) so it is relatively straight.\nOnce the desired scope is laid out, the vessel should be gently forced astern, usually using the auxiliary motor but possibly by backing a sail. A hand on the anchor line may telegraph a series of jerks and jolts, indicating the anchor is dragging, or a smooth tension indicative of digging in. As the anchor begins to dig in and resist backward force, the engine may be throttled up to get a thorough set. If the anchor continues to drag, or sets after having dragged too far, it should be retrieved and moved back to the desired position (or another location chosen.)\nThere are techniques of anchoring to limit the swing of a vessel if the anchorage has limited room:\nUsing an anchor weight, kellet or sentinel.\nLowering a concentrated, heavy weight down the anchor line \u2013 rope or chain \u2013 directly in front of the bow to the seabed behaves like a heavy chain rode and lowers the angle of pull on the anchor. If the weight is suspended off the seabed it acts as a spring or shock absorber to dampen the sudden actions that are normally transmitted to the anchor and can cause it to dislodge and drag. In light conditions, a kellet reduces the swing of the vessel considerably. In heavier conditions these effects disappear as the rode becomes straightened and the weight ineffective. Known as an \"anchor chum weight\" or \"angel\" in the UK.\nForked moor.\nUsing two anchors set approximately 45\u00b0 apart, or wider angles up to 90\u00b0, from the bow is a strong mooring for facing into strong winds. To set anchors in this way, first one anchor is set in the normal fashion. Then, taking in on the first cable as the boat is motored into the wind and letting slack while drifting back, a second anchor is set approximately a half-scope away from the first on a line perpendicular to the wind. After this second anchor is set, the scope on the first is taken up until the vessel is lying between the two anchors and the load is taken equally on each cable.\nThis moor also to some degree limits the range of a vessel's swing to a narrower oval. Care should be taken that other vessels do not swing down on the boat due to the limited swing range.\nBow and stern.\n(Not to be mistaken with the \"Bahamian moor\", below.) In the \"bow and stern\" technique, an anchor is set off each the bow and the stern, which can severely limit a vessel's swing range and also align it to steady wind, current or wave conditions. One method of accomplishing this moor is to set a bow anchor normally, then drop back to the limit of the bow cable (or to double the desired scope, e.g. 8:1 if the eventual scope should be 4:1, 10:1 if the eventual scope should be 5:1, etc.) to lower a stern anchor. By taking up on the bow cable the stern anchor can be set. After both anchors are set, tension is taken up on both cables to limit the swing or to align the vessel.\nBahamian moor.\nSimilar to the above, a \"Bahamian moor\" is used to sharply limit the swing range of a vessel, but allows it to swing to a current. One of the primary characteristics of this technique is the use of a swivel as follows: the first anchor is set normally, and the vessel drops back to the limit of anchor cable. A second anchor is attached to the end of the anchor cable, and is dropped and set. A swivel is attached to the middle of the anchor cable, and the vessel connected to that.\nThe vessel now swings in the middle of two anchors, which is acceptable in strong reversing currents, but a wind perpendicular to the current may break out the anchors, as they are not aligned for this load.\nBacking an anchor.\nAlso known as \"tandem anchoring\", in this technique two anchors are deployed in line with each other, on the same rode. With the foremost anchor reducing the load on the aft-most, this technique can develop great holding power and may be appropriate in \"ultimate storm\" circumstances. It does not limit swinging range, and might not be suitable in some circumstances. There are complications, and the technique requires careful preparation and a level of skill and experience above that required for a single anchor.\nKedging.\n\"Kedging\" or \"warping\" is a technique for moving or turning a ship by using a relatively light anchor.\nIn yachts, a kedge anchor is an anchor carried in addition to the main, or bower anchors, and usually stowed aft. Every yacht should carry at least two anchors \u2013 the main or \"bower\" anchor and a second lighter \"kedge\" anchor. It is used occasionally when it is necessary to limit the turning circle as the yacht swings when it is anchored, such as in a narrow river or a deep pool in an otherwise shallow area. Kedge anchors are sometimes used to recover vessels that have run aground.\nFor ships, a kedge may be dropped while a ship is underway, or carried out in a suitable direction by a tender or ship's boat to enable the ship to be winched off if aground or swung into a particular heading, or even to be held steady against a tidal or other stream.\nHistorically, it was of particular relevance to sailing warships that used them to outmaneuver opponents when the wind had dropped but might be used by any vessel in confined, shoal water to place it in a more desirable position, provided she had enough manpower.\nClub hauling.\nClub hauling is an archaic technique. When a vessel is in a narrow channel or on a lee shore so that there is no room to tack the vessel in a conventional manner, an anchor attached to the lee quarter may be dropped from the lee bow. This is deployed when the vessel is head to wind and has lost headway. As the vessel gathers sternway the strain on the cable pivots the vessel around what is now the weather quarter turning the vessel onto the other tack. The anchor is then normally cut away (the ship\u2019s momentum prevents recovery without aborting the manuver). \nWeighing anchor.\nSince all anchors that embed themselves in the bottom require the strain to be along the seabed, anchors can be broken out of the bottom by shortening the rope until the vessel is directly above the anchor; at this point the anchor chain is \"up and down\", in naval parlance. If necessary, motoring slowly around the location of the anchor also helps dislodge it. Anchors are sometimes fitted with a trip line attached to the crown, by which they can be unhooked from rocks, coral, chain, or other underwater hazards.\nThe term \"aweigh\" describes an anchor when it is hanging on the rope and is not resting on the bottom. This is linked to the term \"to weigh anchor\", meaning to lift the anchor from the sea bed, allowing the ship or boat to move. An anchor is described as \"aweigh\" when it has been broken out of the bottom and is being hauled up to be \"stowed\". \"Aweigh\" should not be confused with \"under way\", which describes a vessel that is not \"moored\" to a dock or \"anchored\", whether or not the vessel is moving through the water. \"Aweigh\" is also often confused with \"away\", which is incorrect.\nAnchor as symbol.\nAn anchor frequently appears on the flags and coats of arms of institutions involved with the sea, both naval and commercial, as well as of port cities and seacoast regions and provinces in various countries. There also exists in heraldry the \"Anchored Cross\", or Mariner's Cross, a stylized cross in the shape of an anchor. The symbol can be used to signify 'fresh start' or 'hope'. The New Testament refers to the Christian's hope as \"an anchor of the soul\". The Mariner's Cross is also referred to as St. Clement's Cross, in reference to the way this saint was killed (being tied to an anchor and thrown from a boat into the Black Sea in 102). Anchored crosses are occasionally a feature of coats of arms in which context they are referred to by the heraldic terms \"anchry\" or \"ancre\".\nIn 1887, the Delta Gamma Fraternity adopted the anchor as its badge to signify hope.\nThe Unicode anchor (Miscellaneous Symbols) is represented by: \u2693.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1359", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1359", "title": "Anbar (town)", "text": "Former town in Al Anbar, Iraq\n \nAnbar (, ,) also known by its original ancient name, Peroz-Shapur, was an ancient and medieval town in central Iraq. It played a role in the Roman\u2013Persian Wars of the 3rd\u20134th centuries, and briefly became the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate before the founding of Baghdad in 762. It remained a moderately prosperous town through the 10th century, but quickly declined thereafter. As a local administrative centre, it survived until the 14th century, but was later abandoned.\nIts ruins are near modern Fallujah. The city gives its name to the Al-Anbar Governorate.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe city is located on the left bank of the Middle Euphrates, at the junction with the Nahr Isa canal, the first of the navigable canals that link the Euphrates to the River Tigris to the east. The origins of the city are unknown, but ancient, perhaps dating to the Babylonian era and even earlier: the local artificial mound of Tell Aswad dates to c.\u20093000 BC.\nSasanian period.\nThe town was originally known as Misiche (Greek: ), Mesiche (), or Massice ( m\u0161yk; m\u0161yk). As a major crossing point of the Euphrates, and occupying the northernmost point of the complex irrigation network of the Sawad, the town was of considerable strategic significance. As the western gate to central Mesopotamia, it was fortified by the Sasanian ruler Shapur I (r.\u2009241\u00a0\u2013\u00a0272) to shield his capital, Ctesiphon, from the Roman Empire. After his decisive defeat of the Roman emperor Gordian III at the Battle of Misiche in 244, Shapur renamed the town to Peroz-Shapur (\"P\u0113r\u014dz-\u0160\u0101p\u016br\" or \"P\u0113r\u014dz-\u0160\u0101buhr\", from , meaning \"victorious Shapur\"; in ; in ). It became known as Pirisapora or Bersabora () to the Greeks and Romans.\nThe city was fortified by a double wall, possibly through the use of Roman prisoner labour; it was sacked and burned after an agreement with its garrison in March 363 by the Roman emperor Julian during his invasion of the Sasanian Empire. It was rebuilt by Shapur II. By 420, it is attested as a bishopric, both for the Church of the East and for the Syriac Orthodox Church. The town's garrison was Persian, but it also contained sizeable Arab and Jewish populations. Anbar was adjacent or identical to the Babylonian Jewish center of Nehardea (), and lies a short distance from the present-day town of Fallujah, formerly the Babylonian Jewish center of Pumbedita ().\nIslamic period.\nThe city fell to the Rashidun Caliphate in July 633, after a fiercely fought siege. When Ali ibn Abi Talib (r. 656\u2013661) passed through the city, he was warmly welcomed by ninety-thousand Jews who then lived there, and he \"received them with great friendliness.\"\nThe Arabs retained the name (\"F\u012br\u016bz Sh\u0101b\u016br\") for the surrounding district, but the town itself became known as Anbar (Middle Persian word for \"granary\" or \"storehouse\") from the granaries in its citadel, a name that had appeared already during the 6th century. According to Baladhuri, the third mosque to be built in Iraq was erected in the city by Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas. Ibn Abi Waqqas initially considered Anbar as a candidate for the location of one of the first Muslim garrison towns, but the fever and fleas endemic in the area persuaded him otherwise.\nAccording to medieval Arabic sources, most of the inhabitants of the town migrated north to found the city of Hdatta south of Mosul. The famous governor al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf cleared the canals of the city.\nAbu'l-Abbas as-Saffah (r.\u2009749\u00a0\u2013\u00a0754), the founder of the Abbasid Caliphate, made it his capital in 752, constructing a new town half a \"farsakh\" (c.) to the north for his Khurasani troops. There he died and was buried at the palace he had built. His successor, al-Mansur (r.\u2009754\u00a0\u2013\u00a0775), remained in the city until the founding of Baghdad in 762. The Abbasids also dug the great Nahr Isa canal to the south of the city, which carried water and commerce east to Baghdad. The Nahr al-Saqlawiyya or Nahr al-Qarma canal, which branches off from the Euphrates to the west of the city, is sometimes erroneously held to be the Nahr Isa, but it is more likely that it is to be identified with the pre-Islamic Nahr al-Rufayl.\nIt continued to be a place of much importance throughout the Abbasid period. Caliph Harun al-Rashid (r.\u2009786\u00a0\u2013\u00a0809) stayed at the town in 799 and in 803. The town's prosperity was founded on agricultural activities, but also on trade between Iraq and Syria. The town was still prosperous in the early 9th century, but the decline of Abbasid authority during the later 9th century exposed it to Bedouin attacks in 882 and 899. In 927, the Qarmatians under Abu Tahir al-Jannabi sacked the city during their invasion of Iraq, and the devastation was compounded by another Bedouin attack two years later. The town's decline accelerated after that: while the early 10th-century geographer Istakhri still calls the town modest but populous, with the ruins of the buildings of as-Saffah still visible, Ibn Hawqal and al-Maqdisi, who wrote a generation later, attest to its decline, and the diminution of its population.\nThe town was sacked again in 1262 by the Mongols under Kerboka. The Ilkhanids retained Anbar as an administrative centre, a role it retained until the first half of the 14th century; the Ilkhanid minister Shams al-Din Juvayni had a canal dug from the city to Najaf, and the city was surrounded by a wall of sun-dried bricks.\nEcclesiastical history.\nAnbar used to host an Assyrian community from the fifth century: the town was the seat of a bishopric of the Church of the East. The names of fourteen of its bishops of the period 486\u20131074 are known, three of whom became Chaldean Patriarchs of Babylon.\nTitular see.\nAnbar is listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see of the Chaldean Catholic Church, established as titular bishopric in 1980.\nIt has had the following incumbents:\nToday.\nIt is now entirely deserted, occupied only by mounds of ruins, whose great number indicate the city's former importance. Its ruins are northwest of Fallujah, with a circumference of some . The remains include traces of the late medieval wall, a square fortification, and the early Islamic mosque. \nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1360", "revid": "1138995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1360", "title": "Anazarbus", "text": "Ancient Greek city in Anatolia\nAnazarbus, also known as Justinopolis (, medieval Ain Zarba; modern Anavarza; ), was an ancient Cilician city. Under the late Roman Empire, it was the capital of Cilicia Secunda. Roman emperor Justinian I rebuilt the city in 527 after a strong earthquake hit it. It was destroyed in 1374 by the forces of the Mamluk Empire, after their conquest of Cilician Armenia.\nLocation.\nIt was situated in Anatolia in modern Turkey, in the present \u00c7ukurova (or classical Aleian plain) about 15\u00a0km west of the main stream of the present Ceyhan River (or classical Pyramus river) and near its tributary the Sempas Su.\nA lofty isolated ridge formed its acropolis. Though some of the masonry in the ruins is certainly pre-Roman, the Suda's identification of it with Cyinda, famous as a treasure city in the wars of Eumenes of Cardia, cannot be accepted in the face of Strabo's express location of Cyinda in western Cilicia.\nHistory.\nAccording to the \"Suda\", the original name of the place was Cyinda or Kyinda or Quinda (); and that it was next called Diocaesarea (\u0394\u03b9\u03bf\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03c3\u03ac\u03c1\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1). A city in Cilicia called Kundu rebelled against the Assyrian king Esarhaddon in 7th century BC, but it's unclear if there is a connection. At least it's known a city called Anazarbus (\u1f08\u03bd\u03ac\u03b6\u03b1\u03c1\u03b2\u03bf\u03c2) and Anazarba (\u1f08\u03bd\u03ac\u03b6\u03b1\u03c1\u03b2\u03b1) and Anazarbon (\u1f08\u03bd\u03ac\u03b6\u03b1\u03c1\u03b2\u03bf\u03bd), situated on the river Pyramus, existed in the first century BC and was a part of the small client-kingdom of Tarcondimotus I until it was annexed by Rome. How the city obtained the name is a matter of conjecture. According to Stephanus of Byzantium, after the city was destroyed by an earthquake, the emperor Nerva sent thither one Anazarbus, a man of senatorial rank, who rebuilt the city, and gave to it his own name. This account cannot be accurate, as Valesius remarks, for it was called Anazarbus in Pliny's time. Dioscorides is called a native of Anazarbus; but the period of Dioscorides is not certain. It was also the home of the poet Oppian. Its later name was Caesarea ad Anazarbum, and there are many medals of the place in which it is both named Anazarbus and Caesarea at or under Anazarbus. On the division of Cilicia it became the chief place of the Roman province of Cilicia Secunda, with the title of Metropolis. Early in the sixth century, in the reign of Eastern Roman emperor Justin I, it was named Justinopolis or Ioustinoupolis (\u1f38\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd\u03bf\u03cd\u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03c2). The city suffered from an earthquake in 526 and was rebuilt by Justinian I and renamed Justinianopolis or Ioustinianoupolis (\u1f38\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd\u03b9\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03cd\u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03c2); but the old name persisted, and when Thoros I, king of Lesser Armenia, made it his capital early in the 12th century, it was known as Anazarva.\nIts great natural strength and situation, not far from the mouth of the Sis pass, and near the great road which debouched from the Cilician Gates, made Anazarbus play a considerable part in the struggles between the Eastern Roman Empire and the early Muslim invaders. It had been rebuilt by Harun al-Rashid in 796, refortified at great expense by the Hamdanid Sayf al-Dawla (mid-10th century) and again destroyed in 962 by Nikephoros II Phokas. In the 11th century it was again a major fortress, comparable to Tarsos and Marash, and belonged to the realm of Philaretos Brachamios before it was captured around 1084 by the Seljuk Turks. In late 1097 or early 1098 it was captured by the armies of the First Crusade and after the conquest of Antioch it was incorporated into Bohemond of Taranto's Principality of Antioch. \nThe site briefly exchanged hands between the Byzantine Empire and Armenians, until it was formally part of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia. Anazarbus was one of a chain of Armenian fortifications stretching through Cilicia. The castle of Sis (modern Kozan, Adana) lies to the north while Tumlu Castle and Yilankale are to the south, and the fortresses of Amouda and Sarvandikar are to the east. The Mamluk Empire of Egypt finally destroyed the city in 1374.\nRemains.\nThe Crusaders are probably responsible for the construction of an impressive donjon atop the center of the outcrop. Most of the remaining fortifications, including the curtain walls, massive horseshoe-shaped towers, undercrofts, cisterns, and free-standing structures date from the Armenian periods of occupation, which began with the arrival of the Rubenid Baron T\u201boros I, c.\u20091111. Within the fortress are two Armenian chapels and the magnificent (but severely damaged) three-aisle church built by T\u201boros I to celebrate his conquests. The church was once surrounded by a continuous, well-executed dedicatory inscription in Armenian.\nThe present wall of the lower city is of late construction. It encloses a mass of ruins conspicuous in which are a fine triumphal arch, the colonnades of two streets, a gymnasium, etc. A stadium and a theatre lie outside the walls to the south. The remains of the acropolis fortifications are very interesting, including roads and ditches hewn in the rock. There are no notable structures in the upper town. For picturesqueness the site is not equaled in Cilicia, and it is worthwhile to trace the three fine aqueducts to their sources. A necropolis on the escarpment to the south of the curtain wall can also be seen complete with signs of illegal modern excavations.\nA modest Turkish farming village (Dilekkaya) lies to the southwest of the ancient city. A small outdoor museum with some of the artifacts collected in the area can be viewed for a small fee. Also nearby are some beautiful mosaics discovered in a farmers field.\nA visit in December 2002 showed that the three aqueducts mentioned above have been nearly completely destroyed. Only small, isolated sections are left standing with the largest portion lying in a pile of rubble that stretches the length of where the aqueducts once stood. A powerful earthquake that struck the area in 1945 is thought to be responsible for the destruction.\nIn 2013, excavations uncovered the first known colonnaded double-lane road of the ancient world, 34 meters wide and 2700 meters long, also uncovered the ruins of a church and a bathhouse.\nIn 2017, archaeologists discovered a limestone statue of the goddess Hygieia and the god Eros. The statue is thought to date to the third or fourth century B.C.\nEcclesiastical history.\nAnazarbus was the capital and so also from 553 (the date of the Second Council of Constantinople) the metropolitan see of the Late Roman province of Cilicia Secunda.\nIn the 4th century, one of the bishops of Anazarbus was Athanasius, a \"consistent expounder of the theology of Arius.\" His theological opponent, Athanasius of Alexandria, in \"De Synodis\" 17, 1 refers to Anazarbus as \u039d\u03b1\u03b6\u03b1\u03c1\u03b2\u1ff6\u03bd.\nMaximin of Anazarbus attended the Council of Chalcedon.\nA 6th century \"Notitia Episcopatuum\" indicates that it had as suffragan sees Epiphania, Alexandria Minor, Irenopolis, Flavias, Castabala and Aegeae. Rhosus was also subject to Anazarbus, but after the 6th century was made exempt, and Mopsuestia was raised to the rank of autocephalous metropolitan see, though without suffragans.\nLatin Catholic titular see.\nThe titular archbishopric was revived in the 18th century as a see of the Latin Catholic church, Anazarbus.\nIt is vacant, having had the following incumbents, generally of the highest (Metropolitan) rank, \"with an episcopal (lowest rank) exception:\"\nArmenian Catholic titular see.\nIn the 19th century, an Armenian Catholic titular bishopric of Anazarbus (of the Armenians) (Anazarbus degli Armeni in Curiate Italian) was established.\nIt was a suppressed in 1933, having had a single incumbent, of the intermediary (archiepiscopal) rank :\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "1361", "revid": "1154664808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1361", "title": "Anagram", "text": "Rearrangement of letters in a word or phrase\nAn anagram is a word or phrase formed by rearranging the letters of a different word or phrase, typically using all the original letters exactly once. For example, the word \"anagram\" itself can be rearranged into \"nag a ram\", as well as the word \"binary\" into \"brainy\" and the word \"adobe\" into \"abode\".\nThe original word or phrase is known as the \"subject\" of the anagram. Any word or phrase that exactly reproduces the letters in another order is an anagram. Someone who creates anagrams may be called an \"anagrammatist\", and the goal of a serious or skilled anagrammatist is to produce anagrams that reflect or comment on their subject.\nExamples.\nAnagrams may be created as a commentary on the subject. They may be a parody, a criticism or satire. For example:\nAn anagram may also be a synonym of the original word. For example:\nAn anagram that has a meaning opposed to that of the original word or phrase is called an \"antigram\". For example:\nThey can sometimes change from a proper noun or personal name into an appropriate sentence:\nThey can change part of speech, such as the adjective \"silent\" to the verb \"listen\".\n\"Anagrams\" itself can be anagrammatized as \"Ars magna\" (Latin, 'the great art').\nHistory.\nAnagrams can be traced back to the time of the ancient Greeks, and were used to find the hidden and mystical meaning in names.\nThey were popular throughout Europe during the Middle Ages, for example with the poet and composer Guillaume de Machaut. They are said to date back at least to the Greek poet Lycophron, in the third century BCE; but this relies on an account of Lycophron given by John Tzetzes in the 12th century.\nIn the Talmudic and Midrashic literature, anagrams were used to interpret the Hebrew Bible, notably by Eleazar of Modi'im. Later, Kabbalists took this up with enthusiasm, calling anagrams \"temurah\".\nAnagrams in Latin were considered witty over many centuries. \"Est vir qui adest\", explained below, was cited as the example in Samuel Johnson's \"A Dictionary of the English Language\". They became hugely popular in the early modern period, especially in Germany.\nAny historical material on anagrams must always be interpreted in terms of the assumptions and spellings that were current for the language in question. In particular, spelling in English only slowly became fixed. There were attempts to regulate anagram formation, an important one in English being that of George Puttenham's \"Of the Anagram or Posy Transposed\" in \"The Art of English Poesie\" (1589).\nInfluence of Latin.\nAs a literary game when Latin was the common property of the literate, Latin anagrams were prominent. Two examples are the change of \"Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum\" (Latin: Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord [is] with you) into \"Virgo serena, pia, munda et immaculata\" (Latin: Serene virgin, pious, clean and spotless), and the anagrammatic answer to Pilate's question, \"Quid est veritas?\" (Latin: What is truth?), namely, \"Est vir qui adest\" (Latin: It is the man who is here). The origins of these are not documented.\nLatin continued to influence letter values (such as I = J, U = V and W = VV). There was an ongoing tradition of allowing anagrams to be \"perfect\" if the letters were all used once, but allowing for these interchanges. This can be seen in a popular Latin anagram against the Jesuits: \"Societas Jesu\" turned into \"Vitiosa seces\" (Latin: Cut off the wicked things). Puttenham, in the time of Elizabeth I, wished to start from \"Elissabet Anglorum Regina\" (Latin: Elizabeth Queen of the English), to obtain \"Multa regnabis ense gloria\" (Latin: By thy sword shalt thou reign in great renown); he explains carefully that H is \"a note of aspiration only and no letter\", and that Z in Greek or Hebrew is a mere SS. The rules were not completely fixed in the 17th century. William Camden in his \"Remains\" commented, singling out some letters\u2014\u00c6, K, W, and Z\u2014not found in the classical Roman alphabet:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The precise in this practice strictly observing all the parts of the definition, are only bold with H either in omitting or retaining it, for that it cannot challenge the right of a letter. But the Licentiats somewhat licentiously, lest they should prejudice poetical liberty, will pardon themselves for doubling or rejecting a letter, if the sence fall aptly, and \"think it no injury to use E for \u00c6; V for W; S for Z, and C for K, and contrariwise.\nEarly modern period.\nWhen it comes to the 17th century and anagrams in English or other languages, there is a great deal of documented evidence of learned interest. The lawyer Thomas Egerton was praised through the anagram \"gestat honorem\" ('he carries honor'); the physician George Ent took the anagrammatic motto \"genio surget\" ('he rises through spirit/genius'), which requires his first name as \"Georgius\". James I's courtiers discovered in \"James Stuart\" \"a just master\", and converted \"Charles James Stuart\" into \"Claims Arthur's seat\" (even at that point in time, the letters I and J were more-or-less interchangeable). Walter Quin, tutor to the future Charles I, worked hard on multilingual anagrams on the name of father James. A notorious murder scandal, the Overbury case, threw up two imperfect anagrams that were aided by typically loose spelling and were recorded by Simonds D'Ewes: \"Francis Howard\" (for Frances Carr, Countess of Somerset, her maiden name spelled in a variant) became \"Car findes a whore\", with the letters E hardly counted, and the victim Thomas Overbury, as \"Thomas Overburie\", was written as \"O! O! a busie murther\" (an old form of \"murder\"), with a V counted as U.\nWilliam Drummond of Hawthornden, in an essay \"On the Character of a Perfect Anagram\", tried to lay down rules for permissible substitutions (such as S standing for Z) and letter omissions. William Camden provided a definition of \"Anagrammatisme\" as \"a dissolution of a name truly written into his letters, as his elements, and a new connection of it by artificial transposition, without addition, subtraction or change of any letter, into different words, making some perfect sense appliable (i.e., applicable) to the person named.\" Dryden in \"MacFlecknoe\" disdainfully called the pastime the \"torturing of one poor word ten thousand ways\".\n\"Eleanor Audeley\", wife of Sir John Davies, is said to have been brought before the High Commission in 1634 for extravagances, stimulated by the discovery that her name could be transposed to \"Reveale, O Daniel\", and to have been laughed out of court by another anagram submitted by Sir John Lambe, the dean of the Arches, \"Dame Eleanor Davies\", \"Never soe mad a ladie\".\nAn example from France was a flattering anagram for Cardinal Richelieu, comparing him to Hercules or at least one of his hands (Hercules being a kingly symbol), where \"Armand de Richelieu\" became \"Ardue main d'Hercule\" (\"difficult hand of Hercules\").\nModern period.\nExamples from the 19th century are the transposition of \"Horatio Nelson\" into \"Honor est a Nilo\" (Latin: Honor is from the Nile); and of \"Florence Nightingale\" into \"Flit on, cheering angel\". The Victorian love of anagramming as recreation is alluded to by the mathematician Augustus De Morgan using his own name as an example; \"Great Gun, do us a sum!\" is attributed to his son William De Morgan, but a family friend John Thomas Graves was prolific, and a manuscript with over 2,800 has been preserved.\nWith the advent of surrealism as a poetic movement, anagrams regained the artistic respect they had had in the Baroque period. The German poet Unica Z\u00fcrn, who made extensive use of anagram techniques, came to regard obsession with anagrams as a \"dangerous fever\", because it created isolation of the author. The surrealist leader Andr\u00e9 Breton coined the anagram \"Avida Dollars\" for Salvador Dal\u00ed, to tarnish his reputation by the implication of commercialism.\nApplications.\nWhile anagramming is certainly a recreation first, there are ways in which anagrams are put to use, and these can be more serious, or at least not quite frivolous and formless. For example, psychologists use anagram-oriented tests, often called \"anagram solution tasks\", to assess the implicit memory of young adults and adults alike.\nEstablishment of priority.\nNatural philosophers (astronomers and others) of the 17th century transposed their discoveries into Latin anagrams, to establish their priority. In this way they laid claim to new discoveries before their results were ready for publication.\nGalileo used \"smaismrmilmepoetaleumibunenugttauiras\" for \"\" (Latin: I have observed the most distant planet to have a triple form) for discovering the rings of Saturn in 1610. Galileo announced his discovery that Venus had phases like the Moon in the form ' (Latin: These immature ones have already been read in vain by me -oy), that is, when rearranged, ' (Latin: The Mother of Loves [= Venus] imitates the figures of Cynthia [= the moon]). In both cases, Johannes Kepler had solved the anagrams incorrectly, assuming they were talking about the Moons of Mars (') and a red spot on Jupiter ('), respectively. By coincidence, he turned out to be right about the actual objects existing.\nIn 1656, Christiaan Huygens, using a better telescope than those available to Galileo, figured that Galileo's earlier observations of Saturn actually meant it had a ring (Galileo's tools were only sufficient to see it as bumps) and, like Galileo, had published an anagram, \"aaaaaacccccdeeeeeghiiiiiiillllmmnnnnnnnnnooooppqrrstttttuuuuu\". Upon confirming his observations, three years later he revealed it to mean \"\" (Latin: It [Saturn] is surrounded by a thin, flat, ring, nowhere touching, inclined to the ecliptic).\nWhen Robert Hooke discovered Hooke's law in 1660, he first published it in anagram form, \"ceiiinosssttuv\", for \"\" (Latin: as the extension, so the force).\nPseudonyms.\nAnagrams are connected to pseudonyms, by the fact that they may conceal or reveal, or operate somewhere in between like a mask that can establish identity. For example, Jim Morrison used an anagram of his name in the Doors song \"L.A. Woman\", calling himself \"Mr. Mojo Risin'\". The use of anagrams and fabricated personal names may be to circumvent restrictions on the use of real names, as happened in the 18th century when Edward Cave wanted to get around restrictions imposed on the reporting of the House of Commons. In a genre such as farce or parody, anagrams as names may be used for pointed and satiric effect.\nPseudonyms adopted by authors are sometimes transposed forms of their names; thus \"Calvinus\" becomes \"Alcuinus\" (here V = U) or \"Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais\" = \"Alcofribas Nasier\". The name \"Voltaire\" of Fran\u00e7ois Marie Arouet fits this pattern, and is allowed to be an anagram of \"Arouet, l[e] j[eune]\" (U = V, J = I) that is, \"Arouet the younger\". Other examples include:\nSeveral of these are \"imperfect anagrams\", letters having been left out in some cases for the sake of easy pronunciation.\nTitles.\nAnagrams used for titles afford scope for some types of wit. Examples:\nCoincidences.\nIn Hebrew, the name \"Gernot Zippe\" (\u05d2\u05e8\u05e0\u05d5\u05d8 \u05e6\u05d9\u05e4\u05d4), the inventor of the Zippe-type centrifuge, is an anagram of the word \"centrifuge\" (\u05e6\u05e0\u05d8\u05e8\u05d9\u05e4\u05d5\u05d2\u05d4).\nThe sentence \"Name is Anu Garg\", referring to anagrammer and founder of wordsmith.org Anu Garg, can be rearranged to spell \"Anagram genius\".\nGames and puzzles.\nAnagrams are in themselves a recreational activity, but they also make up part of many other games, puzzles and game shows. The Jumble is a puzzle found in many newspapers in the United States requiring the unscrambling of letters to find the solution. Cryptic crossword puzzles frequently use anagrammatic clues, usually indicating that they are anagrams by the inclusion of a descriptive term like \"confused\" or \"in disarray\". An example would be \"Businessman burst into tears (9 letters)\". The solution, \"stationer\", is an anagram of \"into tears\", the letters of which have \"burst\" out of their original arrangement to form the name of a type of \"businessman\".\nNumerous other games and contests involve some element of anagram formation as a basic skill. Some examples:\nCiphers.\nMultiple anagramming is a technique used to solve some kinds of cryptograms, such as a permutation cipher, a transposition cipher, and the Jefferson disk. Solutions may be computationally found using a Jumble algorithm.\nMethods of construction.\nSometimes, it is possible to \"see\" anagrams in words, unaided by tools, though the more letters involved the more difficult this becomes. The difficulty is that for a word of n different letters, there are \"n\"! (factorial of n) different permutations and so \"n\"!-1 different anagrams of the word. Anagram dictionaries can also be used. Computer programs, known as \"anagram search\", \"anagram servers\", \"anagram solvers\", offer a much faster route to creating anagrams, and a large number of these programs are available on the Internet. Some programs use the Anatree algorithm to compute anagrams efficiently.\nThe program or server carries out an exhaustive search of a database of words, to produce a list containing every possible combination of words or phrases from the input word or phrase using a jumble algorithm. Some programs (such as \"Lexpert\") restrict to one-word answers. Many anagram servers (for example, The Words Oracle) can control the search results, by excluding or including certain words, limiting the number or length of words in each anagram, or limiting the number of results. Anagram solvers are often banned from online anagram games. The disadvantage of computer anagram solvers, especially when applied to multi-word anagrams, is their poor understanding of the meaning of the words they are manipulating. They usually cannot filter out meaningful or appropriate anagrams from large numbers of nonsensical word combinations. Some servers attempt to improve on this using statistical techniques that try to combine only words that appear together often. This approach provides only limited success since it fails to recognize ironic and humorous combinations.\nSome anagrammatists indicate the method they used. Anagrams constructed without the aid of a computer are noted as having been done \"manually\" or \"by hand\"; those made by utilizing a computer may be noted \"by machine\" or \"by computer\", or may indicate the name of the computer program (using \"Anagram Genius\").\nThere are also a few \"natural\" instances: English words unconsciously created by switching letters around. The French \"chaise longue\" (\"long chair\") became the American \"chaise lounge\" by metathesis (transposition of letters and/or sounds). It has also been speculated that the English \"curd\" comes from the Latin \"crudus\" (\"raw\"). Similarly, the ancient English word for bird was \"brid\".\nNotable anagrammatists.\nThe French king Louis XIII had a man named Thomas Billon appointed as his Royal Anagrammatist with an annual salary of 1200 pounds. Among contemporary anagrammers, Anu Garg, created an Internet Anagram Server in 1994 together with the satirical anagram-based newspaper \"The Anagram Times\". Mike Keith has anagrammed the complete text of \"Moby Dick\". He, along with Richard Brodie, has published \"The Anagrammed Bible\" that includes anagrammed version of many books of the Bible. Popular television personality Dick Cavett is known for his anagrams of famous celebrities such as Alec Guinness and Spiro Agnew.\nAnagram animation.\nAn animated anagram displays the letters of a word or phrase moving into their new positions.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1362", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1362", "title": "Anadyr (river)", "text": "River in Chukotka, Russia\nThe Anadyr (; Yukaghir: \u041e\u043d\u0430\u043d\u0434\u044b\u0440\u044c; ) is a river in the far northeast of Siberia which flows into the Gulf of Anadyr of the Bering Sea and drains much of the interior of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug. Its basin corresponds to the Anadyrsky District of Chukotka.\nGeography.\nThe Anadyr is long and has a basin of . It is frozen from October to late May and has a maximum flow in June with the snowmelt. It is navigable in small boats for about to near Markovo. West of Markovo it is in the Anadyr Highlands (moderate mountains and valleys with a few trees) and east of Markovo it moves into the Anadyr Lowlands (very flat treeless tundra with lakes and bogs). The drop from Markovo to the sea is less than .\nIt rises at about 67\u00b0N latitude and 171\u00b0E longitude in the Anadyr Highlands, near the headwaters of the Maly Anyuy, flows southwest receiving the waters of the rivers Yablon and Yeropol, turns east around the Shchuchy Range and passes Markvovo and the old site of Anadyrsk, turns north and east and receives the Mayn from the south, thereby encircling the Lebediny Zakaznik, turns northeast to receive the Belaya from the north in the Parapol-Belsky Lowlands, then past Ust-Belaya it turns southeast into the Anadyr Lowlands past the Ust-Tanyurer Zakaznik and receives the Tanyurer from the north. At Lake Krasnoye, it turns east and flows into the Onemen Bay of the Anadyr Estuary. If the Onemen Bay is considered part of the river, it also receives the Velikaya from the south and the Kanchalan from the north. Other important tributaries are the Yablon, Yeropol and Mamolina from the right and the Chineyveyem and Ubiyenka from the left.\nIts basin is surrounded by the Amguema and Palyavaam basins to the north, the Bolshoy Anyuy, Oloy and Kolyma basins to the northwest, and the Penzhina basin to the southwest.\nHistory.\nIn 1648, Semyon Dezhnev reached the mouth of the Anadyr after being shipwrecked on the coast. In 1649, he went upriver and built winter quarters at Anadyrsk. For the next 100 years, the Anadyr was the main route from the Arctic to the Pacific and Kamchatka. In the 18th century, the Anadyr was described by the polar explorer Dmitry Laptev.\nEcology.\nThe country through which it passes is thinly populated, and is dominated by tundra, with a rich variety of plant life. Much of the region's landscapes are dominated by rugged mountains. For nine months of the year the ground is covered with snow, and the frozen rivers become navigable roads. George Kennan, an American working on the Western Union Telegraph Expedition in the late 1860s, found that dog sled travel on the lower Anadyr was limited by lack of firewood.\nReindeer, upon which the local inhabitants subsisted, were once found in considerable numbers, but the domestic reindeer population has collapsed dramatically since the reorganization and privatization of state-run collective farms beginning in 1992. As herds of domestic reindeer have declined, herds of wild caribou have increased.\nThere are ten species of salmon inhabiting the Anadyr river basin. Every year, on the last Sunday in April, there is an ice fishing competition in the frozen estuarine waters of the Anadyr's mouth. This festival is locally known as Korfest.\nThe area is a summering place for a number of migratory birds including brent geese, Eurasian wigeons, and the pintails of California.\nSources.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
