{"id": "3986", "revid": "26347579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3986", "title": "Benjamin Franklin", "text": "Founding Father of the United States (1706\u20131790)\nBenjamin Franklin (January 17, 1706 [O.S. January 6, 1705]\u00a0\u2013 April 17, 1790) was an American polymath who was active as a writer, scientist, inventor, statesman, diplomat, printer, publisher, and political philosopher. Among the leading intellectuals of his time, Franklin was one of the Founding Fathers of the United States, a drafter and signer of the Declaration of Independence, and the first Postmaster General.\nAs a scientist, he was a major figure in the American Enlightenment and the history of physics for his studies of electricity, and for charting and naming the Gulf Stream current. As an inventor, he is known for the lightning rod, bifocals, and the Franklin stove, among others. He founded many civic organizations, including the Library Company, Philadelphia's first fire department, and the University of Pennsylvania.\nFranklin earned the title of \"The First American\" for his early and indefatigable campaigning for colonial unity, and as an author and spokesman in London for several colonies. As the first U.S. ambassador to France, he exemplified the emerging American nation. Franklin was foundational in defining the American ethos as a marriage of the practical values of thrift, hard work, education, community spirit, self-governing institutions, and opposition to authoritarianism both political and religious, with the scientific and tolerant values of the Enlightenment. In the words of historian Henry Steele Commager, \"In Franklin could be merged the virtues of Puritanism without its defects, the illumination of the Enlightenment without its heat.\" Franklin has been called \"the most accomplished American of his age and the most influential in inventing the type of society America would become.\"\nFranklin became a successful newspaper editor and printer in Philadelphia, the leading city in the colonies, publishing the \"Pennsylvania Gazette\" at age 23. He became wealthy publishing this and \"Poor Richard's Almanack\", which he wrote under the pseudonym \"Richard Saunders\". After 1767, he was associated with the \"Pennsylvania Chronicle\", a newspaper that was known for its revolutionary sentiments and criticisms of the policies of the British Parliament and the Crown.\nHe pioneered and was the first president of the Academy and College of Philadelphia, which opened in 1751 and later became the University of Pennsylvania. He organized and was the first secretary of the American Philosophical Society and was elected president in 1769. Franklin became a national hero in America as an agent for several colonies when he spearheaded an effort in London to have the Parliament of Great Britain repeal the unpopular Stamp Act. An accomplished diplomat, he was widely admired among the French as American minister to Paris and was a major figure in the development of positive Franco\u2013American relations. His efforts proved vital for the American Revolution in securing French aid.\nHe was promoted to deputy postmaster-general for the British colonies on August 10, 1753, having been Philadelphia postmaster for many years, and this enabled him to set up the first national communications network. He was active in community affairs and colonial and state politics, as well as national and international affairs. From 1785 to 1788, he served as governor of Pennsylvania. He initially owned and dealt in slaves but, by the late 1750s, he began arguing against slavery, became an abolitionist, and promoted education and the integration of African Americans into U.S. society.\nHis life and legacy of scientific and political achievement, and his status as one of America's most influential Founding Fathers, have seen Franklin honored more than two centuries after his death on the $100 bill, warships, and the names of many towns, counties, educational institutions, and corporations, as well as numerous cultural references and with a portrait in the Oval Office. Over his lifetime, Franklin wrote or received more than 30,000 letters and other documents, which since the 1950s have been collected in \"The Papers of Benjamin Franklin\", published by both the American Philosophical Society and Yale University.\nAncestry.\nBenjamin Franklin's father, Josiah Franklin, was a tallow chandler, soaper, and candlemaker. Josiah Franklin was born at Ecton, Northamptonshire, England, on December 23, 1657, the son of Thomas Franklin, a blacksmith and farmer, and his wife, Jane White. Benjamin's father and all four of his grandparents were born in England.\nJosiah Franklin had a total of seventeen children with his two wives. He married his first wife, Anne Child, in about 1677 in Ecton and emigrated with her to Boston in 1683; they had three children before emigration and four after. Following her death, Josiah married Abiah Folger on July 9, 1689, in the Old South Meeting House by Reverend Samuel Willard, and had ten children with her. Benjamin, their eighth child, was Josiah Franklin's fifteenth child overall, and his tenth and final son.\nBenjamin Franklin's mother, Abiah, was born in Nantucket, Massachusetts Bay Colony, on August 15, 1667, to Peter Folger, a miller and schoolteacher, and his wife, Mary Morrell Folger, a former indentured servant. Mary Folger came from a Puritan family that was among the first Pilgrims to flee to Massachusetts for religious freedom, sailing for Boston in 1635 after King Charles I of England had begun persecuting Puritans. Her father Peter was \"the sort of rebel destined to transform colonial America.\" As clerk of the court, he was jailed for disobeying the local magistrate in defense of middle-class shopkeepers and artisans in conflict with wealthy landowners.\nEarly life.\nBoston.\nFranklin was born on Milk Street in Boston, Massachusetts on January 17, 1706, and baptized at Old South Meeting House. As a child growing up along the Charles River, Franklin recalled that he was \"generally the leader among the boys.\"\nFranklin's father wanted him to attend school with the clergy but only had enough money to send him to school for two years. He attended Boston Latin School but did not graduate; he continued his education through voracious reading. Although \"his parents talked of the church as a career\" for Franklin, his schooling ended when he was ten. He worked for his father for a time, and at 12 he became an apprentice to his brother James, a printer, who taught him the printing trade. When Benjamin was 15, James founded \"The New-England Courant\", which was the third newspaper founded in Boston.\nWhen denied the chance to write a letter to the paper for publication, Franklin adopted the pseudonym of \"Silence Dogood\", a middle-aged widow. Mrs. Dogood's letters were published and became a subject of conversation around town. Neither James nor the \"Courant\"'s readers were aware of the ruse, and James was unhappy with Benjamin when he discovered the popular correspondent was his younger brother. Franklin was an advocate of free speech from an early age. When his brother was jailed for three weeks in 1722 for publishing material unflattering to the governor, young Franklin took over the newspaper and had Mrs. Dogood (quoting \"Cato's Letters\") proclaim, \"Without freedom of thought there can be no such thing as wisdom and no such thing as public liberty without freedom of speech.\" Franklin left his apprenticeship without his brother's permission, and in so doing became a fugitive.\nMove to Philadelphia.\nAt age 17, Franklin ran away to Philadelphia, seeking a new start in a new city. When he first arrived, he worked in several printer shops around town, but he was not satisfied by the immediate prospects. After a few months, while working in a printing house, Pennsylvania governor Sir William Keith convinced him to go to London, ostensibly to acquire the equipment necessary for establishing another newspaper in Philadelphia. Discovering that Keith's promises of backing a newspaper were empty, he worked as a typesetter in a printer's shop in what is now the Church of St Bartholomew-the-Great in the Smithfield area of London. Following this, he returned to Philadelphia in 1726 with the help of Thomas Denham, a merchant who employed him as a clerk, shopkeeper, and bookkeeper in his business.\nJunto and library.\nIn 1727, at age 21, Franklin formed the Junto, a group of \"like minded aspiring artisans and tradesmen who hoped to improve themselves while they improved their community.\" The Junto was a discussion group for issues of the day; it subsequently gave rise to many organizations in Philadelphia. The Junto was modeled after English coffeehouses that Franklin knew well and which had become the center of the spread of Enlightenment ideas in Britain.\nReading was a great pastime of the Junto, but books were rare and expensive. The members created a library initially assembled from their own books after Franklin wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A proposition was made by me that since our books were often referr'd to in our disquisitions upon the inquiries, it might be convenient for us to have them altogether where we met, that upon occasion they might be consulted; and by thus clubbing our books to a common library, we should, while we lik'd to keep them together, have each of us the advantage of using the books of all the other members, which would be nearly as beneficial as if each owned the whole.\nThis did not suffice, however. Franklin conceived the idea of a subscription library, which would pool the funds of the members to buy books for all to read. This was the birth of the Library Company of Philadelphia, whose charter he composed in 1731.\nNewspaperman.\nUpon Denham's death, Franklin returned to his former trade. In 1728, he set up a printing house in partnership with Hugh Meredith; the following year he became the publisher of a newspaper called \"The Pennsylvania Gazette\". The \"Gazette\" gave Franklin a forum for agitation about a variety of local reforms and initiatives through printed essays and observations. Over time, his commentary, and his adroit cultivation of a positive image as an industrious and intellectual young man, earned him a great deal of social respect. But even after he achieved fame as a scientist and statesman, he habitually signed his letters with the unpretentious 'B. Franklin, Printer.'\nIn 1732, he published the first German-language newspaper in America \u2013 \"Die Philadelphische Zeitung\" \u2013 although it failed after only one year because four other newly founded German papers quickly dominated the newspaper market. Franklin also printed Moravian religious books in German. He often visited Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, staying at the Moravian Sun Inn. In a 1751 pamphlet on demographic growth and its implications for the Thirteen Colonies, he called the Pennsylvania Germans \"Palatine Boors\" who could never acquire the \"Complexion\" of Anglo-American settlers and referred to \"Blacks and Tawneys\" as weakening the social structure of the colonies. Although he apparently reconsidered shortly thereafter, and the phrases were omitted from all later printings of the pamphlet, his views may have played a role in his political defeat in 1764.\nAccording to Ralph Frasca, Franklin promoted the printing press as a device to instruct colonial Americans in moral virtue. Frasca argues he saw this as a service to God, because he understood moral virtue in terms of actions, thus, doing good provides a service to God. Despite his own moral lapses, Franklin saw himself as uniquely qualified to instruct Americans in morality. He tried to influence American moral life through the construction of a printing network based on a chain of partnerships from the Carolinas to New England. He thereby invented the first newspaper chain. It was more than a business venture, for like many publishers he believed that the press had a public-service duty.\nWhen he established himself in Philadelphia, shortly before 1730, the town boasted two \"wretched little\" news sheets, Andrew Bradford's \"The American Weekly Mercury\", and Samuel Keimer's \"Universal Instructor in all Arts and Sciences, and Pennsylvania Gazette\". This instruction in all arts and sciences consisted of weekly extracts from \"Chambers's Universal Dictionary\". Franklin quickly did away with all of this when he took over the \"Instructor\" and made it \"The Pennsylvania Gazette\". The \"Gazette\" soon became his characteristic organ, which he freely used for satire, for the play of his wit, even for sheer excess of mischief or of fun. From the first, he had a way of adapting his models to his own uses. The series of essays called \"The Busy-Body\", which he wrote for Bradford's \"American Mercury\" in 1729, followed the general Addisonian form, already modified to suit homelier conditions. The thrifty Patience, in her busy little shop, complaining of the useless visitors who waste her valuable time, is related to the women who address Mr. Spectator. The Busy-Body himself is a true Censor Morum, as Isaac Bickerstaff had been in the \"Tatler\". And a number of the fictitious characters, Ridentius, Eugenius, Cato, and Cretico, represent traditional 18th-century classicism. Even this Franklin could use for contemporary satire, since Cretico, the \"sowre Philosopher\", is evidently a portrait of his rival, Samuel Keimer.\nFranklin had mixed success in his plan to establish an inter-colonial network of newspapers that would produce a profit for him and disseminate virtue. Over the years he sponsored two dozen printers in Pennsylvania, South Carolina, New York, Connecticut and even the Caribbean. By 1753, 8 of the 15 English language newspapers in the colonies were published by him or his partners. He began in Charleston, South Carolina, in 1731. After his second editor died, the widow Elizabeth Timothy took over and made it a success. She was one of the colonial era's first woman printers. For three decades Franklin maintained a close business relationship with her and her son Peter Timothy, who took over the \"South Carolina Gazette\" in 1746. The \"Gazette\" was impartial in political debates, while creating the opportunity for public debate, which encouraged others to challenge authority. Timothy avoided blandness and crude bias and after 1765 increasingly took a patriotic stand in the growing crisis with Great Britain. However, Franklin's \"Connecticut Gazette\" (1755\u201368) proved unsuccessful. As the Revolution approached, political strife slowly tore his network apart.\nFreemasonry.\nIn 1730 or 1731, Franklin was initiated into the local Masonic lodge. He became a grand master in 1734, indicating his rapid rise to prominence in Pennsylvania. The same year, he edited and published the first Masonic book in the Americas, a reprint of James Anderson's \"Constitutions of the Free-Masons\". He was the secretary of St. John's Lodge in Philadelphia from 1735 to 1738. Franklin remained a Freemason for the rest of his life.\nCommon-law marriage to Deborah Read.\nAt age 17 in 1723, Franklin proposed to 15-year-old Deborah Read while a boarder in the Read home. At that time, Deborah's mother was wary of allowing her young daughter to marry Franklin, who was on his way to London at Governor Keith's request, and also because of his financial instability. Her own husband had recently died, and she declined Franklin's request to marry her daughter.\nWhile Franklin was in London, his trip was extended, and there were problems with the governor's promises of support. Perhaps because of the circumstances of this delay, Deborah married a man named John Rodgers. This proved to be a regrettable decision. Rodgers shortly avoided his debts and prosecution by fleeing to Barbados with her dowry, leaving her behind. Rodgers's fate was unknown, and because of bigamy laws, Deborah was not free to remarry.\nFranklin established a common-law marriage with Deborah on September 1, 1730. They took in his recently acknowledged illegitimate young son and raised him in their household. They had two children together. Their son, Francis Folger Franklin, was born in October 1732 and died of smallpox in 1736. Their daughter, Sarah \"Sally\" Franklin, was born in 1743 and eventually married Richard Bache.\nDeborah's fear of the sea meant that she never accompanied Franklin on any of his extended trips to Europe; another possible reason why they spent much time apart is that he may have blamed her for possibly preventing their son Francis from being inoculated against the disease that subsequently killed him. Deborah wrote to him in November 1769, saying she was ill due to \"dissatisfied distress\" from his prolonged absence, but he did not return until his business was done. Deborah Read Franklin died of a stroke on December 14, 1774, while Franklin was on an extended mission to Great Britain; he returned in 1775.\nWilliam Franklin.\nIn 1730, 24-year-old Franklin publicly acknowledged his illegitimate son William and raised him in his household. William was born on February 22, 1730, but his mother's identity is unknown. He was educated in Philadelphia and beginning at about age 30 studied law in London in the early 1760s. William himself fathered an illegitimate son, William Temple Franklin, born on the same day and month: February 22, 1760. The boy's mother was never identified, and he was placed in foster care. In 1762, the elder William Franklin married Elizabeth Downes, daughter of a planter from Barbados, in London. In 1763, he was appointed as the last royal governor of New Jersey.\nA Loyalist to the king, William Franklin saw his relations with father Benjamin eventually break down over their differences about the American Revolutionary War, as Benjamin Franklin could never accept William's position. Deposed in 1776 by the revolutionary government of New Jersey, William was placed under house arrest at his home in Perth Amboy for six months. After the Declaration of Independence, he was formally taken into custody by order of the Provincial Congress of New Jersey, an entity which he refused to recognize, regarding it as an \"illegal assembly\". He was incarcerated in Connecticut for two years, in Wallingford and Middletown, and, after being caught surreptitiously engaging Americans into supporting the Loyalist cause, was held in solitary confinement at Litchfield for eight months. When finally released in a prisoner exchange in 1778, he moved to New York City, which was occupied by the British at the time.\nWhile in New York City, he became leader of the Board of Associated Loyalists, a quasi-military organization chartered by King George III and headquartered in New York City. They initiated guerrilla forays into New Jersey, southern Connecticut, and New York counties north of the city. When British troops evacuated from New York, William Franklin left with them and sailed to England. He settled in London, never to return to North America. In the preliminary peace talks in 1782 with Britain, \"...\u00a0Benjamin Franklin insisted that loyalists who had borne arms against the United States would be excluded from this plea (that they be given a general pardon). He was undoubtedly thinking of William Franklin.\"\nSuccess as an author.\nIn 1733, Franklin began to publish the noted \"Poor Richard's Almanack\" (with content both original and borrowed) under the pseudonym Richard Saunders, on which much of his popular reputation is based. He frequently wrote under pseudonyms. He had developed a distinct, signature style that was plain, pragmatic and had a sly, soft but self-deprecating tone with declarative sentences. Although it was no secret that he was the author, his Richard Saunders character repeatedly denied it. \"Poor Richard's Proverbs\", adages from this almanac, such as \"A penny saved is twopence dear\" (often misquoted as \"A penny saved is a penny earned\") and \"Fish and visitors stink in three days\", remain common quotations in the modern world. Wisdom in folk society meant the ability to provide an apt adage for any occasion, and his readers became well prepared. He sold about ten thousand copies per year\u2014it became an institution. In 1741, Franklin began publishing \"The General Magazine and Historical Chronicle for all the British Plantations in America.\" He used the heraldic badge of the Prince of Wales as the cover illustration.\nIn 1758, the year he ceased writing for the Almanack, he printed \"Father Abraham's Sermon\", also known as \"The Way to Wealth\". Franklin's autobiography, begun in 1771 but published after his death, has become one of the classics of the genre. He wrote a letter, \"Advice to a Friend on Choosing a Mistress\", dated June 25, 1745, in which he gives advice to a young man about channeling sexual urges. Due to its licentious nature, it was not published in collections of his papers during the nineteenth century. Federal court decisions from the mid-to-late twentieth century cited the document as a reason for overturning obscenity laws, using it to make a case against censorship.\nPublic life.\nEarly steps in Pennsylvania.\nIn 1736, Franklin created the Union Fire Company, one of the first volunteer firefighting companies in America. In the same year, he printed a new currency for New Jersey based on innovative anti-counterfeiting techniques he had devised. Throughout his career, he was an advocate for paper money, publishing \"A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency\" in 1729, and his printer printed money. He was influential in the more restrained and thus successful monetary experiments in the Middle Colonies, which stopped deflation without causing excessive inflation. In 1766, he made a case for paper money to the British House of Commons.\nAs he matured, Franklin began to concern himself more with public affairs. In 1743, he first devised a scheme for the Academy, Charity School, and College of Philadelphia. However, the person he had in mind to run the academy, Rev. Richard Peters, refused and Franklin put his ideas away until 1749 when he printed his own pamphlet, \"Proposals Relating to the Education of Youth in Pensilvania.\" He was appointed president of the Academy on November 13, 1749; the academy and the charity school opened in 1751.\nIn 1743, he founded the American Philosophical Society to help scientific men discuss their discoveries and theories. He began the electrical research that, along with other scientific inquiries, would occupy him for the rest of his life, in between bouts of politics and moneymaking.\nDuring King George's War, Franklin raised a militia called the Association for General Defense because the legislators of the city had decided to take no action to defend Philadelphia \"either by erecting fortifications or building Ships of War\". He raised money to create earthwork defenses and buy artillery. The largest of these was the \"Association Battery\" or \"Grand Battery\" of 50 guns.\nIn 1747, Franklin (already a very wealthy man) retired from printing and went into other businesses. He formed a partnership with his foreman, David Hall, which provided Franklin with half of the shop's profits for 18 years. This lucrative business arrangement provided leisure time for study, and in a few years he had made many new discoveries.\nFranklin became involved in Philadelphia politics and rapidly progressed. In October 1748, he was selected as a councilman; in June 1749, he became a justice of the peace for Philadelphia; and in 1751, he was elected to the Pennsylvania Assembly. On August 10, 1753, he was appointed deputy postmaster-general of British North America. His most notable service in domestic politics was his reform of the postal system, with mail sent out every week.\nIn 1751, Franklin and Thomas Bond obtained a charter from the Pennsylvania legislature to establish a hospital. Pennsylvania Hospital was the first hospital in the colonies. In 1752, Franklin organized the Philadelphia Contributionship, the Colonies' first homeowner's insurance company.\nBetween 1750 and 1753, the \"educational triumvirate\" of Franklin, Samuel Johnson of Stratford, Connecticut, and schoolteacher William Smith built on Franklin's initial scheme and created what Bishop James Madison, president of the College of William &amp; Mary, called a \"new-model\" plan or style of American college. Franklin solicited, printed in 1752, and promoted an American textbook of moral philosophy by Samuel Johnson, titled \"Elementa Philosophica\", to be taught in the new colleges. In June 1753, Johnson, Franklin, and Smith met in Stratford. They decided the new-model college would focus on the professions, with classes taught in English instead of Latin, have subject matter experts as professors instead of one tutor leading a class for four years, and there would be no religious test for admission. Johnson went on to found King's College (now Columbia University) in New York City in 1754, while Franklin hired Smith as provost of the College of Philadelphia, which opened in 1755. At its first commencement, on May 17, 1757, seven men graduated; six with a Bachelor of Arts and one with a Master of Arts. It was later merged with the University of the State of Pennsylvania to become the University of Pennsylvania. The college was to become influential in guiding : in the Continental Congress, for example, over one-third of the college-affiliated men who contributed to the Declaration of Independence between September 4, 1774, and July 4, 1776, were affiliated with the college.\nIn 1754, he headed the Pennsylvania delegation to the Albany Congress. This meeting of several colonies had been requested by the Board of Trade in England to improve relations with the Indians and defense against the French. Franklin proposed a broad Plan of Union for the colonies. While the plan was not adopted, elements of it found their way into the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution.\nIn 1753, both Harvard and Yale awarded him honorary master of arts degrees. In 1756, he received an honorary Master of Arts degree from the College of William &amp; Mary. Later in 1756, Franklin organized the Pennsylvania Militia. He used Tun Tavern as a gathering place to recruit a regiment of soldiers to go into battle against the Native American uprisings that beset the American colonies.\nPostmaster.\nWell known as a printer and publisher, Franklin was appointed postmaster of Philadelphia in 1737, holding the office until 1753, when he and publisher William Hunter were named deputy postmasters\u2013general of British North America, the first to hold the office. (Joint appointments were standard at the time, for political reasons.) He was responsible for the British colonies from Pennsylvania north and east, as far as the island of Newfoundland. A post office for local and outgoing mail had been established in Halifax, Nova Scotia, by local stationer Benjamin Leigh, on April 23, 1754, but service was irregular. Franklin opened the first post office to offer regular, monthly mail in Halifax on December 9, 1755. Meantime, Hunter became postal administrator in Williamsburg, Virginia, and oversaw areas south of Annapolis, Maryland. Franklin reorganized the service's accounting system and improved speed of delivery between Philadelphia, New York, and Boston. By 1761, efficiencies led to the first profits for the colonial post office.\nWhen the lands of New France were ceded to the British under the Treaty of Paris in 1763, the British province of Quebec was created among them, and Franklin saw mail service expanded between Montreal, Trois-Rivi\u00e8res, Quebec City, and New York. For the greater part of his appointment, he lived in England (from 1757 to 1762, and again from 1764 to 1774)\u2014about three-quarters of his term. Eventually, his sympathies for the rebel cause in the American Revolution led to his dismissal on January 31, 1774.\nOn July 26, 1775, the Second Continental Congress established the United States Post Office and named Franklin as the first United States postmaster general. He had been a postmaster for decades and was a natural choice for the position. He had just returned from England and was appointed chairman of a Committee of Investigation to establish a postal system. The report of the committee, providing for the appointment of a postmaster general for the 13 American colonies, was considered by the Continental Congress on July 25 and 26. On July 26, 1775, Franklin was appointed postmaster general, the first appointed under the Continental Congress. His apprentice, William Goddard, felt that his ideas were mostly responsible for shaping the postal system and that the appointment should have gone to him, but he graciously conceded it to Franklin, 36 years his senior. Franklin, however, appointed Goddard as Surveyor of the Posts, issued him a signed pass, and directed him to investigate and inspect the various post offices and mail routes as he saw fit. The newly established postal system became the United States Post Office, a system that continues to operate today.\nDecades in London.\nFrom the mid-1750s to the mid-1770s, Franklin spent much of his time in London.\nPolitical work.\nIn 1757, he was sent to England by the Pennsylvania Assembly as a colonial agent to protest against the political influence of the Penn family, the proprietors of the colony. He remained there for five years, striving to end the proprietors' prerogative to overturn legislation from the elected Assembly and their exemption from paying taxes on their land. His lack of influential allies in Whitehall led to the failure of this mission.\nAt this time, many members of the Pennsylvania Assembly were feuding with William Penn's heirs, who controlled the colony as proprietors. After his return to the colony, Franklin led the \"anti-proprietary party\" in the struggle against the Penn family and was elected Speaker of the Pennsylvania House in May 1764. His call for a change from proprietary to royal government was a rare political miscalculation, however: Pennsylvanians worried that such a move would endanger their political and religious freedoms. Because of these fears and because of political attacks on his character, Franklin lost his seat in the October 1764 Assembly elections. The anti-proprietary party dispatched him to England again to continue the struggle against the Penn family proprietorship. During this trip, events drastically changed the nature of his mission.\nIn London, Franklin opposed the 1765 Stamp Act. Unable to prevent its passage, he made another political miscalculation and recommended a friend to the post of stamp distributor for Pennsylvania. Pennsylvanians were outraged, believing that he had supported the measure all along, and threatened to destroy his home in Philadelphia. Franklin soon learned of the extent of colonial resistance to the Stamp Act, and he testified during the House of Commons proceedings that led to its repeal. With this, Franklin suddenly emerged as the leading spokesman for American interests in England. He wrote popular essays on behalf of the colonies. Georgia, New Jersey, and Massachusetts also appointed him as their agent to the Crown.\nDuring his lengthy missions to London between 1757 and 1775, Franklin lodged in a house on Craven Street, just off the Strand in central London. During his stays there, he developed a close friendship with his landlady, Margaret Stevenson, and her circle of friends and relations, in particular, her daughter Mary, who was more often known as Polly. The house is now a museum known as the Benjamin Franklin House. Whilst in London, Franklin became involved in radical politics. He belonged to a gentleman's club (which he called \"the honest Whigs\"), which held stated meetings, and included members such as Richard Price, the minister of Newington Green Unitarian Church who ignited the Revolution controversy, and Andrew Kippis.\nScientific work.\nIn 1756, Franklin had become a member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures &amp; Commerce (now the Royal Society of Arts), which had been founded in 1754. After his return to the United States in 1775, he became the Society's Corresponding Member, continuing a close connection. The Royal Society of Arts instituted a Benjamin Franklin Medal in 1956 to commemorate the 250th anniversary of his birth and the 200th anniversary of his membership of the RSA.\nThe study of natural philosophy (referred today as science in general) drew him into overlapping circles of acquaintance. Franklin was, for example, a corresponding member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham. In 1759, the University of St Andrews awarded him an honorary doctorate in recognition of his accomplishments. In October 1759, he was granted Freedom of the Borough of St Andrews. He was also awarded an honorary doctorate by Oxford University in 1762. Because of these honors, he was often addressed as \"Dr. Franklin\".\nWhile living in London in 1768, he developed a phonetic alphabet in \"A Scheme for a new Alphabet and a Reformed Mode of Spelling\". This reformed alphabet discarded six letters he regarded as redundant (c, j, q, w, x, and y), and substituted six new letters for sounds he felt lacked letters of their own. This alphabet never caught on, and he eventually lost interest.\nTravels around Europe.\nFranklin used London as a base to travel. In 1771, he made short journeys through different parts of England, staying with Joseph Priestley at Leeds, Thomas Percival at Manchester and Erasmus Darwin at Lichfield. In Scotland, he spent five days with Lord Kames near Stirling and stayed for three weeks with David Hume in Edinburgh. In 1759, he visited Edinburgh with his son and later reported that he considered his six weeks in Scotland \"six weeks of the densest happiness I have met with in any part of my life\".\nIn Ireland, he stayed with Lord Hillsborough. Franklin noted of him that \"all the plausible behaviour I have described is meant only, by patting and stroking the horse, to make him more patient, while the reins are drawn tighter, and the spurs set deeper into his sides.\" In Dublin, Franklin was invited to sit with the members of the Irish Parliament rather than in the gallery. He was the first American to receive this honor. While touring Ireland, he was deeply moved by the level of poverty he witnessed. The economy of the Kingdom of Ireland was affected by the same trade regulations and laws that governed the Thirteen Colonies. He feared that the American colonies could eventually come to the same level of poverty if the regulations and laws continued to apply to them.\nFranklin spent two months in German lands in 1766, but his connections to the country stretched across a lifetime. He declared a debt of gratitude to German scientist Otto von Guericke for his early studies of electricity. Franklin also co-authored the first treaty of friendship between Prussia and America in 1785. In September 1767, he visited Paris with his usual traveling partner, Sir John Pringle, 1st Baronet. News of his electrical discoveries was widespread in France. His reputation meant that he was introduced to many influential scientists and politicians, and also to King Louis XV.\nDefending the American cause.\nOne line of argument in Parliament was that Americans should pay a share of the costs of the French and Indian War and therefore taxes should be levied on them. Franklin became the American spokesman in highly publicized testimony in Parliament in 1766. He stated that Americans already contributed heavily to the defense of the Empire. He said local governments had raised, outfitted and paid 25,000 soldiers to fight France\u2014as many as Britain itself sent\u2014and spent many millions from American treasuries doing so in the French and Indian War alone.\nIn 1772, Franklin obtained private letters of Thomas Hutchinson and Andrew Oliver, governor and lieutenant governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, proving that they had encouraged the Crown to crack down on Bostonians. Franklin sent them to America, where they escalated tensions. The letters were finally leaked to the public in the \"Boston Gazette\" in mid-June 1773, causing a political firestorm in Massachusetts and raising significant questions in England. The British began to regard him as the fomenter of serious trouble. Hopes for a peaceful solution ended as he was systematically ridiculed and humiliated by Solicitor-General Alexander Wedderburn, before the Privy Council on January 29, 1774. He returned to Philadelphia in March 1775, and abandoned his accommodationist stance.\nIn 1773, Franklin published two of his most celebrated pro-American satirical essays: , and \"An Edict by the King of Prussia\".\nAgent for British and Hellfire Club membership.\nFranklin is known to have occasionally attended the Hellfire Club's meetings during 1758 as a non-member during his time in England. However, some authors and historians would argue he was in fact a British spy. As there are no records left (having been burned in 1774), many of these members are just assumed or linked by letters sent to each other. One early proponent that Franklin was a member of the Hellfire Club and a double agent is the historian Donald McCormick, who has a history of making controversial claims.\nComing of revolution.\nIn 1763, soon after Franklin returned to Pennsylvania from England for the first time, the western frontier was engulfed in a bitter war known as Pontiac's Rebellion. The Paxton Boys, a group of settlers convinced that the Pennsylvania government was not doing enough to protect them from American Indian raids, murdered a group of peaceful Susquehannock Indians and marched on Philadelphia. Franklin helped to organize a local militia to defend the capital against the mob. He met with the Paxton leaders and persuaded them to disperse. Franklin wrote a scathing attack against the racial prejudice of the Paxton Boys. \"If an \"Indian\" injures me\", he asked, \"does it follow that I may revenge that Injury on all \"Indians\"?\"\nHe provided an early response to British surveillance through his own network of counter-surveillance and manipulation. \"He waged a public relations campaign, secured secret aid, played a role in privateering expeditions, and churned out effective and inflammatory propaganda.\"\nDeclaration of Independence.\nBy the time Franklin arrived in Philadelphia on May 5, 1775, after his second mission to Great Britain, the American Revolution had begun\u2014with skirmishes breaking out between colonials and British at Lexington and Concord. The New England militia had forced the main British army to remain inside Boston. The Pennsylvania Assembly unanimously chose Franklin as their delegate to the Second Continental Congress. In June 1776, he was appointed a member of the Committee of Five that drafted the Declaration of Independence. Although he was temporarily disabled by gout and unable to attend most meetings of the committee, he made several \"small but important\" changes to the draft sent to him by Thomas Jefferson.\nAt the signing, he is quoted as having replied to a comment by John Hancock that they must all hang together: \"Yes, we must, indeed, all hang together, or most assuredly we shall all hang separately.\"\nAmbassador to France (1776\u20131785).\nOn October 26, 1776, Franklin was dispatched to France as commissioner for the United States. He took with him as secretary his 16-year-old grandson, William Temple Franklin. They lived in a home in the Parisian suburb of Passy, donated by Jacques-Donatien Le Ray de Chaumont, who supported the United States. Franklin remained in France until 1785. He conducted the affairs of his country toward the French nation with great success, which included securing a critical military alliance in 1778 and signing the 1783 Treaty of Paris.\nAmong his associates in France was Honor\u00e9 Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau\u2014a French Revolutionary writer, orator and statesman who in 1791 was elected president of the National Assembly. In July 1784, Franklin met with Mirabeau and contributed anonymous materials that the Frenchman used in his first signed work: \"Considerations sur l'ordre de Cincinnatus\". The publication was critical of the Society of the Cincinnati, established in the United States. Franklin and Mirabeau thought of it as a \"noble order\", inconsistent with the egalitarian ideals of the new republic.\nDuring his stay in France, he was active as a Freemason, serving as venerable master of the lodge Les Neuf S\u0153urs from 1779 until 1781. In 1784, when Franz Mesmer began to publicize his theory of \"animal magnetism\" which was considered offensive by many, Louis XVI appointed a commission to investigate it. These included the chemist Antoine Lavoisier, the physician Joseph-Ignace Guillotin, the astronomer Jean Sylvain Bailly, and Franklin. In doing so, the committee concluded, through blind trials that mesmerism only seemed to work when the subjects expected it, which discredited mesmerism and became the first major demonstration of the placebo effect, which was described at that time as \"imagination\". In 1781, he was elected a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nFranklin's advocacy for religious tolerance in France contributed to arguments made by French philosophers and politicians that resulted in Louis XVI's signing of the Edict of Versailles in November 1787. This edict effectively nullified the Edict of Fontainebleau, which had denied non-Catholics civil status and the right to openly practice their faith.\nFranklin also served as American minister to Sweden, although he never visited that country. He negotiated a treaty that was signed in April 1783. On August 27, 1783, in Paris, he witnessed the world's first hydrogen balloon flight. \"Le Globe\", created by professor Jacques Charles and Les Fr\u00e8res Robert, was watched by a vast crowd as it rose from the Champ de Mars (now the site of the Eiffel Tower). Franklin became so enthusiastic that he subscribed financially to the next project to build a manned hydrogen balloon. On December 1, 1783, Franklin was seated in the special enclosure for honored guests when \"La Charli\u00e8re\" took off from the Jardin des Tuileries, piloted by Charles and Nicolas-Louis Robert.\nReturn to America.\nWhen he returned home in 1785, Franklin occupied a position second only to that of George Washington as the champion of American independence. He returned from France with an unexplained shortage of 100,000 pounds in Congressional funds. In response to a question from a member of Congress about this, Franklin, quoting the Bible, quipped, \"Muzzle not the ox that treadeth out his master's grain.\" The missing funds were never again mentioned in Congress. \nLe Ray honored him with a commissioned portrait painted by Joseph Duplessis, which now hangs in the National Portrait Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. After his return, Franklin became an abolitionist and freed his two slaves. He eventually became president of the Pennsylvania Abolition Society.\nPresident of Pennsylvania and Delegate to the Constitutional convention.\nSpecial balloting conducted October 18, 1785, unanimously elected him the sixth president of the Supreme Executive Council of Pennsylvania, replacing John Dickinson. The office was practically that of the governor. He held that office for slightly over three years, longer than any other, and served the constitutional limit of three full terms. Shortly after his initial election, he was re-elected to a full term on October 29, 1785, and again in the fall of 1786 and on October 31, 1787. In that capacity, he served as host to the Constitutional Convention of 1787 in Philadelphia.\nHe also served as a delegate to the Convention. It was primarily an honorary position and he seldom engaged in debate.\nDeath.\nFranklin suffered from obesity throughout his middle-age and later years, which resulted in multiple health problems, particularly gout, which worsened as he aged. In poor health during the signing of the US Constitution in 1787, he was rarely seen in public from then until his death.\nBenjamin Franklin died from pleuritic attack at his home in Philadelphia on April 17, 1790. He was aged 84 at the time of his death. His last words were reportedly, \"a dying man can do nothing easy\", to his daughter after she suggested that he change position in bed and lie on his side so he could breathe more easily. Franklin's death is described in the book \"The Life of Benjamin Franklin\", quoting from the account of John Jones:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0when the pain and difficulty of breathing entirely left him, and his family were flattering themselves with the hopes of his recovery, when an imposthume, which had formed itself in his lungs, suddenly burst, and discharged a quantity of matter, which he continued to throw up while he had power; but, as that failed, the organs of respiration became gradually oppressed; a calm, lethargic state succeeded; and on the 17th instant (April 1790), about eleven o'clock at night, he quietly expired, closing a long and useful life of eighty-four years and three months.\nApproximately 20,000 people attended his funeral. He was interred in Christ Church Burial Ground in Philadelphia. Upon learning of his death, the Constitutional Assembly in Revolutionary France entered into a state of mourning for a period of three days, and memorial services were conducted in honor of Franklin throughout the country. In 1728, aged 22, Franklin wrote what he hoped would be his own epitaph:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Body of B. Franklin Printer; Like the Cover of an old Book, Its Contents torn out, And stript of its Lettering and Gilding, Lies here, Food for Worms. But the Work shall not be wholly lost: For it will, as he believ'd, appear once more, In a new &amp; more perfect Edition, Corrected and Amended By the Author.\nFranklin's actual grave, however, as he specified in his final will, simply reads \"Benjamin and Deborah Franklin\".\nInventions and scientific inquiries.\nFranklin was a prodigious inventor. Among his many creations were the lightning rod, Franklin stove, bifocal glasses and the flexible urinary catheter. He never patented his inventions; in his autobiography he wrote, \"...\u00a0as we enjoy great advantages from the inventions of others, we should be glad of an opportunity to serve others by any invention of ours; and this we should do freely and generously.\"\nElectricity.\nFranklin started exploring the phenomenon of electricity in the 1740s, after he met the itinerant lecturer Archibald Spencer who used static electricity in his demonstrations. He proposed that \"vitreous\" and \"resinous\" electricity were not different types of \"electrical fluid\" (as electricity was called then), but the same \"fluid\" under different pressures. (The same proposal was made independently that same year by William Watson.) He was the first to label them as positive and negative respectively, and he was the first to discover the principle of conservation of charge. In 1748, he constructed a multiple plate capacitor, that he called an \"electrical battery\" (not a true battery like Volta's pile) by placing eleven panes of glass sandwiched between lead plates, suspended with silk cords and connected by wires.\nIn pursuit of more pragmatic uses for electricity, remarking in spring 1749 that he felt \"chagrin'd a little\" that his experiments had heretofore resulted in \"Nothing in this Way of Use to Mankind\", he planned a practical demonstration. He proposed a dinner party where a turkey was to be killed via electric shock and roasted on an electrical spit. After having prepared several turkeys this way, he noted that \"the birds kill'd in this manner eat uncommonly tender.\" Franklin recounted that in the process of one of these experiments, he was shocked by a pair of Leyden jars, resulting in numbness in his arms that persisted for one evening, noting \"I am Ashamed to have been Guilty of so Notorious a Blunder.\"\nFranklin briefly investigated electrotherapy, including the use of the electric bath. This work led to the field becoming widely known. In recognition of his work with electricity, he received the Royal Society's Copley Medal in 1753, and in 1756, he became one of the few 18th-century Americans elected a fellow of the Society. The CGS unit of electric charge has been named after him: one \"franklin\" (Fr) is equal to one statcoulomb.\nFranklin advised Harvard University in its acquisition of new electrical laboratory apparatus after the complete loss of its original collection, in a fire that destroyed the original Harvard Hall in 1764. The collection he assembled later became part of the Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments, now on public display in its Science Center.\nKite experiment and lightning rod.\nFranklin published a proposal for an experiment to prove that lightning is electricity by flying a kite in a storm. On May 10, 1752, Thomas-Fran\u00e7ois Dalibard of France conducted Franklin's experiment using a iron rod instead of a kite, and he extracted electrical sparks from a cloud. On June 15, 1752, Franklin may possibly have conducted his well-known kite experiment in Philadelphia, successfully extracting sparks from a cloud. He described the experiment in his newspaper, \"The Pennsylvania Gazette\", on October 19, 1752, without mentioning that he himself had performed it. This account was read to the Royal Society on December 21 and printed as such in the \"Philosophical Transactions\". Joseph Priestley published an account with additional details in his 1767 \"History and Present Status of Electricity\". Franklin was careful to stand on an insulator, keeping dry under a roof to avoid the danger of electric shock. Others, such as Georg Wilhelm Richmann in Russia, were indeed electrocuted in performing lightning experiments during the months immediately following his experiment.\nIn his writings, Franklin indicates that he was aware of the dangers and offered alternative ways to demonstrate that lightning was electrical, as shown by his use of the concept of electrical ground. He did not perform this experiment in the way that is often pictured in popular literature, flying the kite and waiting to be struck by lightning, as it would have been dangerous. Instead he used the kite to collect some electric charge from a storm cloud, showing that lightning was electrical. On October 19, 1752, in a letter to England with directions for repeating the experiment, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When rain has wet the kite twine so that it can conduct the electric fire freely, you will find it streams out plentifully from the key at the approach of your knuckle, and with this key a phial, or Leyden jar, may be charged: and from electric fire thus obtained spirits may be kindled, and all other electric experiments [may be] performed which are usually done by the help of a rubber glass globe or tube; and therefore the sameness of the electrical matter with that of lightening [\"sic\"] completely demonstrated.\nFranklin's electrical experiments led to his invention of the lightning rod. He said that conductors with a sharp rather than a smooth point could discharge silently and at a far greater distance. He surmised that this could help protect buildings from lightning by attaching \"upright Rods of Iron, made sharp as a Needle and gilt to prevent Rusting, and from the Foot of those Rods a Wire down the outside of the Building into the Ground;\u00a0... Would not these pointed Rods probably draw the Electrical Fire silently out of a Cloud before it came nigh enough to strike, and thereby secure us from that most sudden and terrible Mischief!\" Following a series of experiments on Franklin's own house, lightning rods were installed on the Academy of Philadelphia (later the University of Pennsylvania) and the Pennsylvania State House (later Independence Hall) in 1752.\nPopulation studies.\nFranklin had a major influence on the emerging science of demography or population studies. In the 1730s and 1740s, he began taking notes on population growth, finding that the American population had the fastest growth rate on Earth. Emphasizing that population growth depended on food supplies, he emphasized the abundance of food and available farmland in America. He calculated that America's population was doubling every 20 years and would surpass that of England in a century. In 1751, he drafted \"Observations concerning the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, etc.\" Four years later, it was anonymously printed in Boston and was quickly reproduced in Britain, where it influenced the economist Adam Smith and later the demographer Thomas Malthus, who credited Franklin for discovering a rule of population growth. Franklin's predictions how British mercantilism was unsustainable alarmed British leaders who did not want to be surpassed by the colonies, so they became more willing to impose restrictions on the colonial economy.\nKammen (1990) and Drake (2011) say Franklin's \"Observations concerning the Increase of Mankind\" (1755) stands alongside Ezra Stiles' \"Discourse on Christian Union\" (1760) as the leading works of 18th-century Anglo-American demography; Drake credits Franklin's \"wide readership and prophetic insight\". Franklin was also a pioneer in the study of slave demography, as shown in his 1755 essay. In his capacity as a farmer, he wrote at least one critique about the negative consequences of price controls, trade restrictions, and subsidy of the poor. This is succinctly preserved in his letter to the \"London Chronicle\" published November 29, 1766, titled \"On the Price of Corn, and Management of the poor\".\nOceanography.\nAs deputy postmaster, Franklin became interested in North Atlantic Ocean circulation patterns. While in England in 1768, he heard a complaint from the Colonial Board of Customs. British packet ships carrying mail had taken several weeks longer to reach New York than it took an average merchant ship to reach Newport, Rhode Island. The merchantmen had a longer and more complex voyage because they left from London, while the packets left from Falmouth in Cornwall. Franklin put the question to his cousin Timothy Folger, a Nantucket whaler captain, who told him that merchant ships routinely avoided a strong eastbound mid-ocean current. The mail packet captains sailed dead into it, thus fighting an adverse current of . Franklin worked with Folger and other experienced ship captains, learning enough to chart the current and name it the Gulf Stream, by which it is still known today.\nFranklin published his Gulf Stream chart in 1770 in England, where it was ignored. Subsequent versions were printed in France in 1778 and the U.S. in 1786. The British original edition of the chart had been so thoroughly ignored that everyone assumed it was lost forever until Phil Richardson, a Woods Hole oceanographer and Gulf Stream expert, discovered it in the Biblioth\u00e8que Nationale in Paris in 1980. This find received front-page coverage in \"The New York Times\". It took many years for British sea captains to adopt Franklin's advice on navigating the current; once they did, they were able to trim two weeks from their sailing time. In 1853, the oceanographer and cartographer Matthew Fontaine Maury noted that while Franklin charted and codified the Gulf Stream, he did not discover it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Though it was Dr. Franklin and Captain Tim Folger, who first turned the Gulf Stream to nautical account, the discovery that there was a Gulf Stream cannot be said to belong to either of them, for its existence was known to Peter Martyr d'Anghiera, and to Sir Humphrey Gilbert, in the 16th century.An aging Franklin accumulated all his oceanographic findings in \"Maritime Observations\", published by the Philosophical Society's \"transactions\" in 1786. It contained ideas for sea anchors, catamaran hulls, watertight compartments, shipboard lightning rods and a soup bowl designed to stay stable in stormy weather.\nTheories and experiments.\nFranklin was, along with his contemporary Leonhard Euler, the only major scientist who supported Christiaan Huygens's wave theory of light, which was basically ignored by the rest of the scientific community. In the 18th century, Isaac Newton's corpuscular theory was held to be true; it took Thomas Young's well-known slit experiment in 1803 to persuade most scientists to believe Huygens's theory.\nOn October 21, 1743, according to the popular myth, a storm moving from the southwest denied Franklin the opportunity of witnessing a lunar eclipse. He was said to have noted that the prevailing winds were actually from the northeast, contrary to what he had expected. In correspondence with his brother, he learned that the same storm had not reached Boston until after the eclipse, despite the fact that Boston is to the northeast of Philadelphia. He deduced that storms do not always travel in the direction of the prevailing wind, a concept that greatly influenced meteorology. After the Icelandic volcanic eruption of Laki in 1783, and the subsequent harsh European winter of 1784, Franklin made observations on the causal nature of these two seemingly separate events. He wrote about them in a lecture series.\nThough Franklin is famously associated with kites from his lightning experiments, he has also been noted by many for using kites to pull humans and ships across waterways. George Pocock in the book \"A Treatise on The Aeropleustic Art, or Navigation in the Air, by means of Kites, or Buoyant Sails\" noted being inspired by Benjamin Franklin's traction of his body by kite power across a waterway.\nFranklin noted a principle of refrigeration by observing that on a very hot day, he stayed cooler in a wet shirt in a breeze than he did in a dry one. To understand this phenomenon more clearly, he conducted experiments. In 1758 on a warm day in Cambridge, England, he and fellow scientist John Hadley experimented by continually wetting the ball of a mercury thermometer with ether and using bellows to evaporate the ether. With each subsequent evaporation, the thermometer read a lower temperature, eventually reaching . Another thermometer showed that the room temperature was constant at . In his letter \"Cooling by Evaporation\", Franklin noted that, \"One may see the possibility of freezing a man to death on a warm summer's day.\"\nAccording to Michael Faraday, Franklin's experiments on the non-conduction of ice are worth mentioning, although the law of the general effect of liquefaction on electrolytes is not attributed to Franklin. However, as reported in 1836 by Franklin's great-grandson Prof. Alexander Dallas Bache of the University of Pennsylvania, the law of the effect of heat on the conduction of bodies otherwise non-conductors, for example, glass, could be attributed to Franklin. Franklin wrote, \"...\u00a0A certain quantity of heat will make some bodies good conductors, that will not otherwise conduct\u00a0...\" and again, \"...\u00a0And water, though naturally a good conductor, will not conduct well when frozen into ice.\"\nWhile traveling on a ship, Franklin had observed that the wake of a ship was diminished when the cooks scuttled their greasy water. He studied the effects on a large pond in Clapham Common, London. \"I fetched out a cruet of oil and dropt a little of it on the water\u00a0... though not more than a teaspoon full, produced an instant calm over a space of several yards square.\" He later used the trick to \"calm the waters\" by carrying \"a little oil in the hollow joint of my cane\".\nDecision-making.\nIn a 1772 letter to Joseph Priestley, Franklin laid out the earliest known description of the Pro &amp; Con list, a common decision-making technique, now sometimes called a decisional balance sheet:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0my Way is, to divide half a Sheet of Paper by a Line into two Columns, writing over the one \"Pro\", and over the other \"Con\". Then during three or four Days Consideration I put down under the different Heads short Hints of the different Motives that at different Times occur to me for or against the Measure. When I have thus got them all together in one View, I endeavour to estimate their respective Weights; and where I find two, one on each side, that seem equal, I strike them both out: If I find a Reason \"pro\" equal to some two Reasons \"con\", I strike out the three. If I judge some two Reasons \"con\" equal to some three Reasons \"pro\", I strike out the five; and thus proceeding I find at length where the Ballance lies; and if after a Day or two of farther Consideration nothing new that is of Importance occurs on either side, I come to a Determination accordingly.\nPolitical, social, and religious views.\nLike the other advocates of republicanism, Franklin emphasized that the new republic could survive only if the people were virtuous. All his life, he explored the role of civic and personal virtue, as expressed in \"Poor Richard's\" aphorisms. He felt that organized religion was necessary to keep men good to their fellow men, but rarely attended religious services himself. When he met Voltaire in Paris and asked his fellow member of the Enlightenment vanguard to bless his grandson, Voltaire said in English, \"God and Liberty\", and added, \"this is the only appropriate benediction for the grandson of Monsieur Franklin.\"\nFranklin's parents were both pious Puritans. The family attended the Old South Church, the most liberal Puritan congregation in Boston, where Benjamin Franklin was baptized in 1706. Franklin's father, a poor chandler, owned a copy of a book, \"Bonifacius: Essays to Do Good\", by the Puritan preacher and family friend Cotton Mather, which Franklin often cited as a key influence on his life. \"If I have been\", Franklin wrote to Cotton Mather's son seventy years later, \"a useful citizen, the public owes the advantage of it to that book.\" His first pen name, Silence Dogood, paid homage both to the book and to a widely known sermon by Mather. The book preached the importance of forming voluntary associations to benefit society. Franklin learned about forming do-good associations from Mather, but his organizational skills made him the most influential force in making voluntarism an enduring part of the American ethos.\nFranklin formulated a presentation of his beliefs and published it in 1728. It did not mention many of the Puritan ideas regarding salvation, the divinity of Jesus, or indeed much religious dogma. He classified himself as a deist in his 1771 autobiography, although he still considered himself a Christian. He retained a strong faith in a God as the wellspring of morality and goodness in man, and as a Providential actor in history responsible for American independence.\nAt a critical impasse during the Constitutional Convention in June 1787, he attempted to introduce the practice of daily common prayer with these words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0In the beginning of the contest with G. Britain, when we were sensible of danger we had daily prayer in this room for the Divine Protection. Our prayers, Sir, were heard, and they were graciously answered. All of us who were engaged in the struggle must have observed frequent instances of a Superintending providence in our favor.\u00a0... And have we now forgotten that powerful friend? or do we imagine that we no longer need His assistance. I have lived, Sir, a long time and the longer I live, the more convincing proofs I see of this truth\u2014that God governs in the affairs of men. And if a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his notice, is it probable that an empire can rise without his aid? We have been assured, Sir, in the sacred writings that \"except the Lord build they labor in vain that build it.\" I firmly believe this; and I also believe that without his concurring aid we shall succeed in this political building no better than the Builders of Babel:\u00a0... I therefore beg leave to move\u2014that henceforth prayers imploring the assistance of Heaven, and its blessings on our deliberations, be held in this Assembly every morning before we proceed to business, and that one or more of the Clergy of this City be requested to officiate in that service.\nThe motion met with resistance and was never brought to a vote.\nFranklin was an enthusiastic supporter of the evangelical minister George Whitefield during the First Great Awakening. He did not himself subscribe to Whitefield's theology, but he admired Whitefield for exhorting people to worship God through good works. He published all of Whitefield's sermons and journals, thereby earning a lot of money and boosting the Great Awakening.\nWhen he stopped attending church, Franklin wrote in his autobiography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFranklin retained a lifelong commitment to the Puritan virtues and political values he had grown up with, and through his civic work and publishing, he succeeded in passing these values into the American culture permanently. He had a \"passion for virtue\". These Puritan values included his devotion to egalitarianism, education, industry, thrift, honesty, temperance, charity and community spirit.\nThe classical authors read in the Enlightenment period taught an abstract ideal of republican government based on hierarchical social orders of king, aristocracy and commoners. It was widely believed that English liberties relied on their balance of power, but also hierarchal deference to the privileged class. \"Puritanism\u00a0... and the epidemic evangelism of the mid-eighteenth century, had created challenges to the traditional notions of social stratification\" by preaching that the Bible taught all men are equal, that the true value of a man lies in his moral behavior, not his class, and that all men can be saved. Franklin, steeped in Puritanism and an enthusiastic supporter of the evangelical movement, rejected the salvation dogma but embraced the radical notion of egalitarian democracy.\nFranklin's commitment to teach these values was itself something he gained from his Puritan upbringing, with its stress on \"inculcating virtue and character in themselves and their communities.\" These Puritan values and the desire to pass them on, were one of his quintessentially American characteristics and helped shape the character of the nation. Max Weber considered Franklin's ethical writings a culmination of the Protestant ethic, which ethic created the social conditions necessary for the birth of capitalism.\nOne of his notable characteristics was his respect, tolerance and promotion of all churches. Referring to his experience in Philadelphia, he wrote in his autobiography, \"new Places of worship were continually wanted, and generally erected by voluntary Contribution, my Mite for such purpose, whatever might be the Sect, was never refused.\" \"He helped create a new type of nation that would draw strength from its religious pluralism.\" The evangelical revivalists who were active mid-century, such as Whitefield, were the greatest advocates of religious freedom, \"claiming liberty of conscience to be an 'inalienable right of every rational creature.'\" Whitefield's supporters in Philadelphia, including Franklin, erected \"a large, new hall, that\u00a0... could provide a pulpit to anyone of any belief.\" Franklin's rejection of dogma and doctrine and his stress on the God of ethics and morality and civic virtue made him the \"prophet of tolerance\". He composed \"A Parable Against Persecution\", an apocryphal 51st chapter of Genesis in which God teaches Abraham the duty of tolerance. While he was living in London in 1774, he was present at the birth of British Unitarianism, attending the inaugural session of the Essex Street Chapel, at which Theophilus Lindsey drew together the first avowedly Unitarian congregation in England; this was somewhat politically risky and pushed religious tolerance to new boundaries, as a denial of the doctrine of the Trinity was illegal until the 1813 Act.\nAlthough his parents had intended for him a career in the church, Franklin as a young man adopted the Enlightenment religious belief in deism, that God's truths can be found entirely through nature and reason, declaring, \"I soon became a thorough Deist.\" He rejected Christian dogma in a 1725 pamphlet \"A Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain\", which he later saw as an embarrassment, while simultaneously asserting that God is \"all wise, all good, all powerful.\" He defended his rejection of religious dogma with these words: \"I think opinions should be judged by their influences and effects; and if a man holds none that tend to make him less virtuous or more vicious, it may be concluded that he holds none that are dangerous, which I hope is the case with me.\" After the disillusioning experience of seeing the decay in his own moral standards, and those of two friends in London whom he had converted to deism, Franklin turned back to a belief in the importance of organized religion, on the pragmatic grounds that without God and organized churches, man will not be good. Moreover, because of his proposal that prayers be said in the Constitutional Convention of 1787, many have contended that in his later life he became a pious Christian.\nAccording to David Morgan, Franklin was a proponent of religion in general. He prayed to \"Powerful Goodness\" and referred to God as \"the infinite\". John Adams noted that he was a mirror in which people saw their own religion: \"The Catholics thought him almost a Catholic. The Church of England claimed him as one of them. The Presbyterians thought him half a Presbyterian, and the Friends believed him a wet Quaker.\" Whatever else Franklin was, concludes Morgan, \"he was a true champion of generic religion.\" In a letter to Richard Price, Franklin states that he believes religion should support itself without help from the government, claiming, \"When a Religion is good, I conceive that it will support itself; and, when it cannot support itself, and God does not take care to support, so that its Professors are oblig'd to call for the help of the Civil Power, it is a sign, I apprehend, of its being a bad one.\"\nIn 1790, just about a month before he died, Franklin wrote a letter to Ezra Stiles, president of Yale University, who had asked him his views on religion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As to Jesus of Nazareth, my Opinion of whom you particularly desire, I think the System of Morals and his Religion, as he left them to us, the best the world ever saw or is likely to see; but I apprehend it has received various corrupt changes, and I have, with most of the present Dissenters in England, some Doubts as to his divinity; tho' it is a question I do not dogmatize upon, having never studied it, and I think it needless to busy myself with it now, when I expect soon an Opportunity of knowing the Truth with less Trouble. I see no harm, however, in its being believed, if that belief has the good consequence, as it probably has, of making his doctrines more respected and better observed; especially as I do not perceive that the Supreme takes it amiss, by distinguishing the unbelievers in his government of the world with any particular marks of his displeasure.\nOn July 4, 1776, Congress appointed a three-member committee composed of Franklin, Jefferson, and Adams to design the Great Seal of the United States. Franklin's proposal (which was not adopted) featured the motto: \"Rebellion to Tyrants is Obedience to God\" and a scene from the Book of Exodus, with Moses, the Israelites, the pillar of fire, and George III depicted as pharaoh. The design that was produced was not acted upon by Congress, and the Great Seal's design was not finalized until a third committee was appointed in 1782.\nFranklin strongly supported the right to freedom of speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In those wretched countries where a man cannot call his tongue his own, he can scarce call anything his own. Whoever would overthrow the liberty of a nation must begin by subduing the freeness of speech\u00a0...\nWithout freedom of thought there can be no such thing as wisdom, and no such thing as public liberty without freedom of speech, which is the right of every man\u00a0...\nThirteen Virtues.\nFranklin sought to cultivate his character by a plan of 13 virtues, which he developed at age 20 (in 1726) and continued to practice in some form for the rest of his life. His autobiography lists his 13 virtues as:\nFranklin did not try to work on them all at once. Instead, he would work on one and only one each week \"leaving all others to their ordinary chance.\" While he did not adhere completely to the enumerated virtues, and by his own admission he fell short of them many times, he believed the attempt made him a better man, contributing greatly to his success and happiness, which is why in his autobiography, he devoted more pages to this plan than to any other single point and wrote, \"I hope, therefore, that some of my descendants may follow the example and reap the benefit.\"\nSlavery.\nFranklin owned as many as seven slaves, including two men who worked in his household and his shop. He posted paid ads for the sale of slaves and for the capture of runaway slaves and allowed the sale of slaves in his general store. However, he later became an outspoken critic of slavery. In 1758, he advocated the opening of a school for the education of black slaves in Philadelphia. He took two slaves to England with him, Peter and King. King escaped with a woman to live in the outskirts of London, and by 1758 he was working for a household in Suffolk. After returning from England in 1762, Franklin became notably more abolitionist in nature, attacking American slavery. In the wake of \"Somerset v Stewart\", he voiced frustration at British abolitionists:\nFranklin, however, refused to publicly debate the issue of slavery at the 1787 Constitutional Convention.\nAt the time of the American founding, there were about half a million slaves in the United States, mostly in the five southernmost states, where they made up 40% of the population. Many of the leading American founders\u00a0\u2013 most notably Thomas Jefferson, George Washington, and James Madison\u00a0\u2013 owned slaves, but many others did not. Benjamin Franklin thought that slavery was \"an atrocious debasement of human nature\" and \"a source of serious evils.\" He and Benjamin Rush founded the Pennsylvania Society for Promoting the Abolition of Slavery in 1774. In 1790, Quakers from New York and Pennsylvania presented their petition for abolition to Congress. Their argument against slavery was backed by the Pennsylvania Abolitionist Society.\nIn his later years, as Congress was forced to deal with the issue of slavery, Franklin wrote several essays that stressed the importance of the abolition of slavery and of the integration of African Americans into American society. These writings included:\nVegetarianism.\nFranklin became a vegetarian when he was a teenager apprenticing at a print shop, after coming upon a book by the early vegetarian advocate Thomas Tryon. In addition, he would have also been familiar with the moral arguments espoused by prominent vegetarian Quakers in colonial Pennsylvania, such as Benjamin Lay and John Woolman. His reasons for vegetarianism were based on health, ethics, and economy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When about 16 years of age, I happen'd to meet with a book written by one Tryon, recommending a vegetable diet. I determined to go into it ... [By not eating meat] I presently found that I could save half what [my brother] paid me. This was an additional fund for buying books: but I had another advantage in it ... I made the greater progress from that greater clearness of head and quicker apprehension which usually attend temperance in eating and drinking.\nFranklin also declared the consumption of meat to be \"unprovoked murder\". Despite his convictions, he began to eat fish after being tempted by fried cod on a boat sailing from Boston, justifying the eating of animals by observing that the fish's stomach contained other fish. Nonetheless, he recognized the faulty ethics in this argument and would continue to be a vegetarian on and off. He was \"excited\" by tofu, which he learned of from the writings of a Spanish missionary to South East Asia, Domingo Fern\u00e1ndez Navarrete. Franklin sent a sample of soybeans to prominent American botanist John Bartram and had previously written to British diplomat and Chinese trade expert James Flint inquiring as to how tofu was made, with their correspondence believed to be the first documented use of the word \"tofu\" in the English language.\nFranklin's \"Second Reply to \"Vindex Patriae\"\", a 1766 letter advocating self-sufficiency and less dependence on England, lists various examples of the bounty of American agricultural products, and does not mention meat. Detailing new American customs, he wrote that, \"[t]hey resolved last spring to eat no more lamb; and not a joint of lamb has since been seen on any of their tables \u2026 the sweet little creatures are all alive to this day, with the prettiest fleeces on their backs imaginable.\"\nView on inoculation.\nThe concept of preventing smallpox by variolation was introduced to colonial America by an African slave named Onesimus via his owner Cotton Mather in the early eighteenth century, but the procedure was not immediately accepted. James Franklin's newspaper carried articles in 1721 that vigorously denounced the concept.\nHowever, by 1736 Benjamin Franklin, by then a prominent Boston citizen, was known as a supporter of the procedure. Therefore, when four-year-old \"Franky\" died of smallpox, opponents of the procedure circulated rumors that the child had been inoculated, and that this was the cause of his subsequent death. When Franklin became aware of this gossip, he placed a notice in the \"Pennsylvania Gazette\", stating: \"I do hereby sincerely declare, that he was not inoculated, but receiv'd the Distemper in the common Way of Infection ... I intended to have my Child inoculated.\". The child had a bad case of flux diarrhea, and his parents had waited for him to get well before having him inoculated. Franklin wrote in his \"Autobiography\": \"In 1736 I lost one of my sons, a fine boy of four years old, by the small-pox, taken in the common way. I long regretted bitterly, and still regret that I had not given it to him by inoculation. This I mention for the sake of parents who omit that operation, on the supposition that they should never forgive themselves if a child died under it; my example showing that the regret may be the same either way, and that, therefore, the safer should be chosen.\"\nInterests and activities.\nMusical endeavors.\nFranklin is known to have played the violin, the harp, and the guitar. He also composed music, notably a string quartet in early classical style. While he was in London, he developed a much-improved version of the glass harmonica, in which the glasses rotate on a shaft, with the player's fingers held steady, instead of the other way around. He worked with the London glassblower Charles James to create it, and instruments based on his mechanical version soon found their way to other parts of Europe. Joseph Haydn, a fan of Franklin's enlightened ideas, had a glass harmonica in his instrument collection. Mozart composed for Franklin's glass harmonica, as did Beethoven. Gaetano Donizetti used the instrument in the accompaniment to Amelia's aria \"Par che mi dica ancora\" in the tragic opera \"Il castello di Kenilworth\" (1821), as did Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns in his 1886 \"The Carnival of the Animals\". Richard Strauss calls for the glass harmonica in his 1917 \"Die Frau ohne Schatten\", and numerous other composers used Franklin's instrument as well.\nChess.\nFranklin was an avid chess player. He was playing chess by around 1733, making him the first chess player known by name in the American colonies. His essay on \"The Morals of Chess\" in \"Columbian Magazine\" in December 1786 is the second known writing on chess in America. This essay in praise of chess and prescribing a code of behavior for the game has been widely reprinted and translated. He and a friend used chess as a means of learning the Italian language, which both were studying; the winner of each game between them had the right to assign a task, such as parts of the Italian grammar to be learned by heart, to be performed by the loser before their next meeting.\nFranklin was able to play chess more frequently against stronger opposition during his many years as a civil servant and diplomat in England, where the game was far better established than in America. He was able to improve his playing standard by facing more experienced players during this period. He regularly attended Old Slaughter's Coffee House in London for chess and socializing, making many important personal contacts. While in Paris, both as a visitor and later as ambassador, he visited the famous Caf\u00e9 de la R\u00e9gence, which France's strongest players made their regular meeting place. No records of his games have survived, so it is not possible to ascertain his playing strength in modern terms.\nFranklin was inducted into the U.S. Chess Hall of Fame in 1999. The Franklin Mercantile Chess Club in Philadelphia, the second oldest chess club in the U.S., is named in his honor.\nLegacy.\nBequest.\nFranklin bequeathed \u00a31,000 (about $4,400 at the time, or about $125,000 in 2021 dollars) each to the cities of Boston and Philadelphia, in trust to gather interest for 200 years. The trust began in 1785 when the French mathematician Charles-Joseph Mathon de la Cour, who admired Franklin greatly, wrote a friendly parody of Franklin's \"Poor Richard's Almanack\" called \"Fortunate Richard\". The main character leaves a smallish amount of money in his will, five lots of 100 \"livres\", to collect interest over one, two, three, four or five full centuries, with the resulting astronomical sums to be spent on impossibly elaborate utopian projects. Franklin, who was 79 years old at the time, wrote thanking him for a great idea and telling him that he had decided to leave a bequest of 1,000\u00a0pounds each to his native Boston and his adopted Philadelphia.\nBy 1990, more than $2,000,000 had accumulated in Franklin's Philadelphia trust, which had loaned the money to local residents. From 1940 to 1990, the money was used mostly for mortgage loans. When the trust came due, Philadelphia decided to spend it on scholarships for local high school students. Franklin's Boston trust fund accumulated almost $5,000,000 during that same time; at the end of its first 100 years a portion was allocated to help establish a trade school that became the Franklin Institute of Boston, and the entire fund was later dedicated to supporting this institute.\nIn 1787, a group of prominent ministers in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, proposed the foundation of a new college named in Franklin's honor. Franklin donated \u00a3200 towards the development of Franklin College (now called Franklin &amp; Marshall College).\nLikeness and image.\nAs the only person to have signed the Declaration of Independence in 1776, Treaty of Alliance with France in 1778, Treaty of Paris in 1783, and U.S. Constitution in 1787, Franklin is considered one of the leading Founding Fathers of the United States. His pervasive influence in the early history of the nation has led to his being jocularly called \"the only president of the United States who was never president of the United States\".\nFranklin's likeness is ubiquitous. Since 1928, it has adorned American $100 bills. From 1948 to 1963, Franklin's portrait was on the half-dollar. He has appeared on a $50 bill and on several varieties of the $100 bill from 1914 and 1918. Franklin also appears on the $1,000 Series EE savings bond.\nOn April 12, 1976, as part of a bicentennial celebration, Congress dedicated a tall marble statue in Philadelphia's Franklin Institute as the Benjamin Franklin National Memorial. Many of Franklin's personal possessions are on display at the institute. In London, his house at 36 Craven Street, which is the only surviving former residence of Franklin, was first marked with a blue plaque and has since been opened to the public as the Benjamin Franklin House. In 1998, workmen restoring the building dug up the remains of six children and four adults hidden below the home. A total of 15 bodies have been recovered. The Friends of Benjamin Franklin House (the organization responsible for the restoration) note that the bones were likely placed there by William Hewson, who lived in the house for two years and who had built a small anatomy school at the back of the house. They note that while Franklin likely knew what Hewson was doing, he probably did not participate in any dissections because he was much more of a physicist than a medical man.\nHe has been honored on U.S. postage stamps many times. The image of Franklin, the first postmaster general of the United States, occurs on the face of U.S. postage more than any other notable American save that of George Washington. He appeared on the first U.S. postage stamp issued in 1847. From 1908 through 1923, the U.S. Post Office issued a series of postage stamps commonly referred to as the Washington\u2013Franklin Issues, in which Washington and Franklin were depicted many times over a 14-year period, the longest run of any one series in U.S. postal history. However, he only appears on a few . Some of the finest portrayals of Franklin on record can be found on the engravings inscribed on the face of U.S. postage.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nIn the arts.\nclass=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:95%;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "3989", "revid": "20530117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3989", "title": "Banach space", "text": "Normed vector space that is complete\nIn mathematics, more specifically in functional analysis, a Banach space (pronounced ]) is a complete normed vector space. Thus, a Banach space is a vector space with a metric that allows the computation of vector length and distance between vectors and is complete in the sense that a Cauchy sequence of vectors always converges to a well-defined limit that is within the space.\nBanach spaces are named after the Polish mathematician Stefan Banach, who introduced this concept and studied it systematically in 1920\u20131922 along with Hans Hahn and Eduard Helly. \nMaurice Ren\u00e9 Fr\u00e9chet was the first to use the term \"Banach space\" and Banach in turn then coined the term \"Fr\u00e9chet space\".\nBanach spaces originally grew out of the study of function spaces by Hilbert, Fr\u00e9chet, and Riesz earlier in the century. Banach spaces play a central role in functional analysis. In other areas of analysis, the spaces under study are often Banach spaces.\nDefinition.\nA Banach space is a complete normed space formula_1 \nA normed space is a pair \nformula_2 consisting of a vector space formula_3 over a scalar field formula_4 (where formula_4 is commonly formula_6 or formula_7) together with a distinguished \nnorm formula_8 Like all norms, this norm induces a translation invariant \ndistance function, called the canonical or (norm) induced metric, defined for all vectors formula_9 by\nformula_10\nThis makes formula_3 into a metric space formula_12 \nA sequence formula_13 is called Cauchy in formula_14 or formula_15-Cauchy or formula_16 there exists some index formula_17 such that\nformula_18\nwhenever formula_19 and formula_20 are greater than formula_21 \nThe normed space formula_2 is called a Banach space and the canonical metric formula_15 is called a complete metric if formula_14 is a complete metric space, which by definition means for every Cauchy sequence formula_13 in formula_26 there exists some formula_27 such that\nformula_28\nwhere because formula_29 this sequence's convergence to formula_30 can equivalently be expressed as:\nformula_31\nThe norm formula_32 of a normed space formula_2 is called a if formula_2 is a Banach space.\nL-semi-inner product\nFor any normed space formula_35 there exists an L-semi-inner product formula_36 on formula_3 such that formula_38 for all formula_27; in general, there may be infinitely many L-semi-inner products that satisfy this condition. L-semi-inner products are a generalization of inner products, which are what fundamentally distinguish Hilbert spaces from all other Banach spaces. This shows that all normed spaces (and hence all Banach spaces) can be considered as being generalizations of (pre-)Hilbert spaces.\nCharacterization in terms of series\nThe vector space structure allows one to relate the behavior of Cauchy sequences to that of converging series of vectors. \nA normed space formula_3 is a Banach space if and only if each absolutely convergent series in formula_3 converges in formula_42\nformula_43\nTopology.\nThe canonical metric formula_15 of a normed space formula_2 induces the usual metric topology formula_46 on formula_42 which is referred to as the canonical or norm induced topology. \nEvery normed space is automatically assumed to carry this Hausdorff topology, unless indicated otherwise. \nWith this topology, every Banach space is a Baire space, although there exist normed spaces that are Baire but not Banach. The norm formula_48 is always a continuous function with respect to the topology that it induces.\nThe open and closed balls of radius formula_49 centered at a point formula_27 are, respectively, the sets \nformula_51 \nAny such ball is a convex and bounded subset of formula_42 but a compact ball/neighborhood exists if and only if formula_3 is a finite-dimensional vector space. \nIn particular, no infinite\u2013dimensional normed space can be locally compact or have the Heine\u2013Borel property. \nIf formula_54 is a vector and formula_55 is a scalar then \nformula_56 or the space of all distributions on formula_57 are complete but are not normed vector spaces and hence not Banach spaces. \nIn Fr\u00e9chet spaces one still has a complete metric, while LF-spaces are complete uniform vector spaces arising as limits of Fr\u00e9chet spaces.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3991", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3991", "title": "Bits", "text": ""}
{"id": "3992", "revid": "37698590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3992", "title": "Bram Stoker", "text": "Irish novelist and short story writer (1847\u20131912)\nAbraham Stoker (8 November 1847\u00a0\u2013 20 April 1912) was an Irish author who wrote the 1897 Gothic horror novel \"Dracula\". During his lifetime, he was better known as the personal assistant of actor Sir Henry Irving and business manager of the West End's Lyceum Theatre, which Irving owned. \nIn his early years, Stoker worked as a theatre critic for an Irish newspaper, and wrote stories as well as commentaries. He also enjoyed travelling, particularly to Cruden Bay where he set two of his novels. During another visit to the English coastal town of Whitby, Stoker drew inspiration for writing \"Dracula\". He died on 20 April 1912 due to locomotor ataxia and was cremated in north London. Since his death, his magnum opus \"Dracula\" has become one of the most well-known works in English literature, and the novel has been adapted for numerous films, short stories, and plays.\nEarly life.\nStoker was born on 8 November 1847 at 15 Marino Crescent, Clontarf, on the northside of Dublin, Ireland. The park adjacent to the house is now known as Bram Stoker Park. His parents were Abraham Stoker (1799\u20131876) from Dublin and Charlotte Mathilda Blake Thornley (1818\u20131901), who was raised in County Sligo. Stoker was the third of seven children, the eldest of whom was Sir Thornley Stoker, 1st Bt. Abraham and Charlotte were members of the Church of Ireland Parish of Clontarf and attended the parish church with their children, who were baptised there. Abraham was a senior civil servant.\nStoker was bedridden with an unknown illness until he started school at the age of seven, when he made a complete recovery. Of this time, Stoker wrote, \"I was naturally thoughtful, and the leisure of long illness gave opportunity for many thoughts which were fruitful according to their kind in later years.\" He was privately educated at Bective House school run by the Reverend (William Woods).\nAfter his recovery, he grew up without further serious illnesses, even excelling as an athlete at Trinity College, Dublin, which he attended from 1864 to 1870. He graduated with a BA in 1870, and paid to receive his MA in 1875. Though he later in life recalled graduating \"with honours in mathematics\", this appears to have been a mistake. He was named University Athlete, participating in multiple sports, including playing rugby for Dublin University. He was auditor of the College Historical Society (\"the Hist\") and president of the University Philosophical Society (he remains the only student in Trinity's history to hold both positions), where his first paper was on \"Sensationalism in Fiction and Society\".\nEarly career.\nStoker became interested in the theatre while a student through his friend Dr. Maunsell. While working for the Irish Civil Service, he became the theatre critic for the \"Dublin Evening Mail\", which was co-owned by Sheridan Le Fanu, an author of Gothic tales. Theatre critics were held in low esteem at the time, but Stoker attracted notice by the quality of his reviews. In December 1876, he gave a favourable review of Henry Irving's \"Hamlet\" at the Theatre Royal in Dublin. Irving invited Stoker for dinner at the Shelbourne Hotel where he was staying, and they became friends. Stoker also wrote stories, and \"Crystal Cup\" was published by the London Society in 1872, followed by \"The Chain of Destiny\" in four parts in \"The Shamrock\". In 1876, while a civil servant in Dublin, Stoker wrote the non-fiction book \"The Duties of Clerks of Petty Sessions in Ireland\" (published 1879), which remained a standard work. Furthermore, he possessed an interest in art and was a founder of the Dublin Sketching Club in 1879.\nLyceum Theatre.\nIn 1878, Stoker married Florence Balcombe, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel James Balcombe of 1 Marino Crescent. She was a celebrated beauty whose former suitor had been Oscar Wilde. Stoker had known Wilde from his student days, having proposed him for membership of the university's Philosophical Society while he was president. Wilde was upset at Florence's decision, but Stoker later resumed the acquaintanceship, and, after Wilde's fall, visited him on the Continent.\nThe Stokers moved to London, where Stoker became acting manager and then business manager of Irving's Lyceum Theatre in the West End, a post he held for 27 years. On 31 December 1879, Bram and Florence's only child was born, a son whom they christened Irving Noel Thornley Stoker. The collaboration with Henry Irving was important for Stoker and through him, he became involved in London's high society, where he met James Abbott McNeill Whistler and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (to whom he was distantly related). Working for Irving, the most famous actor of his time, and managing one of the most successful theatres in London made Stoker a notable if busy man. He was dedicated to Irving and his memoirs show he idolised him. In London, Stoker also met Hall Caine, who became one of his closest friends \u2013 he dedicated \"Dracula\" to him.\nIn the course of Irving's tours, Stoker travelled the world, although he never visited Eastern Europe, a setting for his most famous novel. Stoker enjoyed the United States, where Irving was popular. With Irving he was invited twice to the White House, and knew William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt. Stoker set two of his novels in America, and used Americans as characters, the most notable being Quincey Morris. He also met one of his literary idols, Walt Whitman, having written to him in 1872 an extraordinary letter that some have interpreted as the expression of a deeply-suppressed homosexuality.\nBram Stoker in Cruden Bay.\nStoker was a regular visitor to Cruden Bay in Scotland between 1892 and 1910. His month-long holidays to the Aberdeenshire coastal village provided a large portion of available time for writing his books. Two novels were set in Cruden Bay: \"The Watter's Mou' \"(1895) and \"The Mystery of the Sea\" (1902). He started writing \"Dracula\" there in 1895 while in residence at the Kilmarnock Arms Hotel. The guest book with his signatures from 1894 and 1895 still survives. The nearby Slains Castle (also known as New Slains Castle) is linked with Bram Stoker and plausibly provided the visual palette for the descriptions of Castle Dracula during the writing phase. A distinctive room in Slains Castle, the octagonal hall, matches the description of the octagonal room in Castle Dracula.\nWritings.\nStoker visited the English coastal town of Whitby in 1890, and that visit was said to be part of the inspiration for \"Dracula\". Count Dracula comes ashore at Whitby, and in the shape of a black dog runs up the 199 steps to the graveyard of St Mary's Church in the shadow of the Whitby Abbey ruins. Stoker began writing novels while working as manager for Irving and secretary and director of London's Lyceum Theatre, beginning with \"The Snake's Pass\" in 1890 and \"Dracula\" in 1897. During this period, he was part of the literary staff of \"The Daily Telegraph\" in London, and he wrote other fiction, including the horror novels \"The Lady of the Shroud\" (1909) and \"The Lair of the White Worm\" (1911). He published his \"Personal Reminiscences of Henry Irving\" in 1906, after Irving's death, which proved successful, and managed productions at the Prince of Wales Theatre.\nBefore writing \"Dracula\", Stoker met \u00c1rmin V\u00e1mb\u00e9ry, a Hungarian-Jewish writer and traveller (born in Szent-Gy\u00f6rgy, Kingdom of Hungary now Sv\u00e4t\u00fd Jur, Slovakia). Dracula likely emerged from V\u00e1mb\u00e9ry's dark stories of the Carpathian mountains. However this claim has been challenged by many including Elizabeth Miller, a professor who, since 1990, has had as her major field of research and writing \"Dracula\", and its author, sources, and influences. She has stated, \u201cThe only comment about the subject matter of the talk was that Vambery 'spoke loudly against Russian aggression.'\" There had been nothing in their conversations about the \"tales of the terrible Dracula\" that are supposed to have \"inspired Stoker to equate his vampire-protagonist with the long-dead tyrant.\" At any rate, by this time, Stoker's novel was well underway, and he was already using the name Dracula for his vampire. Stoker then spent several years researching Central and East European folklore and mythological stories of vampires.\nThe 1972 book \"In Search of Dracula\" by Radu Florescu and Raymond McNally claimed that the Count in Stoker's novel was based on Vlad III Dracula. However, according to Elizabeth Miller, Stoker borrowed only the name and \"scraps of miscellaneous information\" about Romanian history; further, there are no comments about Vlad III in the author's working notes.\n\"Dracula\" is an epistolary novel, written as a collection of realistic but completely fictional diary entries, telegrams, letters, ship's logs, and newspaper clippings, all of which added a level of detailed realism to the story, a skill which Stoker had developed as a newspaper writer. At the time of its publication, \"Dracula\" was considered a \"straightforward horror novel\" based on imaginary creations of supernatural life. \"It gave form to a universal fantasy ... and became a part of popular culture.\"\nAccording to the \"Encyclopedia of World Biography\", Stoker's stories are today included in the categories of horror fiction, romanticized Gothic stories, and melodrama. They are classified alongside other works of popular fiction, such as Mary Shelley's \"Frankenstein\", which also used the myth-making and story-telling method of having multiple narrators telling the same tale from different perspectives. According to historian Jules Zanger, this leads the reader to the assumption that \"they can't all be lying\".\nThe original 541-page typescript of \"Dracula\" was believed to have been lost until it was found in a barn in northwestern Pennsylvania in the early 1980s. It consisted of typed sheets with many emendations, and handwritten on the title page was \"THE UN-DEAD.\" The author's name was shown at the bottom as Bram Stoker. Author Robert Latham remarked: \"the most famous horror novel ever published, its title changed at the last minute.\" The typescript was purchased by Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen.\nStoker's inspirations for the story, in addition to Whitby, may have included a visit to Slains Castle in Aberdeenshire, a visit to the crypts of St. Michan's Church in Dublin, and the novella \"Carmilla\" by Sheridan Le Fanu.\nStoker's original research notes for the novel are kept by the Rosenbach Museum and Library in Philadelphia. A facsimile edition of the notes was created by Elizabeth Miller and Robert Eighteen-Bisang in 1998.\nStoker at The London Library.\nStoker was a member of The London Library and conducted much of the research for \"Dracula\" there\".\" In 2018, the Library discovered some of the books that Stoker used for his research, complete with notes and marginalia.\nDeath.\nAfter suffering a number of strokes, Stoker died at No. 26 St George's Square, London on 20 April 1912. Some biographers attribute the cause of death to overwork, others to tertiary syphilis. His death certificate listed the cause of death as \"Locomotor ataxia 6 months\", presumed to be a reference to syphilis. He was cremated, and his ashes were placed in a display urn at Golders Green Crematorium in north London. The ashes of Irving Noel Stoker, the author's son, were added to his father's urn following his death in 1961. The original plan had been to keep his parents' ashes together, but after Florence Stoker's death, her ashes were scattered at the Gardens of Rest.\nBeliefs and philosophy.\nStoker was raised a Protestant in the Church of Ireland. He was a strong supporter of the Liberal Party and took a keen interest in Irish affairs. As a \"philosophical home ruler\", he supported Home Rule for Ireland brought about by peaceful means. He remained an ardent monarchist who believed that Ireland should remain within the British Empire, an entity that he saw as a force for good. He was an admirer of Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone, whom he knew personally, and supported his plans for Ireland.\nStoker believed in progress and took a keen interest in science and science-based medicine. Some of Stoker's novels represent early examples of science fiction, such as \"The Lady of the Shroud\" (1909). He had a writer's interest in the occult, notably mesmerism, but despised fraud and believed in the superiority of the scientific method over superstition. Stoker counted among his friends J. W. Brodie-Innis, a member of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, and hired member Pamela Colman Smith as an artist for the Lyceum Theatre, but no evidence suggests that Stoker ever joined the Order himself. Although Irving was an active Freemason, no evidence has been found of Stoker taking part in Masonic activities in London. The Grand Lodge of Ireland also has no record of his membership.\nPosthumous.\nThe short story collection \"Dracula's Guest and Other Weird Stories\" was published in 1914 by Stoker's widow, Florence Stoker, who was also his literary executrix. The first film adaptation of \"Dracula\" was F. W. Murnau's \"Nosferatu\", released in 1922, with Max Schreck starring as Count Orlok. Florence Stoker eventually sued the filmmakers, and was represented by the attorneys of the British Incorporated Society of Authors. Her chief legal complaint was that she had neither been asked for permission for the adaptation nor paid any royalty. The case dragged on for some years, with Mrs. Stoker demanding the destruction of the negative and all prints of the film. The suit was finally resolved in the widow's favour in July 1925. A single print of the film survived, however, and it has become well known. The first authorised film version of \"Dracula\" did not come about until almost a decade later when Universal Studios released Tod Browning's \"Dracula\" starring Bela Lugosi.\nDacre Stoker.\nCanadian writer Dacre Stoker, a great-grandnephew of Bram Stoker, decided to write \"a sequel that bore the Stoker name\" to \"reestablish creative control over\" the original novel, with encouragement from screenwriter Ian Holt, because of the Stokers' frustrating history with \"Dracula's\" copyright. In 2009, \"Dracula: The Un-Dead\" was released, written by Dacre Stoker and Ian Holt. Both writers \"based [their work] on Bram Stoker's own handwritten notes for characters and plot threads excised from the original edition\" along with their own research for the sequel. This also marked Dacre Stoker's writing debut.\nIn spring 2012, Dacre Stoker (in collaboration with Elizabeth Miller) presented the \"lost\" Dublin Journal written by Bram Stoker, which had been kept by his great-grandson Noel Dobbs. Stoker's diary entries shed a light on the issues that concerned him before his London years. A remark about a boy who caught flies in a bottle might be a clue for the later development of the Renfield character in \"Dracula\".\nCommemorations.\nOn 8 November 2012, Stoker was honoured with a Google Doodle on Google's homepage commemorating the 165th anniversary of his birth.\nAn annual festival takes place in Dublin, the birthplace of Bram Stoker, in honour of his literary achievements. The 2014 Bram Stoker Festival encompassed literary, film, family, street, and outdoor events, and ran from October 24 to 27 in Dublin. The festival is supported by the Bram Stoker Estate and funded by Dublin City Council and F\u00e1ilte Ireland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3993", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3993", "title": "Billion (disambiguation)", "text": "Billion is a name for a large number. It may refer specifically to:\nBillion may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "3994", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3994", "title": "Benoit B. Mandelbrot", "text": ""}
{"id": "3995", "revid": "9753772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3995", "title": "Contract bridge", "text": "Card game\nContract bridge, or simply bridge, is a trick-taking card game using a standard 52-card deck. In its basic format, it is played by four players in two competing partnerships, with partners sitting opposite each other around a table. Millions of people play bridge worldwide in clubs, tournaments, online and with friends at home, making it one of the world's most popular card games, particularly among seniors. The World Bridge Federation (WBF) is the governing body for international competitive bridge, with numerous other bodies governing it at the regional level.\nThe game consists of a number of deals, each progressing through four phases. The cards are dealt to the players; then the players \"call\" (or \"bid\") in an auction seeking to take the contract, specifying how many tricks the partnership receiving the contract (the declaring side) needs to take to receive points for the deal. During the auction, partners use their bids to exchange information about their hands, including overall strength and distribution of the suits; no other means of conveying or implying any information is permitted. The cards are then played, the declaring side trying to fulfill the contract, and the defenders trying to stop the declaring side from achieving its goal. The deal is scored based on the number of tricks taken, the contract, and various other factors which depend to some extent on the variation of the game being played.\nRubber bridge is the most popular variation for casual play, but most club and tournament play involves some variant of duplicate bridge, where the cards are not re-dealt on each occasion, but the same deal is played by two or more sets of players (or \"tables\") to enable comparative scoring.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory and etymology.\nBridge is a member of the family of trick-taking games and is a derivative of whist, which had become the dominant such game and enjoyed a loyal following for centuries. The idea of a trick-taking 52-card game has its first documented origins in Italy and France. The French physician and author Rabelais (1493\u20131553) mentions a game called \"La Triomphe\" in one of his works. Also Juan Luis Vives, in his \"Linguae latinae exercitio\" (Exercise in the Latin language) of 1539 has a dialogue on card games, where the characters play \u2018Triumphus hispanicus\u2019 (Spanish Triumph).\nBridge departed from whist with the creation of \"Biritch\" in the 19th century and evolved through the late 19th and early 20th centuries to form the present game. The first rule book for bridge, dated 1886, is \"\" written by John Collinson, an English financier working in Ottoman Constantinople. It and his subsequent letter to \"The Saturday Review\" dated 28 May 1906, document the origin of \"Biritch\" as being the Russian community in Constantinople. The word \"biritch\" is thought to be a transliteration of the Russian word \u0411\u0438\u0440\u044e\u0447 (\u0431\u0438\u0440\u0447\u0438\u0439, \u0431\u0438\u0440\u0438\u0447), an occupation of a diplomatic clerk or an announcer. Another theory is that British soldiers invented the game bridge while serving in the Crimean War, and named it after the Galata Bridge, which they crossed on their way to a coffeehouse to play cards.\nBiritch had many significant bridge-like developments: dealer chose the trump suit, or nominated his partner to do so; there was a call of \"no trumps\" (\"biritch\"); dealer's partner's hand became dummy; points were scored above and below the line; game was 3NT, 4\u2665 and 5\u2666 (although 8 club odd tricks and 15 spade odd tricks were needed); the score could be doubled and redoubled; and there were slam bonuses. It has some features in common with solo whist. This game, and variants of it known as \"bridge\" and \"bridge whist\", became popular in the United States and the United Kingdom in the 1890s despite the long-established dominance of whist. Its breakthrough was its acceptance in 1894 by Lord Brougham at London's Portland Club.\nIn 1904 auction bridge was developed, in which the players bid in a competitive auction to decide the contract and declarer. The object became to make at least as many tricks as were contracted for, and penalties were introduced for failing to do so. Auction bridge bidding beyond winning the auction is pointless. If taking all 13 tricks, there is no difference in score between a 1\u2660 and a 7\u2660 final bid, as the bonus for rubber, small slam or grand slam depends on the number of tricks taken rather than the number of tricks bid.\nThe modern game of contract bridge was the result of innovations to the scoring of auction bridge by Harold Stirling Vanderbilt and others. The most significant change was that only the tricks contracted for were scored below the line toward game or a slam bonus, a change that resulted in bidding becoming much more challenging and interesting. Also new was the concept of \"vulnerability\", making sacrifices to protect the lead in a rubber more expensive. The various scores were adjusted to produce a more balanced and interesting game. Vanderbilt set out his rules in 1925, and within a few years contract bridge had so supplanted other forms of the game that \"bridge\" became synonymous with \"contract bridge\".\nThe form of bridge mostly played in clubs, tournaments and online is duplicate bridge. The number of people playing contract bridge has declined since its peak in the 1940s, when a survey found it was played in 44% of US households. The game is still widely played, especially amongst retirees, and in 2005 the ACBL estimated there were 25 million players in the US.\nGameplay.\nOverview.\nBridge is a four-player partnership trick-taking game with thirteen tricks per deal. The dominant variations of the game are rubber bridge, more common in social play; and duplicate bridge, which enables comparative scoring in tournament play. Each player is dealt thirteen cards from a standard 52-card deck. A trick starts when a player leads, i.e. plays the first card. The leader to the first trick is determined by the auction; the leader to each subsequent trick is the player who won the preceding trick. Each player, in clockwise order, plays one card on the trick. Players must play a card of the same suit as the original card led, unless they have none (said to be \"void\"), in which case they may play any card.\nThe player who played the highest-ranked card wins the trick. Within a suit, the ace is ranked highest followed by the king, queen and jack and then the ten through to the two. In a deal where the auction has determined that there is no trump suit, the trick must be won by a card of the suit led. In a deal with a trump suit, cards of that suit are superior in rank to any of the cards of any other suit. If one or more players plays a trump to a trick when void in the suit led, the highest trump wins. For example, if the trump suit is spades and a player is void in the suit led and plays a spade card, they win the trick if no other player plays a higher spade. If a trump suit is led, the usual rule for trick-taking applies.\nUnlike its predecessor, whist, the goal of bridge is not simply to take the most tricks in a deal. Instead, the goal is to successfully estimate how many tricks one's partnership can take. To illustrate this, the simpler partnership trick-taking game of spades has a similar mechanism: the usual trick-taking rules apply with the trump suit being spades, but in the beginning of the game, players \"bid\" or estimate how many tricks they can win, and the number of tricks bid by both players in a partnership are added. If a partnership takes at least that many tricks, they receive points for the round; otherwise, they lose penalty points.\nBridge extends the concept of bidding into an auction, where partnerships compete to take a contract, specifying how many tricks they will need to take in order to receive points, and also specifying the trump suit (or \"no trump\", meaning that there will be no trump suit). Players take turns to call in a clockwise order: each player in turn either passes, doubles\u00a0\u2013 which increases the penalties for not making the contract specified by the opposing partnership's last bid, but also increases the reward for making it\u00a0\u2013 or redoubles, or states a contract that their partnership will adopt, which must be higher than the previous highest bid (if any). Eventually, the player who bid the highest contract\u00a0\u2013 which is determined by the contract's level as well as the trump suit or no trump\u00a0\u2013 wins the contract for their partnership.\nIn the example auction below, the east\u2013west pair secures the contract of 6\u2660; the auction concludes when there have been three successive passes. Note that six tricks are added to contract values, so the six-level contract is a contract of twelve tricks. In practice, establishing a contract without enough information on the other partner's hand is difficult, so there exist many bidding systems assigning meanings to bids, with common ones including Standard American, Acol, and 2/1 game forcing. Contrast with Spades, where players only have to bid their own hand.\nAfter the contract is decided, and the first lead is made, the declarer's partner (dummy) lays their cards face up on the table, and the declarer plays the dummy's cards as well as their own. The opposing partnership is called the defenders, and their goal is to stop the declarer from fulfilling his contract. Once all the cards have been played, the hand is scored: if the declaring side makes their contract, they receive points based on the level of the contract, with some trump suits being worth more points than others and \"no trump\" being the highest, as well as bonus points for overtricks. If the declarer fails to fulfill the contract, the defenders receive points depending on the declaring side's undertricks (the number of tricks short of the contract) and whether the contract was \"doubled\" by the defenders.\nSetup and dealing.\nThe four players sit in two partnerships with players sitting opposite their partners. A cardinal direction is assigned to each seat, so that one partnership sits in North and South, while the other sits in West and East. The cards may be freshly dealt or, in duplicate bridge games, pre-dealt. All that is needed in basic games are the cards and a method of keeping score, but there is often other equipment on the table, such as a board containing the cards to be played (in duplicate bridge), bidding boxes, or screens.\nIn rubber bridge each player draws a card at the start of the game; the player who draws the highest card deals first. The second highest card becomes the dealer's partner and takes the chair on the opposite side of the table. They play against the other two. The deck is shuffled and cut, usually by the player to the left of the dealer, before dealing. Players take turns to deal, in clockwise order. The dealer deals the cards clockwise, one card at a time. Normally, rubber bridge is played with two packs of cards and whilst one pack is being dealt, the dealer's partner shuffles the other pack. After shuffling the pack is placed on the right ready for the next dealer. Before dealing, the next dealer passes the cards to the previous dealer who cuts them.\nIn duplicate bridge the cards are pre-dealt, either by hand or by a computerized dealing machine, in order to allow for competitive scoring. Once dealt, the cards are placed in a device called a \"board\", having slots designated for each player's cardinal direction seating position. After a deal has been played, players return their cards to the appropriate slot in the board, ready to be played by the next table.\nAuction.\nThe dealer opens the auction and can make the first call, and the auction proceeds clockwise. When it is their turn to call, a player may pass\u00a0\u2013 but can enter into the bidding later\u00a0\u2013 or bid a contract, specifying the level of their contract and either the trump suit or \"no trump\" (the denomination), provided that it is higher than the last bid by any player, including their partner. All bids promise to take a number of tricks in excess of six, so a bid must be between one (seven tricks) and seven (thirteen tricks). A bid is higher than another bid if either the level is greater (e.g., 2\u2663 over 1NT) or the denomination is higher, with the order being in ascending order: \u2663, \u2666, \u2665, \u2660, and NT (no trump). Calls may be made orally or with a bidding box.\nIf the last bid was by the opposing partnership, one may also double the opponents' bid, increasing the penalties for undertricks, but also increasing the reward for making the contract. Doubling does not carry to future bids by the opponents unless future bids are doubled again. A player on the opposing partnership being doubled may also redouble, which increases the penalties and rewards further. Players may not see their partner's hand during the auction, only their own. There exist many bidding conventions that assign agreed meanings to various calls to assist players in reaching an optimal contract (or obstruct the opponents).\nThe auction ends when, after a player bids, doubles, or redoubles, every other player has passed, in which case the action proceeds to the play; or every player has passed and no bid has been made, in which case the round is considered to be \"passed out\" and not played.\nPlay.\nThe player from the declaring side who first bid the denomination named in the final contract becomes declarer. The player left to the declarer leads to the first trick. Dummy then lays his or her cards face-up on the table, organized in columns by suit. Play proceeds clockwise, with each player required to follow suit if possible. Tricks are won by the highest trump, or if there were none played, the highest card of the led suit. The player who won the previous trick leads to the next trick. The declarer has control of the dummy's cards and tells his partner which card to play at dummy's turn. There also exist conventions that communicate further information between defenders about their hands during the play.\nAt any time, a player may claim, stating that their side will win a specific number of the remaining tricks. The claiming player lays his cards down on the table and explains the order in which he intends to play the remaining cards. The opponents can either accept the claim and the round is scored accordingly, or dispute the claim. If the claim is disputed, play continues with the claiming player's cards face up in rubber games, or in duplicate games, play ceases and the tournament director is called to adjudicate the hand.\nScoring.\nAt the end of the hand, points are awarded to the declaring side if they make the contract, or else to the defenders. Partnerships can be vulnerable, increasing the rewards for making the contract, but also increasing the penalties for undertricks. In rubber bridge, if a side has won 100 contract points, they have won a game and are vulnerable for the remaining rounds, but in duplicate bridge, vulnerability is predetermined based on the number of each board.\nIf the declaring side makes their contract, they receive points for odd tricks, or tricks bid and made in excess of six. In both rubber and duplicate bridge, the declaring side is awarded 20 points per odd trick for a contract in clubs or diamonds, and 30 points per odd trick for a contract in hearts or spades. For a contract in notrump, the declaring side is awarded 40 points for the first odd trick and 30 points for the remaining odd tricks. Contract points are doubled or quadrupled if the contract is respectively doubled or redoubled.\nIn rubber bridge, a partnership wins one game once it has accumulated 100 contract points; excess contract points do not carry over to the next game. A partnership that wins two games wins the rubber, receiving a bonus of 500 points if the opponents have won a game, and 700 points if they have not.\nOvertricks score the same number of points per odd trick, although their doubled and redoubled values differ. Bonuses vary between the two bridge variations both in score and in type (for example, rubber bridge awards a bonus for holding a certain combination of high cards), although some are common between the two.\nA larger bonus is awarded if the declaring side makes a small slam or grand slam, a contract of 12 or 13 tricks respectively. If the declaring side is not vulnerable, a small slam gets 500 points, and a grand slam 1000 points. If the declaring side is vulnerable, a small slam is 750 points and a grand slam is 1,500.\nIn rubber bridge, the rubber finishes when a partnership has won two games, but the partnership receiving the most \"overall\" points wins the rubber. Duplicate bridge is scored comparatively, meaning that the score for the hand is compared to other tables playing the same cards and match points are scored according to the comparative results: usually either \"matchpoint scoring\", where each partnership receives 2 points (or 1 point) for each pair that they beat, and 1 point (or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 point) for each tie; or IMPs (international matchpoint) scoring, where the number of IMPs varies (but less than proportionately) with the points difference between the teams.\nUndertricks are scored in both variations as follows:\nRules.\nThe rules of the game are referred to as the \"laws\" as promulgated by various bridge organizations.\nDuplicate.\nThe official rules of duplicate bridge are promulgated by the WBF as \"The Laws of Duplicate Bridge 2017\". The Laws Committee of the WBF, composed of world experts, updates the Laws every 10 years; it also issues a Laws Commentary advising on interpretations it has rendered.\nIn addition to the basic rules of play, there are many additional rules covering playing conditions and the rectification of irregularities, which are primarily for use by tournament directors who act as referees and have overall control of procedures during competitions. But various details of procedure are left to the discretion of the zonal bridge organisation for tournaments under their aegis and some (for example, the choice of \"movement\") to the sponsoring organisation (for example, the club).\nSome zonal organisations of the WBF also publish editions of the Laws. For example, the American Contract Bridge League (ACBL) publishes the \"Laws of Duplicate Bridge\" and additional documentation for club and tournament directors.\nRubber.\nThere are no universally accepted rules for rubber bridge, but some zonal organisations have published their own. An example for those wishing to abide by a published standard is \"The Laws of Rubber Bridge\" as published by the American Contract Bridge League.\nThe majority of rules mirror those of duplicate bridge in the bidding and play and differ primarily in procedures for dealing and scoring.\nOnline.\nIn 2001, the WBF promulgated a set of laws for online play.\nTournaments.\nBridge is a game of skill played with randomly dealt cards, which makes it also a game of chance, or more exactly, a tactical game with inbuilt randomness, imperfect knowledge and restricted communication. The chance element is in the deal of the cards; in duplicate bridge some of the chance element is eliminated by comparing results of multiple pairs in identical situations. This is achievable when there are eight or more players, sitting at two or more tables, and the deals from each table are preserved and passed to the next table, thereby \"duplicating\" them for the other table(s) of players. At the end of a session, the scores for each deal are compared, and the most points are awarded to the players doing the best with each particular deal. This measures relative skill (but still with an element of luck) because each pair or team is being judged only on the ability to bid with, and play, the same cards as other players.\nDuplicate bridge is played in clubs and tournaments, which can gather as many as several hundred players. Duplicate bridge is a mind sport, and its popularity gradually became comparable to that of chess, with which it is often compared for its complexity and the mental skills required for high-level competition. Bridge and chess are the only \"mind sports\" recognized by the International Olympic Committee, although they were not found eligible for the main Olympic program. In October 2017 the British High Court ruled against the English Bridge Union, finding that Bridge is not a sport under a definition of sport as involving physical activity, but did not rule on the \"broad, somewhat philosophical question\" as to whether or not bridge is a sport.\nThe basic premise of duplicate bridge had previously been used for whist matches as early as 1857. Initially, bridge was not thought to be suitable for duplicate competition; it was not until the 1920s that (auction) bridge tournaments became popular.\nIn 1925 when contract bridge first evolved, bridge tournaments were becoming popular, but the rules were somewhat in flux, and several different organizing bodies were involved in tournament sponsorship: the American Bridge League (formerly the \"American Auction Bridge League\", which changed its name in 1929), the American Whist League, and the United States Bridge Association. In 1935, the first officially recognized world championship was held. In 1958, the World Bridge Federation (WBF) was founded to promote bridge worldwide, coordinate periodic revision to the Laws (each ten years, next in 2027) and conduct world championships.\nBidding boxes and screens.\nIn tournaments, \"bidding boxes\" are frequently used, as noted above. These avoid the possibility of players at other tables hearing any spoken bids. The bidding cards are laid out in sequence as the auction progresses. Although it is not a formal rule, many clubs adopt a protocol that the bidding cards stay revealed until the first playing card is tabled, after which point the bidding cards are put away. Bidding pads are an alternative to bidding boxes. A bidding pad is a block of 100mm square tear-off sheets. Players write their bids on the top sheet. When the first trick is complete the sheet is torn off and discarded.\nIn top national and international events, \"bidding screens\" are used. These are placed diagonally across the table, preventing partners from seeing each other during the game; often the screen is removed after the auction is complete.\nStrategy.\nBidding.\nMuch of the complexity in bridge arises from the difficulty of arriving at a good final contract in the auction (or deciding to let the opponents declare the contract). This is a difficult problem: the two players in a partnership must try to communicate enough information about their hands to arrive at a makeable contract, but the information they can exchange is restricted\u00a0\u2013 information may be passed only by the calls made and later by the cards played, not by other means; in addition, the agreed-upon meaning of each call and play must be available to the opponents.\nSince a partnership that has freedom to bid gradually at leisure can exchange more information, and since a partnership that can interfere with the opponents' bidding (as by raising the bidding level rapidly) can cause difficulties for their opponents, bidding systems are both informational and strategic. It is this mixture of information exchange and evaluation, deduction, and tactics that is at the heart of bidding in bridge.\nA number of basic rules of thumb in bridge bidding and play are summarized as bridge maxims.\nSystems and conventions.\nA \"bidding system\" is a set of partnership agreements on the meanings of bids. A partnership's bidding system is usually made up of a core system, modified and complemented by specific conventions (optional customizations incorporated into the main system for handling specific bidding situations) which are pre-chosen between the partners prior to play. The line between a well-known convention and a part of a system is not always clear-cut: some bidding systems include specified conventions by default. Bidding systems can be divided into mainly natural systems such as Acol and Standard American, and mainly artificial systems such as the Precision Club and Polish Club.\nCalls are usually considered to be either \"natural\" or \"conventional\" (artificial). A natural call carries a meaning that reflects the call; a natural bid intuitively showing hand or suit strength based on the level or suit of the bid, and a natural double expressing that the player believes that the opposing partnership will not make their contract. By contrast, a conventional (artificial) call offers and/or asks for information by means of pre-agreed coded interpretations, in which some calls convey very specific information or requests that are not part of the natural meaning of the call. Thus in response to 4NT, a 'natural' bid of 5\u2666 would state a preference towards a diamond suit or a desire to play in five diamonds, whereas if the partners have agreed to use the common Blackwood convention, a bid of 5\u2666 in the same situation would say nothing about the diamond suit, but would tell the partner that the hand in question contains exactly one ace.\nConventions are valuable in bridge because of the need to pass information beyond a simple like or dislike of a particular suit, and because the limited bidding space can be used more efficiently by adopting a conventional (artificial) meaning for a given call where a natural meaning has less utility, because the information it conveys is not valuable or because the desire to convey that information arises only rarely. The conventional meaning conveys more useful (or more frequently useful) information. There are a very large number of conventions from which players can choose; many books have been written detailing bidding conventions. Well-known conventions include Stayman (to ask the opening 1NT bidder to show any four-card major suit), Jacoby transfers (a request by (usually) the weak hand for the partner to bid a particular suit first, and therefore to become the declarer), and the Blackwood convention (to ask for information on the number of aces and kings held, used in slam bidding situations).\nThe term \"preempt\" refers to a high-level tactical bid by a weak hand, relying upon a very long suit rather than high cards for tricks. Preemptive bids serve a double purpose\u00a0\u2013 they allow players to indicate they are bidding on the basis of a long suit in an otherwise weak hand, which is important information to share, and they also consume substantial bidding space which prevents a possibly strong opposing pair from exchanging information on their cards. Several systems include the use of opening bids or other early bids with weak hands including long (usually six to eight card) suits at the 2, 3 or even 4 or 5 levels as preempts.\nBasic natural systems.\nAs a rule, a natural suit bid indicates a holding of at least four (or more, depending on the situation and the system) cards in that suit as an opening bid, or a lesser number when supporting partner; a natural NT bid indicates a balanced hand.\nMost systems use a count of high card points as the basic evaluation of the strength of a hand, refining this by reference to shape and distribution if appropriate. In the most commonly used point count system, aces are counted as 4 points, kings as 3, queens as 2, and jacks as 1 point; therefore, the deck contains 40 points. In addition, the \"distribution\" of the cards in a hand into suits may also contribute to the strength of a hand and be counted as distribution points. A better than average hand, containing 12 or 13 points, is usually considered sufficient to \"open\" the bidding, i.e., to make the first bid in the auction. A combination of two such hands (i.e., 25 or 26 points shared between partners) is often sufficient for a partnership to bid, and generally to make, game in a major suit or notrump (more are usually needed for a minor suit game, as the level is higher).\nIn natural systems, a 1NT opening bid usually reflects a hand that has a relatively balanced shape (usually between two and four (or less often five) cards in each suit) and a sharply limited number of high card points, usually somewhere between 12 and 18\u00a0\u2013 the most common ranges use a span of exactly three points (for example, 12\u201314, 15\u201317 or 16\u201318), but some systems use a four-point range, usually 15\u201318.\nOpening bids of three or higher are preemptive bids, i.e., bids made with weak hands that especially favor a particular suit, opened at a high level in order to define the hand's value quickly and to frustrate the opposition. For example, a hand of would be a candidate for an opening bid of 3\u2660, designed to make it difficult for the opposing team to bid and find their optimum contract even if they have the bulk of the points. This hand is nearly valueless unless spades are trumps but it contains good enough spades that the penalty for being set should not be higher than the value of an opponent game. The high card weakness makes it likely that the opponents have enough strength to make game themselves.\nOpenings at the 2 level are either unusually strong (2NT, natural, and 2\u2663, artificial) or preemptive, depending on the system. Unusually strong bids communicate an especially high number of points (normally 20 or more) or a high trick-taking potential (normally 8 or more). Also 2\u2666 as the strongest (by HCP and by DP+HCP) has become more common, perhaps especially at websites that offer duplicate bridge. Here the 2\u2663 opening is used for either hands with a good 6-card suit or longer (max one losing card) and a total of 18 HCP up to 23 total points \u2013 or \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442NT\", like 2NT but with 22\u201323 HCP. Whilst the 2\u2666 opening bid takes care of all hands with 24 points (HCP or with distribution points included) with the only exception of \"Gambling 3NT\".\nOpening bids at the one level are made with hands containing 12\u201313 points or more and which are not suitable for one of the preceding bids. Using Standard American with 5-card majors, opening hearts or spades usually promises a 5-card suit. Partnerships who agree to play 5-card majors open a minor suit with 4-card majors and then bid their major suit at the next opportunity. This means that an opening bid of 1\u2663 or 1\u2666 will sometimes be made with only 3 cards in that suit.\nDoubles are sometimes given conventional meanings in otherwise mostly natural systems. A natural, or \"penalty\" double, is one used to try to gain extra points when the defenders are confident of setting (defeating) the contract. The most common example of a conventional double is the takeout double of a low-level suit bid, implying support for the unbid suits or the unbid major suits and asking partner to choose one of them.\nBasic variations.\nBidding systems depart from these basic ideas in varying degrees. Standard American, for instance, is a collection of conventions designed to bolster the accuracy and power of these basic ideas, while Precision Club is a system that uses the 1\u2663 opening bid for all or almost all strong hands (but sets the threshold for \"strong\" rather lower than most other systems\u00a0\u2013 usually 16 high card points) and may include other artificial calls to handle other situations (but it may contain natural calls as well). Many experts today use a system called 2/1 game forcing (enunciated as two over one game forcing), which amongst other features adds some complexity to the treatment of the one notrump response as used in Standard American. In the UK, Acol is the most common system; its main features are a weak one notrump opening with 12\u201314 high card points and several variations for 2-level openings.\nThere are also a variety of advanced techniques used for hand evaluation. The most basic is the Milton Work point count, (the 4-3-2-1 system detailed above) but this is sometimes modified in various ways, or either augmented or replaced by other approaches such as losing trick count, honor point count, law of total tricks, or Zar Points.\nCommon conventions and variations within natural systems include:\nWithin play, it is also commonly agreed what systems of opening leads, signals and discards will be played:\nAdvanced techniques.\nEvery call (including \"pass\", also sometimes called \"no bid\") serves two purposes. It confirms or passes some information to a partner, and, by implication, denies any other kind of hand which would have tended to support an alternative call. For example, a bid of 2NT immediately after partner's 1NT not only shows a balanced hand of a certain point range, but also almost always denies possession of a five-card major suit (otherwise the player would have bid it) or even a four card major suit (in that case, the player should use the Stayman convention).\nLikewise, in some partnerships the bid of 2\u2665 in the sequence 1NT\u20132\u2663\u20132\u2666\u20132\u2665 between partners (opponents passing throughout) explicitly shows five hearts but also confirms four cards in spades: the bidder must hold at least five hearts to make it worth looking for a heart fit after 2\u2666 denied a four card major, and with at least five hearts, a Stayman bid must have been justified by having exactly four spades, the other major (since Stayman (as used by this partnership) is not useful with anything except a four card major suit). Thus an astute partner can read much more than the surface meaning into the bidding. Alternatively, many partnerships play this same bidding sequence as \"Crawling Stayman\" by which the responder shows a weak hand (less than eight high card points) with shortness in diamonds but at least four hearts and four spades; the opening bidder may correct to spades if that appears to be the better contract.\nThe situations detailed here are extremely simple examples; many instances of advanced bidding involve specific agreements related to very specific situations and subtle inferences regarding entire sequences of calls.\nPlay techniques.\nTerence Reese, a prolific author of bridge books, points out that there are only four ways of taking a trick by force, two of which are very easy:\nNearly all trick-taking techniques in bridge can be reduced to one of these four methods. The optimum play of the cards can require much thought and experience and is the subject of whole books on bridge.\nExample.\nThe cards are dealt as shown in the bridge hand diagram; North is the dealer and starts the auction which proceeds as shown in the bidding table.\nAs neither North nor East have sufficient strength to \"open\" the bidding, they each pass, denying such strength. South, next in turn, opens with the bid of 1\u2665, which denotes a reasonable heart suit (at least 4 or 5 cards long, depending on the bidding system) and at least 12 high card points. On this hand, South has 14 high card points. West \"overcalls\" with 1\u2660, since he has a long spade suit of reasonable quality and 10 high card points (an overcall can be made on a hand that is not quite strong enough for an opening bid). North \"supports\" partner's suit with 2\u2665, showing heart support and about 6\u20138 points. East supports spades with 2\u2660. South inserts a \"game try\" of 3\u2663, \"inviting\" the partner to bid the \"game\" of 4\u2665 with good club support and overall values. North complies, as North is at the higher end of the range for his 2\u2665 bid, and has a fourth trump (the 2\u2665 bid promised only three), and the \"doubleton\" queen of clubs to fit with partner's strength there. (North could instead have bid 3\u2665, indicating not enough strength for game, asking South to pass and so play 3\u2665.)\nIn the auction, north\u2013south are trying to investigate whether their cards are sufficient to make a game (nine tricks at notrump, ten tricks in hearts or spades, 11 tricks in clubs or diamonds), which yields bonus points if bid and made. East-West are \"competing\" in spades, hoping to play a contract in spades at a low level. 4\u2665 is the final contract, 10 tricks being required for N-S to make with hearts as trump.\nSouth is the \"declarer\", having been first to bid hearts, and the player to South's left, West, has to choose the first card in the play, known as the \"opening lead\". West chooses the spade king because spades is the suit the partnership has shown strength in, and because they have agreed that when they hold two \"touching honors\" (or \"adjacent honors\") they will play the higher one first. West plays the card face down, to give their partner and the declarer (but not dummy) a chance to ask any last questions about the bidding or to object if they believe West is not the correct hand to lead. After that, North's cards are laid on the table and North becomes \"dummy\", as both the North and South hands will be controlled by the declarer. West turns the lead card face up, and the declarer studies the two hands to make a plan for the play. On this hand, the trump ace, a spade, and a diamond trick must be lost, so declarer must not lose a trick in clubs.\nIf the \u2663K is held by West, South will find it very hard to prevent it from making a trick (unless West leads a club). There is an almost equal chance that it is held by East, in which case it can be trapped against the ace, and will be beaten, using a tactic known as a \"finesse\".\nAfter considering the cards, the declarer directs dummy (North) to play a small spade. East plays \"low\" (small card) and South takes the \u2660A, gaining the \"lead\". (South may also elect to \"duck\", but for the purpose of this example, let us assume South wins the \u2660A at trick 1). South proceeds by \"drawing trump\", leading the \u2665K. West decides there is no benefit to holding back, and so wins the trick with the ace, and then cashes the \u2660Q. For fear of conceding a \"ruff and discard\", West plays the \u26662 instead of another spade. Declarer plays low from the table, and East scores the \u2666Q. Not having anything better to do, East returns the remaining trump, taken in South's hand. The trumps now accounted for, South can now execute the finesse, perhaps trapping the king as planned. South \"enters\" the dummy (i.e. wins a trick in the dummy's hand) by leading a low diamond, using dummy's \u2666A to win the trick, and leads the \u2663Q from dummy to the next trick. East \"covers\" the queen with the king, and South takes the trick with the ace, and proceeds by \"cashing\" the remaining \"master\" \u2663J. (If East doesn't play the king, then South will play a low club from South's hand and the queen will win anyway, this being the essence of the finesse). The game is now safe: South \"ruffs\" a small club with a dummy's trump, then ruffs a diamond in hand for an \"entry\" back, and ruffs the last club in dummy (sometimes described as a \"crossruff\"). Finally, South \"claims\" the remaining tricks by showing his or her hand, as it now contains only high trumps and there's no need to play the hand out to prove they are all winners.\n(The trick-by-trick notation used above can be also expressed in tabular form, but a textual explanation is usually preferred in practice, for reader's convenience. Plays of small cards or \"discards\" are often omitted from such a description, unless they were important for the outcome).\nNorth-South score the required 10 tricks, and their opponents take the remaining three. The contract is fulfilled, and North enters the pair numbers, the contract, and the score of +420 for the winning side (North is in charge of bookkeeping in duplicate tournaments) on the traveling sheet. North asks East to check the score entered on the traveller. All players return their own cards to the board, and the next deal is played.\nOn the prior hand, it is quite possible that the \u2663K is held by West. For example, by swapping the \u2663K and \u2665A between the defending hands. Then the 4\u2665 contract would fail by one trick (unless West had led a club early in the play). The failure of the contract would not mean that 4\u2665 was a bad contract on this hand. The contract depends on the club finesse working, or a defense error. The bonus points awarded for making a game contract far outweigh the penalty for going one off, so it is best strategy in the long run to bid game contracts such as this one.\nSimilarly, there is a minuscule chance that the \u2663K is in the west hand, but the west hand has no other clubs. In that case, declarer can succeed by simply cashing the \u2663A, felling the \u2663K and setting up the \u2663Q as a winner. The chance of this is far lower than the chance that East started with the \u2663K. Therefore, the superior percentage play is to take the club finesse, as described above.\nComputers.\nAfter many years of little progress, computer bridge made great progress at the end of the 20th century. In 1996, the ACBL initiated the official World Championships Computer Bridge, to be held annually along with a major bridge event. The first Computer Bridge Championship took place in 1997 at the North American Bridge Championships in Albuquerque, New Mexico.\nStand-alone software.\nStrong bridge playing programs such as Jack Bridge (World Champion in 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013 and 2015), Wbridge5 (World Champion in 2005, 2007, 2008, 2016, 2017 and 2018), RoboBridge and many-time finalist Bridge Baron, probably ranks among the top few thousand human pairs worldwide. A series of articles published in 2005 and 2006 in the Dutch bridge magazine IMP describes matches between Jack Bridge and seven top Dutch pairs. A total of 196 boards were played. Jack Bridge lost, but by a small margin (359 versus 385 IMPs).\nOnline play.\nThere are several free and subscription-based services available for playing bridge on the internet. For example:\nSome national contract bridge organizations now offer online bridge play to their members, including the English Bridge Union, the Dutch Bridge Federation and the Australian Bridge Federation. MSN and Yahoo! Games have several online rubber bridge rooms. In 2001, the WBF issued a special edition of the lawbook adapted for internet and other electronic forms of the game.\nRelated card games.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3996", "revid": "40561892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3996", "title": "Boat", "text": "Vessel for transport by water\nA boat is a watercraft of a large range of types and sizes, but generally smaller than a ship, which is distinguished by its larger size, shape, cargo or passenger capacity, or its ability to carry boats.\nSmall boats are typically found on inland waterways such as rivers and lakes, or in protected coastal areas. However, some boats, such as the whaleboat, were intended for use in an offshore environment. In modern naval terms, a boat is a vessel small enough to be carried aboard a ship.\nBoats vary in proportion and construction methods with their intended purpose, available materials, or local traditions. Canoes have been used since prehistoric times and remain in use throughout the world for transportation, fishing, and sport. Fishing boats vary widely in style partly to match local conditions. Pleasure craft used in recreational boating include ski boats, pontoon boats, and sailboats. House boats may be used for vacationing or long-term residence. Lighters are used to move cargo to and from large ships unable to get close to shore. Lifeboats have rescue and safety functions.\nBoats can be propelled by manpower (e.g. rowboats and paddle boats), wind (e.g. sailboats), and inboard/outboard motors (including gasoline, diesel, and electric).\nHistory.\nAfter \"Homo erectus\" possibly used watercraft more than a million years ago to cross straits between landmasses, boats have served as transportation far into pre-historic times. Circumstantial evidence, such as the early settlement of Australia over 40,000 years ago, findings in Crete dated 130,000 years ago and in Flores dated to 900,000 years ago, suggest that boats have been used since pre-historic times. The earliest boats are thought to have been dugouts, and the oldest boats found by archaeological excavation date from around 7,000 to 10,000 years ago. The oldest recovered boat in the world, the Pesse canoe, found in the Netherlands, is a dugout made from the hollowed tree trunk of a \"Pinus sylvestris\" that was constructed somewhere between 8200 and 7600 BC. This canoe is exhibited in the Drents Museum in Assen, Netherlands. Other very old dugout boats have also been recovered. Rafts have operated for at least 8,000 years. A 7,000-year-old seagoing reed boat has been found at site H3 in Kuwait. Boats were used between 4000 and 3000 BC in Sumer, where a 4000-year old boat has been excavated at Uruk, ancient Egypt, and in the Indian Ocean.\nBoats played an important role in the commerce between the Indus Valley civilization and Mesopotamia. Evidence of varying models of boats has also been discovered at various Indus Valley archaeological sites. Uru craft originate in Beypore, a village in south Calicut, Kerala, in southwestern India. This type of mammoth wooden ship was constructed solely of teak, with a transport capacity of 400 tonnes. The ancient Arabs and Greeks used such boats as trading vessels.\nThe historians Herodotus, Pliny the Elder, and Strabo record the use of boats for commerce, travel, and military purposes.\nTypes.\nBoats can be categorized by their means of propulsion. These divide into:\nA number of large vessels are usually referred to as boats. Submarines are a prime example. Other types of large vessels which are traditionally called boats include Great Lakes freighters, riverboats, and ferryboats. Though large enough to carry their own boats and heavy cargoes, these vessels are designed for operation on inland or protected coastal waters.\nTerminology.\nThe hull is the main, and in some cases only, structural component of a boat. It provides both capacity and buoyancy. The keel is a boat's \"backbone\", a lengthwise structural member to which the perpendicular frames are fixed. On some boats a deck covers the hull, in part or whole. While a ship often has several decks, a boat is unlikely to have more than one. Above the deck are often lifelines connected to stanchions, bulwarks perhaps topped by gunnels, or some combination of the two. A cabin may protrude above the deck forward, aft, along the centerline, or covering much of the length of the boat. Vertical structures dividing the internal spaces are known as bulkheads.\nThe forward end of a boat is called the bow, the aft end the stern. Facing forward the right side is referred to as starboard and the left side as port.\nBuilding materials.\nUntil the mid-19th century most boats were made of natural materials, primarily wood, although reed, bark and animal skins were also used. Early boats include the bound-reed style of boat seen in Ancient Egypt, the birch bark canoe, the animal hide-covered kayak and coracle and the dugout canoe made from a single log.\nBy the mid-19th century, many boats had been built with iron or steel frames but still planked in wood. In 1855 ferro-cement boat construction was patented by the French, who coined the name \"ferciment\". This is a system by which a steel or iron wire framework is built in the shape of a boat's hull and covered over with cement. Reinforced with bulkheads and other internal structure it is strong but heavy, easily repaired, and, if sealed properly, will not leak or corrode.\nAs the forests of Britain and Europe continued to be over-harvested to supply the keels of larger wooden boats, and the Bessemer process (patented in 1855) cheapened the cost of steel, steel ships and boats began to be more common. By the 1930s boats built entirely of steel from frames to plating were seen replacing wooden boats in many industrial uses and fishing fleets. Private recreational boats of steel remain uncommon. In 1895 WH Mullins produced steel boats of galvanized iron and by 1930 became the world's largest producer of pleasure boats.\nMullins also offered boats in aluminum from 1895 through 1899 and once again in the 1920s, but it wasn't until the mid-20th century that aluminium gained widespread popularity. Though much more expensive than steel, aluminum alloys exist that do not corrode in salt water, allowing a similar load carrying capacity to steel at much less weight.\nAround the mid-1960s, boats made of fiberglass (aka \"glassfibre\") became popular, especially for recreational boats. Fiberglass is also known as \"GRP\" (glass-reinforced plastic) in the UK, and \"FRP\" (for fiber-reinforced plastic) in the US. Fiberglass boats are strong, and do not rust, corrode, or rot. Instead, they are susceptible to structural degradation from sunlight and extremes in temperature over their lifespan. Fiberglass structures can be made stiffer with sandwich panels, where the fiberglass encloses a lightweight core such as balsa or foam.\nCold molding is a modern construction method, using wood as the structural component. In one cold molding process, very thin strips of wood are layered over a form. Each layer is coated with resin, followed by another directionally alternating layer laid on top. Subsequent layers may be stapled or otherwise mechanically fastened to the previous, or weighted or vacuum bagged to provide compression and stabilization until the resin sets. An alternative process uses thin sheets of plywood shaped over a disposable male mold, and coated with epoxy.\nPropulsion.\nThe most common means of boat propulsion are as follows:\nBuoyancy.\nA boat displaces its weight in water, regardless whether it is made of wood, steel, fiberglass, or even concrete. If weight is added to the boat, the volume of the hull drawn below the waterline will increase to keep the balance above and below the surface equal. Boats have a natural or designed level of buoyancy. Exceeding it will cause the boat first to ride lower in the water, second to take on water more readily than when properly loaded, and ultimately, if overloaded by any combination of structure, cargo, and water, sink.\nAs commercial vessels must be correctly loaded to be safe, and as the sea becomes less buoyant in brackish areas such as the Baltic, the Plimsoll line was introduced to prevent overloading.\nEuropean Union classification.\nSince 1998 all new leisure boats and barges built in Europe between 2.5m and 24m must comply with the EU's Recreational Craft Directive (RCD). The Directive establishes four categories that permit the allowable wind and wave conditions for vessels in each class:\nEurope is the main producer of recreational boats (the second production in the world is located in Poland). European brands are known all over the world - in fact, these are the brands that created RCD and set the standard for shipyards around the world.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3997", "revid": "40561892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3997", "title": "Blood", "text": "Organic fluid which transports nutrients throughout the organism\nBlood is a body fluid in the circulatory system of humans and other vertebrates that delivers necessary substances such as nutrients and oxygen to the cells, and transports metabolic waste products away from those same cells. Blood in the circulatory system is also known as \"peripheral blood\", and the blood cells it carries, \"peripheral blood cells\".\nBlood is composed of blood cells suspended in blood plasma. Plasma, which constitutes 55% of blood fluid, is mostly water (92% by volume), and contains proteins, glucose, mineral ions, hormones, carbon dioxide (plasma being the main medium for excretory product transportation), and blood cells themselves. Albumin is the main protein in plasma, and it functions to regulate the colloidal osmotic pressure of blood. The blood cells are mainly red blood cells (also called RBCs or erythrocytes), white blood cells (also called WBCs or leukocytes), and in mammals platelets (also called thrombocytes). The most abundant cells in vertebrate blood are red blood cells. These contain hemoglobin, an iron-containing protein, which facilitates oxygen transport by reversibly binding to this respiratory gas thereby increasing its solubility in blood. In contrast, carbon dioxide is mostly transported extracellularly as bicarbonate ion transported in plasma.\nVertebrate blood is bright red when its hemoglobin is oxygenated and dark red when it is deoxygenated.\nSome animals, such as crustaceans and mollusks, use hemocyanin to carry oxygen, instead of hemoglobin. Insects and some mollusks use a fluid called hemolymph instead of blood, the difference being that hemolymph is not contained in a closed circulatory system. In most insects, this \"blood\" does not contain oxygen-carrying molecules such as hemoglobin because their bodies are small enough for their tracheal system to suffice for supplying oxygen.\nJawed vertebrates have an adaptive immune system, based largely on white blood cells. White blood cells help to resist infections and parasites. Platelets are important in the clotting of blood. Arthropods, using hemolymph, have hemocytes as part of their immune system.\nBlood is circulated around the body through blood vessels by the pumping action of the heart. In animals with lungs, arterial blood carries oxygen from inhaled air to the tissues of the body, and venous blood carries carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism produced by cells, from the tissues to the lungs to be exhaled.\nMedical terms related to blood often begin with \"hemo-\", \"hemato-\", \"haemo-\" or \"haemato-\" from the Greek word (\"\") for \"blood\". In terms of anatomy and histology, blood is considered a specialized form of connective tissue, given its origin in the bones and the presence of potential molecular fibers in the form of fibrinogen.\nFunctions.\nBlood performs many important functions within the body, including:\nConstituents.\nIn mammals.\nBlood accounts for 7% of the human body weight, with an average density around 1060\u00a0kg/m3, very close to pure water's density of 1000\u00a0kg/m3. The average adult has a blood volume of roughly or 1.3 gallons, which is composed of plasma and \"formed elements\". The formed elements are the two types of blood cell or \"corpuscle\" \u2013 the red blood cells, (erythrocytes) and white blood cells (leukocytes), and the cell fragments called platelets that are involved in clotting. By volume, the red blood cells constitute about 45% of whole blood, the plasma about 54.3%, and white cells about 0.7%.\nWhole blood (plasma and cells) exhibits non-Newtonian fluid dynamics.\nCells.\nOne microliter of blood contains:\nPlasma.\nAbout 55% of blood is blood plasma, a fluid that is the blood's liquid medium, which by itself is straw-yellow in color. The blood plasma volume totals of 2.7\u20133.0 liters (2.8\u20133.2 quarts) in an average human. It is essentially an aqueous solution containing 92% water, 8% blood plasma proteins, and trace amounts of other materials. Plasma circulates dissolved nutrients, such as glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids (dissolved in the blood or bound to plasma proteins), and removes waste products, such as carbon dioxide, urea, and lactic acid.\nOther important components include:\nThe term serum refers to plasma from which the clotting proteins have been removed. Most of the proteins remaining are albumin and immunoglobulins.\npH values.\nBlood pH is regulated to stay within the narrow range of 7.35 to 7.45, making it slightly basic (compensation). Extra-cellular fluid in blood that has a pH below 7.35 is too acidic, whereas blood pH above 7.45 is too basic. A pH below 6.9 or above 7.8 is usually lethal. Blood pH, partial pressure of oxygen (pO2), partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2), and bicarbonate (HCO3\u2212) are carefully regulated by a number of homeostatic mechanisms, which exert their influence principally through the respiratory system and the urinary system to control the acid\u2013base balance and respiration, which is called compensation. An arterial blood gas test measures these. Plasma also circulates hormones transmitting their messages to various tissues. The list of normal reference ranges for various blood electrolytes is extensive.\nIn non-mammalian vertebrates.\nHuman blood is typical of that of mammals, although the precise details concerning cell numbers, size, protein structure, and so on, vary somewhat between species. In non-mammalian vertebrates, however, there are some key differences:\nPhysiology.\nCirculatory system.\nBlood is circulated around the body through blood vessels by the pumping action of the heart. In humans, blood is pumped from the strong left ventricle of the heart through arteries to peripheral tissues and returns to the right atrium of the heart through veins. It then enters the right ventricle and is pumped through the pulmonary artery to the lungs and returns to the left atrium through the pulmonary veins. Blood then enters the left ventricle to be circulated again. Arterial blood carries oxygen from inhaled air to all of the cells of the body, and venous blood carries carbon dioxide, a waste product of metabolism by cells, to the lungs to be exhaled. However, one exception includes pulmonary arteries, which contain the most deoxygenated blood in the body, while the pulmonary veins contain oxygenated blood.\nAdditional return flow may be generated by the movement of skeletal muscles, which can compress veins and push blood through the valves in veins toward the right atrium.\nThe blood circulation was famously described by William Harvey in 1628.\nCell production and degradation.\nIn vertebrates, the various cells of blood are made in the bone marrow in a process called hematopoiesis, which includes erythropoiesis, the production of red blood cells; and myelopoiesis, the production of white blood cells and platelets. During childhood, almost every human bone produces red blood cells; as adults, red blood cell production is limited to the larger bones: the bodies of the vertebrae, the breastbone (sternum), the ribcage, the pelvic bones, and the bones of the upper arms and legs. In addition, during childhood, the thymus gland, found in the mediastinum, is an important source of T lymphocytes.\nThe proteinaceous component of blood (including clotting proteins) is produced predominantly by the liver, while hormones are produced by the endocrine glands and the watery fraction is regulated by the hypothalamus and maintained by the kidney.\nHealthy erythrocytes have a plasma life of about 120 days before they are degraded by the spleen, and the Kupffer cells in the liver. The liver also clears some proteins, lipids, and amino acids. The kidney actively secretes waste products into the urine.\nOxygen transport.\nAbout 98.5% of the oxygen in a sample of arterial blood in a healthy human breathing air at sea-level pressure is chemically combined with the hemoglobin. About 1.5% is physically dissolved in the other blood liquids and not connected to hemoglobin. The hemoglobin molecule is the primary transporter of oxygen in mammals and many other species (for exceptions, see below). Hemoglobin has an oxygen binding capacity between 1.36 and 1.40 ml O2 per gram hemoglobin, which increases the total blood oxygen capacity seventyfold, compared to if oxygen solely were carried by its solubility of 0.03\u00a0ml O2 per liter blood per mm\u00a0Hg partial pressure of oxygen (about 100\u00a0mm\u00a0Hg in arteries).\nWith the exception of pulmonary and umbilical arteries and their corresponding veins, arteries carry oxygenated blood away from the heart and deliver it to the body via arterioles and capillaries, where the oxygen is consumed; afterwards, venules and veins carry deoxygenated blood back to the heart.\nUnder normal conditions in adult humans at rest, hemoglobin in blood leaving the lungs is about 98\u201399% saturated with oxygen, achieving an oxygen delivery between 950 and 1150 ml/min to the body. In a healthy adult at rest, oxygen consumption is approximately 200\u2013250 ml/min, and deoxygenated blood returning to the lungs is still roughly 75% (70 to 78%) saturated. Increased oxygen consumption during sustained exercise reduces the oxygen saturation of venous blood, which can reach less than 15% in a trained athlete; although breathing rate and blood flow increase to compensate, oxygen saturation in arterial blood can drop to 95% or less under these conditions. Oxygen saturation this low is considered dangerous in an individual at rest (for instance, during surgery under anesthesia). Sustained hypoxia (oxygenation less than 90%), is dangerous to health, and severe hypoxia (saturations less than 30%) may be rapidly fatal.\nA fetus, receiving oxygen via the placenta, is exposed to much lower oxygen pressures (about 21% of the level found in an adult's lungs), so fetuses produce another form of hemoglobin with a much higher affinity for oxygen (hemoglobin F) to function under these conditions.\nCarbon dioxide transport.\nCO2 is carried in blood in three different ways. (The exact percentages vary depending whether it is arterial or venous blood). Most of it (about 70%) is converted to bicarbonate ions by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase in the red blood cells by the reaction ; about 7% is dissolved in the plasma; and about 23% is bound to hemoglobin as carbamino compounds.\nHemoglobin, the main oxygen-carrying molecule in red blood cells, carries both oxygen and carbon dioxide. However, the CO2 bound to hemoglobin does not bind to the same site as oxygen. Instead, it combines with the N-terminal groups on the four globin chains. However, because of allosteric effects on the hemoglobin molecule, the binding of CO2 decreases the amount of oxygen that is bound for a given partial pressure of oxygen. The decreased binding to carbon dioxide in the blood due to increased oxygen levels is known as the Haldane effect, and is important in the transport of carbon dioxide from the tissues to the lungs. A rise in the partial pressure of CO2 or a lower pH will cause offloading of oxygen from hemoglobin, which is known as the Bohr effect.\nTransport of hydrogen ions.\nSome oxyhemoglobin loses oxygen and becomes deoxyhemoglobin. Deoxyhemoglobin binds most of the hydrogen ions as it has a much greater affinity for more hydrogen than does oxyhemoglobin.\nLymphatic system.\nIn mammals, blood is in equilibrium with lymph, which is continuously formed in tissues from blood by capillary ultrafiltration. Lymph is collected by a system of small lymphatic vessels and directed to the thoracic duct, which drains into the left subclavian vein, where lymph rejoins the systemic blood circulation.\nThermoregulation.\nBlood circulation transports heat throughout the body, and adjustments to this flow are an important part of thermoregulation. Increasing blood flow to the surface (e.g., during warm weather or strenuous exercise) causes warmer skin, resulting in faster heat loss. In contrast, when the external temperature is low, blood flow to the extremities and surface of the skin is reduced and to prevent heat loss and is circulated to the important organs of the body, preferentially.\nRate of flow.\nRate of blood flow varies greatly between different organs. Liver has the most abundant blood supply with an approximate flow of 1350 ml/min. Kidney and brain are the second and the third most supplied organs, with 1100 ml/min and ~700 ml/min, respectively.\nRelative rates of blood flow per 100 g of tissue are different, with kidney, adrenal gland and thyroid being the first, second and third most supplied tissues, respectively.\nHydraulic functions.\nThe restriction of blood flow can also be used in specialized tissues to cause engorgement, resulting in an erection of that tissue; examples are the erectile tissue in the penis and clitoris.\nAnother example of a hydraulic function is the jumping spider, in which blood forced into the legs under pressure causes them to straighten for a powerful jump, without the need for bulky muscular legs.\nInvertebrates.\nIn insects, the blood (more properly called hemolymph) is not involved in the transport of oxygen. (Openings called tracheae allow oxygen from the air to diffuse directly to the tissues.) Insect blood moves nutrients to the tissues and removes waste products in an open system.\nOther invertebrates use respiratory proteins to increase the oxygen-carrying capacity. Hemoglobin is the most common respiratory protein found in nature. Hemocyanin (blue) contains copper and is found in crustaceans and mollusks. It is thought that tunicates (sea squirts) might use vanabins (proteins containing vanadium) for respiratory pigment (bright-green, blue, or orange).\nIn many invertebrates, these oxygen-carrying proteins are freely soluble in the blood; in vertebrates they are contained in specialized red blood cells, allowing for a higher concentration of respiratory pigments without increasing viscosity or damaging blood filtering organs like the kidneys.\nGiant tube worms have unusual hemoglobins that allow them to live in extraordinary environments. These hemoglobins also carry sulfides normally fatal in other animals.\nColor.\nThe coloring matter of blood (hemochrome) is largely due to the protein in the blood responsible for oxygen transport. Different groups of organisms use different proteins.\nHemoglobin.\nHemoglobin is the principal determinant of the color of blood in vertebrates. Each molecule has four heme groups, and their interaction with various molecules alters the exact color. In vertebrates and other hemoglobin-using creatures, arterial blood and capillary blood are bright red, as oxygen imparts a strong red color to the heme group. Deoxygenated blood is a darker shade of red; this is present in veins, and can be seen during blood donation and when venous blood samples are taken. This is because the spectrum of light absorbed by hemoglobin differs between the oxygenated and deoxygenated states.\nBlood in carbon monoxide poisoning is bright red, because carbon monoxide causes the formation of carboxyhemoglobin. In cyanide poisoning, the body cannot use oxygen, so the venous blood remains oxygenated, increasing the redness. There are some conditions affecting the heme groups present in hemoglobin that can make the skin appear blue\u00a0\u2013 a symptom called cyanosis. If the heme is oxidized, methemoglobin, which is more brownish and cannot transport oxygen, is formed. In the rare condition sulfhemoglobinemia, arterial hemoglobin is partially oxygenated, and appears dark red with a bluish hue.\nVeins close to the surface of the skin appear blue for a variety of reasons. However, the factors that contribute to this alteration of color perception are related to the light-scattering properties of the skin and the processing of visual input by the visual cortex, rather than the actual color of the venous blood.\nSkinks in the genus \"Prasinohaema\" have green blood due to a buildup of the waste product biliverdin.\nHemocyanin.\nThe blood of most mollusks \u2013 including cephalopods and gastropods \u2013 as well as some arthropods, such as horseshoe crabs, is blue, as it contains the copper-containing protein hemocyanin at concentrations of about 50\u00a0grams per liter. Hemocyanin is colorless when deoxygenated and dark blue when oxygenated. The blood in the circulation of these creatures, which generally live in cold environments with low oxygen tensions, is grey-white to pale yellow, and it turns dark blue when exposed to the oxygen in the air, as seen when they bleed. This is due to change in color of hemocyanin when it is oxidized. Hemocyanin carries oxygen in extracellular fluid, which is in contrast to the intracellular oxygen transport in mammals by hemoglobin in RBCs.\nChlorocruorin.\nThe blood of most annelid worms and some marine polychaetes use chlorocruorin to transport oxygen. It is green in color in dilute solutions.\nHemerythrin.\nHemerythrin is used for oxygen transport in the marine invertebrates sipunculids, priapulids, brachiopods, and the annelid worm, magelona. Hemerythrin is violet-pink when oxygenated.\nHemovanadin.\nThe blood of some species of ascidians and tunicates, also known as sea squirts, contains proteins called vanadins. These proteins are based on vanadium, and give the creatures a concentration of vanadium in their bodies 100 times higher than the surrounding seawater. Unlike hemocyanin and hemoglobin, hemovanadin is not an oxygen carrier. When exposed to oxygen, however, vanadins turn a mustard yellow.\nDisorders.\nCarbon monoxide poisoning.\nSubstances other than oxygen can bind to hemoglobin; in some cases, this can cause irreversible damage to the body. Carbon monoxide, for example, is extremely dangerous when carried to the blood via the lungs by inhalation, because carbon monoxide irreversibly binds to hemoglobin to form carboxyhemoglobin, so that less hemoglobin is free to bind oxygen, and fewer oxygen molecules can be transported throughout the blood. This can cause suffocation insidiously. A fire burning in an enclosed room with poor ventilation presents a very dangerous hazard, since it can create a build-up of carbon monoxide in the air. Some carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin when smoking tobacco.\nTreatments.\nTransfusion.\nBlood for transfusion is obtained from human donors by blood donation and stored in a blood bank. There are many different blood types in humans, the ABO blood group system, and the Rhesus blood group system being the most important. Transfusion of blood of an incompatible blood group may cause severe, often fatal, complications, so crossmatching is done to ensure that a compatible blood product is transfused.\nOther blood products administered intravenously are platelets, blood plasma, cryoprecipitate, and specific coagulation factor concentrates.\nIntravenous administration.\nMany forms of medication (from antibiotics to chemotherapy) are administered intravenously, as they are not readily or adequately absorbed by the digestive tract.\nAfter severe acute blood loss, liquid preparations, generically known as plasma expanders, can be given intravenously, either solutions of salts (NaCl, KCl, CaCl2 etc.) at physiological concentrations, or colloidal solutions, such as dextrans, human serum albumin, or fresh frozen plasma. In these emergency situations, a plasma expander is a more effective life-saving procedure than a blood transfusion, because the metabolism of transfused red blood cells does not restart immediately after a transfusion.\nLetting.\nIn modern evidence-based medicine, bloodletting is used in management of a few rare diseases, including hemochromatosis and polycythemia. However, bloodletting and leeching were common unvalidated interventions used until the 19th century, as many diseases were incorrectly thought to be due to an excess of blood, according to Hippocratic medicine.\nEtymology.\nEnglish \"blood\" (Old English \"blod\") derives from Germanic and has cognates with a similar range of meanings in all other Germanic languages (e.g. German \"Blut\", Swedish \"blod\", Gothic \"bl\u014d\u00fe\"). There is no accepted Indo-European etymology.\nHistory.\nClassical Greek medicine.\nRobin F\u00e5hr\u00e6us (a Swedish physician who devised the erythrocyte sedimentation rate) suggested that the Ancient Greek system of humorism, wherein the body was thought to contain four distinct bodily fluids (associated with different temperaments), were based upon the observation of blood clotting in a transparent container. When blood is drawn in a glass container and left undisturbed for about an hour, four different layers can be seen. A dark clot forms at the bottom (the \"black bile\"). Above the clot is a layer of red blood cells (the \"blood\"). Above this is a whitish layer of white blood cells (the \"phlegm\"). The top layer is clear yellow serum (the \"yellow bile\").\nTypes.\nThe ABO blood group system was discovered in the year 1900 by Karl Landsteiner. Jan Jansk\u00fd is credited with the first classification of blood into the four types (A, B, AB, and O) in 1907, which remains in use today. In 1907 the first blood transfusion was performed that used the ABO system to predict compatibility. The first non-direct transfusion was performed on 27 March 1914. The Rhesus factor was discovered in 1937.\nCulture and religion.\nDue to its importance to life, blood is associated with a large number of beliefs. One of the most basic is the use of blood as a symbol for family relationships through birth/parentage; to be \"related by blood\" is to be related by ancestry or descendence, rather than marriage. This bears closely to bloodlines, and sayings such as \"blood is thicker than water\" and \"bad blood\", as well as \"Blood brother\".\nBlood is given particular emphasis in the Islamic, Jewish, and Christian religions, because Leviticus 17:11 says \"the life of a creature is in the blood.\" This phrase is part of the Levitical law forbidding the drinking of blood or eating meat with the blood still intact instead of being poured off.\nMythic references to blood can sometimes be connected to the life-giving nature of blood, seen in such events as childbirth, as contrasted with the blood of injury or death.\nIndigenous Australians.\nIn many indigenous Australian Aboriginal peoples' traditions, ochre (particularly red) and blood, both high in iron content and considered Maban, are applied to the bodies of dancers for ritual. As Lawlor states:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In many Aboriginal rituals and ceremonies, red ochre is rubbed all over the naked bodies of the dancers. In secret, sacred male ceremonies, blood extracted from the veins of the participant's arms is exchanged and rubbed on their bodies. Red ochre is used in similar ways in less-secret ceremonies. Blood is also used to fasten the feathers of birds onto people's bodies. Bird feathers contain a protein that is highly magnetically sensitive. Lawlor comments that blood employed in this fashion is held by these peoples to attune the dancers to the invisible energetic realm of the Dreamtime. Lawlor then connects these invisible energetic realms and magnetic fields, because iron is magnetic.\nEuropean paganism.\nAmong the Germanic tribes, blood was used during their sacrifices; the \"Bl\u00f3ts\". The blood was considered to have the power of its originator, and, after the butchering, the blood was sprinkled on the walls, on the statues of the gods, and on the participants themselves. This act of sprinkling blood was called \"bl\u00f3edsian\" in Old English, and the terminology was borrowed by the Roman Catholic Church becoming \"to bless\" and \"blessing\". The Hittite word for blood, \"ishar\" was a cognate to words for \"oath\" and \"bond\", see Ishara.\nThe Ancient Greeks believed that the blood of the gods, \"ichor\", was a substance that was poisonous to mortals.\nAs a relic of Germanic Law, the cruentation, an ordeal where the corpse of the victim was supposed to start bleeding in the presence of the murderer, was used until the early 17th century.\nChristianity.\nIn Genesis 9:4, God prohibited Noah and his sons from eating blood (see Noahide Law). This command continued to be observed by the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nIt is also found in the Bible that when the Angel of Death came around to the Hebrew house that the first-born child would not die if the angel saw lamb's blood wiped across the doorway.\nAt the Council of Jerusalem, the apostles prohibited certain Christians from consuming blood\u00a0\u2013 this is documented in Acts 15:20 and 29. This chapter specifies a reason (especially in verses 19\u201321): It was to avoid offending Jews who had become Christians, because the Mosaic Law Code prohibited the practice.\nChrist's blood is the means for the atonement of sins. Also, \"... the blood of Jesus Christ his [God] Son cleanseth us from all sin.\" (1 John 1:7), \"... Unto him [God] that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood.\" (Revelation 1:5), and \"And they overcame him (Satan) by the blood of the Lamb [Jesus the Christ], and by the word of their testimony ...\" (Revelation 12:11).\nSome Christian churches, including Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, and the Assyrian Church of the East teach that, when consecrated, the Eucharistic wine actually becomes the blood of Jesus for worshippers to drink. Thus in the consecrated wine, Jesus becomes spiritually and physically present. This teaching is rooted in the Last Supper, as written in the four gospels of the Bible, in which Jesus stated to his disciples that the bread that they ate was his body, and the wine was his blood. \"\"This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you.\" ()\".\nMost forms of Protestantism, especially those of a Methodist or Presbyterian lineage, teach that the wine is no more than a symbol of the blood of Christ, who is spiritually but not physically present. Lutheran theology teaches that the body and blood is present together \"in, with, and under\" the bread and wine of the Eucharistic feast.\nJudaism.\nIn Judaism, animal blood may not be consumed even in the smallest quantity (Leviticus 3:17 and elsewhere); this is reflected in Jewish dietary laws (Kashrut). Blood is purged from meat by rinsing and soaking in water (to loosen clots), salting and then rinsing with water again several times. Eggs must also be checked and any blood spots removed before consumption. Although blood from fish is biblically kosher, it is rabbinically forbidden to consume fish blood to avoid the appearance of breaking the Biblical prohibition.\nAnother ritual involving blood involves the covering of the blood of fowl and game after slaughtering (Leviticus 17:13); the reason given by the Torah is: \"Because the life of the animal is [in] its blood\" (ibid 17:14). In relation to human beings, Kabbalah expounds on this verse that the animal soul of a person is in the blood, and that physical desires stem from it.\nLikewise, the mystical reason for salting temple sacrifices and slaughtered meat is to remove the blood of animal-like passions from the person. By removing the animal's blood, the animal energies and life-force contained in the blood are removed, making the meat fit for human consumption.\nIslam.\nConsumption of food containing blood is forbidden by Islamic dietary laws. This is derived from the statement in the Qur'an, sura Al-Ma'ida (5:3): \"Forbidden to you (for food) are: dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine, and that on which has been invoked the name of other than Allah.\"\nBlood is considered unclean, hence there are specific methods to obtain physical and ritual status of cleanliness once bleeding has occurred. Specific rules and prohibitions apply to menstruation, postnatal bleeding and irregular vaginal bleeding. When an animal has been slaughtered, the animal's neck is cut in a way to ensure that the spine is not severed, hence the brain may send commands to the heart to pump blood to it for oxygen. In this way, blood is removed from the body, and the meat is generally now safe to cook and eat. In modern times, blood transfusions are generally not considered against the rules.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nBased on their interpretation of scriptures such as Acts 15:28, 29 (\"Keep abstaining...from blood.\"), many Jehovah's Witnesses neither consume blood nor accept transfusions of whole blood or its major components: red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets (thrombocytes), and plasma. Members may personally decide whether they will accept medical procedures that involve their own blood or substances that are further fractionated from the four major components.\nVampirism.\nVampires are mythical creatures that drink blood directly for sustenance, usually with a preference for human blood. Cultures all over the world have myths of this kind; for example the 'Nosferatu' legend, a human who achieves damnation and immortality by drinking the blood of others, originates from Eastern European folklore. Ticks, leeches, female mosquitoes, vampire bats, and an assortment of other natural creatures do consume the blood of other animals, but only bats are associated with vampires. This has no relation to vampire bats, which are New World creatures discovered well after the origins of the European myths.\nOther uses.\nForensic and archaeological.\nBlood residue can help forensic investigators identify weapons, reconstruct a criminal action, and link suspects to the crime. Through bloodstain pattern analysis, forensic information can also be gained from the spatial distribution of bloodstains.\nBlood residue analysis is also a technique used in archeology.\nArtistic.\nBlood is one of the body fluids that has been used in art. In particular, the performances of Viennese Actionist Hermann Nitsch, Istvan Kantor, Franko B, Lennie Lee, Ron Athey, Yang Zhichao, Lucas Abela and Kira O'Reilly, along with the photography of Andres Serrano, have incorporated blood as a prominent visual element. Marc Quinn has made sculptures using frozen blood, including a cast of his own head made using his own blood.\nGenealogical.\nThe term \"blood\" is used in genealogical circles to refer to one's ancestry, origins, and ethnic background as in the word \"bloodline\". Other terms where blood is used in a family history sense are \"blue-blood\", \"royal blood\", \"mixed-blood\" and \"blood relative\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "3999", "revid": "45117782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3999", "title": "Benoit Mandelbrot", "text": "French-American mathematician\nBenoit B. Mandelbrot (20 November 1924\u00a0\u2013 14 October 2010) was a Polish-born French-American mathematician and polymath with broad interests in the practical sciences, especially regarding what he labeled as \"the art of roughness\" of physical phenomena and \"the uncontrolled element in life\". He referred to himself as a \"fractalist\" and is recognized for his contribution to the field of fractal geometry, which included coining the word \"fractal\", as well as developing a theory of \"roughness and self-similarity\" in nature.\nIn 1936, at the age of 11, Mandelbrot and his family emigrated from Warsaw, Poland, to France. After World War II ended, Mandelbrot studied mathematics, graduating from universities in Paris and in the United States and receiving a master's degree in aeronautics from the California Institute of Technology. He spent most of his career in both the United States and France, having dual French and American citizenship. In 1958, he began a 35-year career at IBM, where he became an IBM Fellow, and periodically took leaves of absence to teach at Harvard University. At Harvard, following the publication of his study of U.S. commodity markets in relation to cotton futures, he taught economics and applied sciences.\nBecause of his access to IBM's computers, Mandelbrot was one of the first to use computer graphics to create and display fractal geometric images, leading to his discovery of the Mandelbrot set in 1980. He showed how visual complexity can be created from simple rules. He said that things typically considered to be \"rough\", a \"mess\", or \"chaotic\", such as clouds or shorelines, actually had a \"degree of order\". His math- and geometry-centered research included contributions to such fields as statistical physics, meteorology, hydrology, geomorphology, anatomy, taxonomy, neurology, linguistics, information technology, computer graphics, economics, geology, medicine, physical cosmology, engineering, chaos theory, econophysics, metallurgy, and the social sciences.\nToward the end of his career, he was Sterling Professor of Mathematical Sciences at Yale University, where he was the oldest professor in Yale's history to receive tenure.\nMandelbrot also held positions at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Universit\u00e9 Lille Nord de France, Institute for Advanced Study and Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. During his career, he received over 15 honorary doctorates and served on many science journals, along with winning numerous awards. His autobiography, \"The Fractalist: Memoir of a Scientific Maverick\", was published posthumously in 2012.\nEarly years.\nBenedykt Mandelbrot was born in a Lithuanian Jewish family, in Warsaw during the Second Polish Republic. His father made his living trading clothing; his mother was a dental surgeon. During his first two school years, he was tutored privately by an uncle who despised rote learning: \"Most of my time was spent playing chess, reading maps and learning how to open my eyes to everything around me.\" In 1936, when he was 11, the family emigrated from Poland to France. The move, World War II, and the influence of his father's brother, the mathematician Szolem Mandelbrojt (who had moved to Paris around 1920), further prevented a standard education. \"The fact that my parents, as economic and political refugees, joined Szolem in France saved our lives,\" he writes.\nMandelbrot attended the Lyc\u00e9e Rollin (now the Coll\u00e8ge-lyc\u00e9e Jacques-Decour) in Paris until the start of World War II, when his family moved to Tulle, France. He was helped by Rabbi David Feuerwerker, the Rabbi of Brive-la-Gaillarde, to continue his studies. Much of France was occupied by the Nazis at the time, and Mandelbrot recalls this period:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1944, Mandelbrot returned to Paris, studied at the Lyc\u00e9e du Parc in Lyon, and in 1945 to 1947 attended the \u00c9cole Polytechnique, where he studied under Gaston Julia and Paul L\u00e9vy. From 1947 to 1949 he studied at California Institute of Technology, where he earned a master's degree in aeronautics. Returning to France, he obtained his PhD degree in Mathematical Sciences at the University of Paris in 1952.\nResearch career.\nFrom 1949 to 1958, Mandelbrot was a staff member at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. During this time he spent a year at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, where he was sponsored by John von Neumann. In 1955 he married Aliette Kagan and moved to Geneva, Switzerland (to collaborate with Jean Piaget at the International Centre for Genetic Epistemology) and later to the Universit\u00e9 Lille Nord de France. In 1958 the couple moved to the United States where Mandelbrot joined the research staff at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, New York. He remained at IBM for 35 years, becoming an IBM Fellow, and later Fellow Emeritus.\nFrom 1951 onward, Mandelbrot worked on problems and published papers not only in mathematics but in applied fields such as information theory, economics, and fluid dynamics.\nRandomness and fractals in financial markets.\nMandelbrot saw financial markets as an example of \"wild randomness\", characterized by concentration and long range dependence. He developed several original approaches for modelling financial fluctuations. In his early work, he found that the price changes in financial markets did not follow a Gaussian distribution, but rather L\u00e9vy stable distributions having infinite variance. He found, for example, that cotton prices followed a L\u00e9vy stable distribution with parameter \"\u03b1\" equal to 1.7 rather than 2 as in a Gaussian distribution. \"Stable\" distributions have the property that the sum of many instances of a random variable follows the same distribution but with a larger scale parameter. The latter work from the early 60s was done with daily data of cotton prices from 1900, long before he introduced the word 'fractal'. In later years, after the concept of fractals had matured, the study of financial markets in the context of fractals became possible only after the availability of high frequency data in finance. In the late 1980s, Mandelbrot used intra-daily tick data supplied by Olsen &amp; Associates in Zurich to apply fractal theory to market microstructure. This cooperation lead to the publication of the first comprehensive papers on scaling law in finance. This law shows similar properties at different time scales, confirming Mandelbrot's insight of the fractal nature of market microstructure. Mandelbrot's own research in this area is presented in his books \"Fractals and Scaling in Finance\" and \"The (Mis)behavior of Markets\".\nDeveloping \"fractal geometry\" and the Mandelbrot set.\nAs a visiting professor at Harvard University, Mandelbrot began to study mathematical objects called Julia sets that were invariant under certain transformations of the complex plane. Building on previous work by Gaston Julia and Pierre Fatou, Mandelbrot used a computer to plot images of the Julia sets. While investigating the topology of these Julia sets, he studied the Mandelbrot set which was introduced by him in 1979.\nIn 1975, Mandelbrot coined the term \"fractal\" to describe these structures and first published his ideas in the French book \"Les Objets Fractals: Forme, Hasard et Dimension\", later translated in 1977 as \"Fractals: Form, Chance and Dimension\". According to computer scientist and physicist Stephen Wolfram, the book was a \"breakthrough\" for Mandelbrot, who until then would typically \"apply fairly straightforward mathematics ... to areas that had barely seen the light of serious mathematics before\". Wolfram adds that as a result of this new research, he was no longer a \"wandering scientist\", and later called him \"the father of fractals\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWolfram briefly describes fractals as a form of geometric repetition, \"in which smaller and smaller copies of a pattern are successively nested inside each other, so that the same intricate shapes appear no matter how much you zoom in to the whole. Fern leaves and Romanesque broccoli are two examples from nature.\" He points out an unexpected conclusion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMandelbrot used the term \"fractal\" as it derived from the Latin word \"fractus\", defined as broken or shattered glass. Using the newly developed IBM computers at his disposal, Mandelbrot was able to create fractal images using graphics computer code, images that an interviewer described as looking like \"the delirious exuberance of the 1960s psychedelic art with forms hauntingly reminiscent of nature and the human body\". He also saw himself as a \"would-be Kepler\", after the 17th-century scientist Johannes Kepler, who calculated and described the orbits of the planets.\nMandelbrot, however, never felt he was inventing a new idea. He described his feelings in a documentary with science writer Arthur C. Clarke:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Exploring this set I certainly never had the feeling of invention. I never had the feeling that my imagination was rich enough to invent all those extraordinary things on discovering them. They were there, even though nobody had seen them before. It's marvelous, a very simple formula explains all these very complicated things. So the goal of science is starting with a mess, and explaining it with a simple formula, a kind of dream of science.\nAccording to Clarke, \"the Mandelbrot set is indeed one of the most astonishing discoveries in the entire history of mathematics. Who could have dreamed that such an incredibly simple equation could have generated images of literally \"infinite\" complexity?\" Clarke also notes an \"odd coincidence\":the name Mandelbrot, and the word \"mandala\"\u2014for a religious symbol\u2014which I'm sure is a pure coincidence, but indeed the Mandelbrot set does seem to contain an enormous number of mandalas.\nIn 1982, Mandelbrot expanded and updated his ideas in \"The Fractal Geometry of Nature\". This influential work brought fractals into the mainstream of professional and popular mathematics, as well as silencing critics, who had dismissed fractals as \"program artifacts\".\nMandelbrot left IBM in 1987, after 35 years and 12 days, when IBM decided to end pure research in his division. He joined the Department of Mathematics at Yale, and obtained his first tenured post in 1999, at the age of 75. At the time of his retirement in 2005, he was Sterling Professor of Mathematical Sciences.\nFractals and the \"theory of roughness\".\nMandelbrot created the first-ever \"theory of roughness\", and he saw \"roughness\" in the shapes of mountains, coastlines and river basins; the structures of plants, blood vessels and lungs; the clustering of galaxies. His personal quest was to create some mathematical formula to measure the overall \"roughness\" of such objects in nature. He began by asking himself various kinds of questions related to nature:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn his paper \"How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-Similarity and Fractional Dimension\", published in \"Science\" in 1967, Mandelbrot discusses self-similar curves that have Hausdorff dimension that are examples of \"fractals\", although Mandelbrot does not use this term in the paper, as he did not coin it until 1975. The paper is one of Mandelbrot's first publications on the topic of fractals.\nMandelbrot emphasized the use of fractals as realistic and useful models for describing many \"rough\" phenomena in the real world. He concluded that \"real roughness is often fractal and can be measured.\" Although Mandelbrot coined the term \"fractal\", some of the mathematical objects he presented in \"The Fractal Geometry of Nature\" had been previously described by other mathematicians. Before Mandelbrot, however, they were regarded as isolated curiosities with unnatural and non-intuitive properties. Mandelbrot brought these objects together for the first time and turned them into essential tools for the long-stalled effort to extend the scope of science to explaining non-smooth, \"rough\" objects in the real world. His methods of research were both old and new:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFractals are also found in human pursuits, such as music, painting, architecture, and stock market prices. Mandelbrot believed that fractals, far from being unnatural, were in many ways more intuitive and natural than the artificially smooth objects of traditional Euclidean geometry: Clouds are not spheres, mountains are not cones, coastlines are not circles, and bark is not smooth, nor does lightning travel in a straight line.\u00a0\u00a0\u2014Mandelbrot, in his introduction to \"The Fractal Geometry of Nature\"\nMandelbrot has been called an artist, and a visionary and a maverick. His informal and passionate style of writing and his emphasis on visual and geometric intuition (supported by the inclusion of numerous illustrations) made \"The Fractal Geometry of Nature\" accessible to non-specialists. The book sparked widespread popular interest in fractals and contributed to chaos theory and other fields of science and mathematics.\nMandelbrot also put his ideas to work in cosmology. He offered in 1974 a new explanation of Olbers' paradox (the \"dark night sky\" riddle), demonstrating the consequences of fractal theory as a sufficient, but not necessary, resolution of the paradox. He postulated that if the stars in the universe were fractally distributed (for example, like Cantor dust), it would not be necessary to rely on the Big Bang theory to explain the paradox. His model would not rule out a Big Bang, but would allow for a dark sky even if the Big Bang had not occurred.\nAwards and honors.\nMandelbrot's awards include the Wolf Prize for Physics in 1993, the Lewis Fry Richardson Prize of the European Geophysical Society in 2000, the Japan Prize in 2003, and the Einstein Lectureship of the American Mathematical Society in 2006.\nThe small asteroid 27500 Mandelbrot was named in his honor. In November 1990, he was made a Chevalier in France's Legion of Honour. In December 2005, Mandelbrot was appointed to the position of Battelle Fellow at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. Mandelbrot was promoted to an Officer of the Legion of Honour in January 2006. An honorary degree from Johns Hopkins University was bestowed on Mandelbrot in the May 2010 commencement exercises.\nA partial list of awards received by Mandelbrot:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDeath and legacy.\nMandelbrot died from pancreatic cancer at the age of 85 in a hospice in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on 14 October 2010. Reacting to news of his death, mathematician Heinz-Otto Peitgen said: \"[I]f we talk about impact inside mathematics, and applications in the sciences, he is one of the most important figures of the last fifty years.\"\nChris Anderson, TED conference curator, described Mandelbrot as \"an icon who changed how we see the world\". Nicolas Sarkozy, President of France at the time of Mandelbrot's death, said Mandelbrot had \"a powerful, original mind that never shied away from innovating and shattering preconceived notions\u00a0[... h]is work, developed entirely outside mainstream research, led to modern information theory.\" Mandelbrot's obituary in \"The Economist\" points out his fame as \"celebrity beyond the academy\" and lauds him as the \"father of fractal geometry\".\nBest-selling essayist-author Nassim Nicholas Taleb has remarked that Mandelbrot's book \"The (Mis)Behavior of Markets\" is in his opinion \"The deepest and most realistic finance book ever published\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4001", "revid": "414998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4001", "title": "Benedict of Nursia", "text": "6th-century Italian Catholic saint and monk\nBenedict of Nursia (; ; 2 March AD 480 \u2013 21 March AD 548), often known as Saint Benedict, was an Italian Christian monk, writer, and theologian who is venerated in the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Anglican Communion, and Old Catholic Churches. He is a patron saint of Europe.\nBenedict founded twelve communities for monks at Subiaco, Lazio, Italy (about to the east of Rome), before moving to Monte Cassino in the mountains of central Italy. The Order of Saint Benedict is of later origin and, moreover, is not an \"order\" as is commonly understood but merely a confederation of autonomous congregations.\nBenedict's main achievement, his \"Rule of Saint Benedict\", contains a set of rules for his monks to follow. Heavily influenced by the writings of John Cassian, it shows strong affinity with the Rule of the Master, but it also has a unique spirit of balance, moderation and reasonableness (, \"epie\u00edkeia\"), which persuaded most Christian religious communities founded throughout the Middle Ages to adopt it. As a result, his Rule became one of the most influential religious rules in Western Christendom. For this reason, Giuseppe Carletti regarded Benedict as the founder of Western Christian monasticism.\nBiography.\nApart from a short poem attributed to Mark of Monte Cassino, the only ancient account of Benedict is found in the second volume of Pope Gregory\u00a0I's four-book \"Dialogues\", thought to have been written in 593, although the authenticity of this work is disputed.\nGregory's account of Benedict's life is not, however, a biography in the modern sense of the word. It provides instead a spiritual portrait of the gentle, disciplined abbot. In a letter to Bishop Maximilian of Syracuse, Gregory states his intention for his \"Dialogues\", saying they are a kind of \"floretum\" (an \"anthology\", literally, 'flowers') of the most striking miracles of Italian holy men.\nGregory did not set out to write a chronological, historically anchored story of Benedict, but he did base his anecdotes on direct testimony. To establish his authority, Gregory explains that his information came from what he considered the best sources: a handful of Benedict's disciples who lived with him and witnessed his various miracles. These followers, he says, are Constantinus, who succeeded Benedict as Abbot of Monte Cassino, Honoratus, who was abbot of Subiaco when St. Gregory wrote his \"Dialogues\", Valentinianus, and Simplicius.\nIn Gregory's day, history was not recognised as an independent field of study; it was a branch of grammar or rhetoric, and \"historia\" was an account that summed up the findings of the learned when they wrote what was, at that time, considered history. Gregory's \"Dialogues\", Book Two, then, an authentic medieval hagiography cast as a conversation between the Pope and his deacon Peter, is designed to teach spiritual lessons.\nEarly life.\nHe was the son of a Roman noble of Nursia, the modern Norcia, in Umbria. A tradition which Bede accepts makes him a twin with his sister Scholastica. If 480 is accepted as the year of his birth, the year of his abandonment of his studies and leaving home would be about 500. Gregory's narrative makes it impossible to suppose him younger than 20 at the time.\nBenedict was sent to Rome to study, but was disappointed by the life he found there. He does not seem to have left Rome for the purpose of becoming a hermit, but only to find some place away from the life of the great city. He took his old nurse with him as a servant and they settled down to live in Enfide. Enfide, which the tradition of Subiaco identifies with the modern Affile, is in the Simbruini mountains, about forty miles from Rome and two miles from Subiaco.\nA short distance from Enfide is the entrance to a narrow, gloomy valley, penetrating the mountains and leading directly to Subiaco. The path continues to ascend, and the side of the ravine, on which it runs, becomes steeper, until a cave is reached above which the mountain now rises almost perpendicularly; while on the right, it strikes in a rapid descent down to where, in Benedict's day, below, lay the blue waters of a lake. The cave has a large triangular-shaped opening and is about ten feet deep.\nOn his way from Enfide, Benedict met a monk, Romanus of Subiaco, whose monastery was on the mountain above the cliff overhanging the cave. Romanus discussed with Benedict the purpose which had brought him to Subiaco, and gave him the monk's habit. By his advice Benedict became a hermit and for three years, unknown to men, lived in this cave above the lake.\nLater life.\nGregory tells little of Benedict's later life. He now speaks of Benedict no longer as a youth (), but as a man () of God. Romanus, Gregory states, served Benedict in every way he could. The monk apparently visited him frequently, and on fixed days brought him food.\nDuring these three years of solitude, broken only by occasional communications with the outer world and by the visits of Romanus, Benedict matured both in mind and character, in knowledge of himself and of his fellow-man, and at the same time he became not merely known to, but secured the respect of, those about him; so much so that on the death of the abbot of a monastery in the neighbourhood (identified by some with Vicovaro), the community came to him and begged him to become its abbot. Benedict was acquainted with the life and discipline of the monastery, and knew that \"their manners were diverse from his and therefore that they would never agree together: yet, at length, overcome with their entreaty, he gave his consent\". The experiment failed; the monks tried to poison him. The legend goes that they first tried to poison his drink. He prayed a blessing over the cup and the cup shattered. Thus he left the group and went back to his cave at Subiaco. There lived in the neighborhood a priest called Florentius who, moved by envy, tried to ruin him. He tried to poison him with poisoned bread. When he prayed a blessing over the bread, a raven swept in and took the loaf away. From this time his miracles seem to have become frequent, and many people, attracted by his sanctity and character, came to Subiaco to be under his guidance. Having failed by sending him poisonous bread, Florentius tried to seduce his monks with some prostitutes. To avoid further temptations, in about 530 Benedict left Subiaco. He founded 12 monasteries in the vicinity of Subiaco, and, eventually, in 530 he founded the great Benedictine monastery of Monte Cassino, which lies on a hilltop between Rome and Naples.\nDuring the invasion of Italy, Totila, King of the Goths, ordered a general to wear his kingly robes and to see whether Benedict would discover the truth. Immediately Benedict detected the impersonation, and Totila came to pay him due respect.\nVeneration.\nHe is believed to have died of a fever at Monte Cassino not long after his twin sister, Scholastica, and was buried in the same place as his sister. According to tradition, this occurred on 21 March 547. He was named patron protector of Europe by Pope Paul VI in 1964. In 1980, Pope John Paul II declared him co-patron of Europe, together with Cyril and Methodius. Furthermore, he is the patron saint of speleologists. On the island of Tenerife (Spain) he is the patron saint of fields and farmers. An important romeria (\"Romer\u00eda Regional de San Benito Abad\") is held on this island in his honor, one of the most important in the country.\nIn the pre-1970 General Roman Calendar, his feast is kept on 21 March, the day of his death according to some manuscripts of the \"Martyrologium Hieronymianum\" and that of Bede. Because on that date his liturgical memorial would always be impeded by the observance of Lent, the 1969 revision of the General Roman Calendar moved his memorial to 11 July, the date that appears in some Gallic liturgical books of the end of the 8th century as the feast commemorating his birth (\"Natalis S. Benedicti\"). There is some uncertainty about the origin of this feast. Accordingly, on 21 March the Roman Martyrology mentions in a line and a half that it is Benedict's day of death and that his memorial is celebrated on 11 July, while on 11 July it devotes seven lines to speaking of him, and mentions the tradition that he died on 21 March.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates Saint Benedict on 14 March.\nThe Anglican Communion has no single universal calendar, but a provincial calendar of saints is published in each province. In almost all of these, Saint Benedict is commemorated on 11 July.\nBenedict is remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival on 11 July.\n\"Rule of Saint Benedict\".\nBenedict wrote the \"Rule\" in 516 for monks living communally under the authority of an abbot. The \"Rule\" comprises seventy-three short chapters. Its wisdom is twofold: spiritual (how to live a Christocentric life on earth) and administrative (how to run a monastery efficiently). More than half of the chapters describe how to be obedient and humble, and what to do when a member of the community is not. About one-fourth regulate the work of God (the \"opus Dei\"). One-tenth outline how, and by whom, the monastery should be managed.\nFollowing the golden rule of \"Ora et Labora \u2013 pray and work\", the monks each day devoted eight hours to prayer, eight hours to sleep, and eight hours to manual work, sacred reading and/or works of charity.\nSaint Benedict Medal.\nThis devotional medal originally came from a cross in honor of Saint Benedict. On one side, the medal has an image of Saint Benedict, holding the Holy Rule in his left hand and a cross in his right. There is a raven on one side of him, with a cup on the other side of him. Around the medal's outer margin are the words \"Eius in obitu nostro praesentia muniamur\" (\"May we be strengthened by his presence in the hour of our death\"). The other side of the medal has a cross with the initials CSSML on the vertical bar which signify \"Crux Sacra Sit Mihi Lux\" (\"May the Holy Cross be my light\") and on the horizontal bar are the initials NDSMD which stand for \"Non-Draco Sit Mihi Dux\" (\"Let not the dragon be my guide\"). The initials CSPB stand for \"Crux Sancti Patris Benedicti\" (\"The Cross of the Holy Father Benedict\") and are located on the interior angles of the cross. Either the inscription \"PAX\" (Peace) or the Christogram \"IHS\" may be found at the top of the cross in most cases. Around the medal's margin on this side are the \"Vade Retro Satana\" initials VRSNSMV which stand for \"Vade Retro Satana, Nonquam Suade Mihi Vana\" (\"Begone Satan, do not suggest to me thy vanities\") then a space followed by the initials SMQLIVB which signify \"Sunt Mala Quae Libas, Ipse Venena Bibas\" (\"Evil are the things thou profferest, drink thou thine own poison\").\nThis medal was first struck in 1880 to commemorate the fourteenth centenary of Benedict's birth and is also called the Jubilee Medal; its exact origin, however, is unknown. In 1647, during a witchcraft trial at Natternberg near Metten Abbey in Bavaria, the accused women testified they had no power over Metten, which was under the protection of the cross. An investigation found a number of painted crosses on the walls of the abbey with the letters now found on St Benedict medals, but their meaning had been forgotten. A manuscript written in 1415 was eventually found that had a picture of Benedict holding a scroll in one hand and a staff which ended in a cross in the other. On the scroll and staff were written the full words of the initials contained on the crosses. Medals then began to be struck in Germany, which then spread throughout Europe. This medal was first approved by Pope Benedict XIV in his briefs of 23 December 1741 and 12 March 1742.\nBenedict has been also the motif of many collector's coins around the world. The Austria 50 euro 'The Christian Religious Orders', issued on 13 March 2002 is one of them.\nInfluence.\nThe early Middle Ages have been called \"the Benedictine centuries.\" In April 2008, Pope Benedict XVI discussed the influence St Benedict had on Western Europe. The pope said that \"with his life and work St Benedict exercised a fundamental influence on the development of European civilization and culture\" and helped Europe to emerge from the \"dark night of history\" that followed the fall of the Roman empire.\nBenedict contributed more than anyone else to the rise of monasticism in the West. His Rule was the foundational document for thousands of religious communities in the Middle Ages. To this day, The Rule of St. Benedict is the most common and influential Rule used by monasteries and monks, more than 1,400 years after its writing. Today the Benedictine family is represented by two branches: the Benedictine Federation and the Cistercians.\nA basilica was built upon the birthplace of Benedict and Scholastica in the 1400s. Ruins of their familial home were excavated from beneath the church and preserved. The earthquake of 30 October 2016 completely devastated the structure of the basilica, leaving only the front facade and altar standing. \n\"See also .\"\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4003", "revid": "97297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4003", "title": "Beaumarchais", "text": ""}
{"id": "4005", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4005", "title": "Battle of Pharsalus", "text": "Decisive battle of Caesar's Civil War (48 BC)\nThe Battle of Pharsalus was the decisive battle of Caesar's Civil War fought on 9 August 48\u00a0BC near Pharsalus in central Greece. Julius Caesar and his allies formed up opposite the army of the Roman Republic under the command of Pompey. Pompey had the backing of a majority of Roman senators and his army significantly outnumbered the veteran Caesarian legions.\nPressured by his officers, Pompey reluctantly engaged in battle and suffered an overwhelming defeat, ultimately fleeing the camp and his men, disguised as an ordinary citizen. Eventually making his way to Egypt, he was assassinated upon his arrival at the order of Ptolemy XIII.\nPrelude.\nFollowing the start of the Civil War, Caesar had captured Rome, forced Pompey and his allies to withdraw from Italy, and defeated Pompey's legates in Spain. In the campaign season for 48\u00a0BC, Caesar crossed the Adriatic and advanced on Dyrrachium. There, he besieged it, but was defeated.\nCaesar then withdrew east into Thessaly, partly to relieve one of his legates from attack by Metellus Scipio's forces arriving from Syria. He besieged Gomphi after it resisted him. Pompey pursued, seeking to spare Italy from invasion by concluding the war on Greek soil, to prevent Caesar from defeating Metellus Scipio's forces arriving from Syria, and under pressure from his overconfident allies who accused him of prolonging the war to extend his command.\nDate.\nThe decisive battle took place on 9\u00a0August 48\u00a0BC according to the Republican calendar. According to the proleptic Julian calendar however, the date was either 29\u00a0June (according to Le Verrier's chronological reconstruction) or possibly 7\u00a0June (according to Drumann/Groebe).\nLocation.\nThe location of the battlefield was for a long time the subject of controversy among scholars. Caesar himself, in his \"Commentarii de Bello Civili\", mentions few place-names; and although the battle is called after Pharsalos by modern authors, four ancient writers \u2013 the author of the \"Bellum Alexandrinum\" (48.1), Frontinus (\"Strategemata\" 2.3.22), Eutropius (20), and Orosius (6.15.27) \u2013 place it specifically at \"Palae\"pharsalus (\"Old\" Pharsalus). Strabo in his \"Geographica\" (\"\u0393\u03b5\u03c9\u03b3\u03c1\u03b1\u03c6\u03b9\u03ba\u03ac\") mentions both old and new Pharsaloi, and notes that the Thetideion, the temple to Thetis south of Scotoussa, was near both. In 198 BC, in the Second Macedonian War, Philip V of Macedon sacked Palaepharsalos (Livy, \"Ab Urbe Condita\" 32.13.9), but left new Pharsalos untouched. These two details perhaps imply that the two cities were not close neighbours. Many scholars, therefore, unsure of the site of Palaepharsalos, followed Appian (2.75) and located the battle of 48 BC south of the Enipeus or close to Pharsalos (today's Pharsala). Among the scholars arguing for the south side are B\u00e9quignon (1928), Bru\u00e8re (1951), and Gwatkin (1957).\nAn increasing number of scholars, however, have argued for a location on the north side of the river. These include Perrin (1885), Holmes (1908), Lucas (1921), Rambaud (1955), Pelling (1973), Morgan (1983), and Sheppard (2006). John D. Morgan in his definitive \"Palae-pharsalus \u2013 the Battle and the Town\", shows that Palaepharsalus cannot have been at Palaiokastro, as B\u00e9quignon thought (a site abandoned c. 500 BC), nor the hill of Fatih-Dzami within the walls of Pharsalus itself, as Kromayer (1903, 1931) and Gwatkin thought; and Morgan argues that it is probably also not the hill of Khtouri (Koutouri), some 7 miles north-west of Pharsalus on the south bank of the Enipeus, as Lucas and Holmes thought, although that remains a possibility. However, Morgan believes it is most likely to have been the hill just east of the village of (Krini Larisas, formerly Driskoli) very close to the ancient highway from Larisa to Pharsalus. This site is some north of Pharsalus, and three miles north of the river Enipeus, and not only has remains dating back to neolithic times but also signs of habitation in the 1st century BC and later. The identification seems to be confirmed by the location of a place misspelled \"Palfari\" or \"Falaphari\" shown on a medieval route map of the road just north of Pharsalus. Morgan places Pompey's camp a mile to the west of Krini, just north of the village of Avra (formerly Sarikayia), and Caesar's camp some four miles to the east-south-east of Pompey's. According to this reconstruction, therefore, the battle took place not between Pharsalus and the river, as Appian wrote, but between Old Pharsalus and the river.\nAn interesting side-note on Palaepharsalus is that it was sometimes identified in ancient sources with Phthia, the home of Achilles. Near Old and New Pharsalus was a \"Thetideion\", or temple dedicated to Thetis, the mother of Achilles. However, Phthia, the kingdom of Achilles and his father Peleus, is more usually identified with the lower valley of the Spercheios river, much further south.\nName of the battle.\nAlthough it is often called the Battle of Pharsalus by modern historians, this name was rarely used in the ancient sources. Caesar merely calls it the \"proelium in Thessali\u0101\" (\"battle in Thessalia\"); Marcus Tullius Cicero and Hirtius call it the \"Phars\u0101licum proelium\" (\"Pharsalic battle\") or \"pugna Phars\u0101lia\" (\"Pharsalian battle\"), and similar expressions are also used in other authors. But Hirtius (if he is the author of the de Bello Alexandrino) also refers to the battle as having taken place at \"Palaepharsalus\", and this name also occurs in Strabo, Frontinus, Eutropius, and Orosius. Lucan in his poem about the Civil War regularly uses the name \"Phars\u0101lia\", and this term is also used by the epitomiser of Livy and by Tacitus. The only ancient sources to refer to the battle as being at Pharsalus are a certain calendar known as the Fasti Amiternini and the Greek authors Plutarch, Appian, and Polyaenus. It has therefore been argued by some scholars that \"Pharsalia\" would be a more accurate name for the battle than Pharsalus.\nOpposing armies.\nThe total number of soldiers on each side is unknown because ancient accounts of the battle focused primarily on giving the numbers of Italian legionaries only, regarding allied non-citizen contingents as inferior and inconsequential. According to Caesar, his own army included 22,000 Roman legionaries distributed throughout 80 cohorts (8 legions), alongside 1,000 Gallic and Germanic cavalry. All of Caesar's legions were understrength; some only had about a thousand men at the time of Pharsalus, due partly to losses at Dyrrhachium and partly to Caesar's wish to rapidly advance with a picked body as opposed to a ponderous movement with a large army. Another source adds that he had recruited Greek light infantry from Dolopia, Acarnania and Aetolia; these numbered no more than a few thousand. Caesar, Appian and Plutarch give Pompey an army of 45,000 Roman infantry. Osorius describes Pompey as having 88 cohorts of Roman infantry, which at full strength would come to 44,000 men, while Brunt and Wylie estimated Pompey's Roman infantry as being as 38,000 men, and Greenhalgh said they contained a maximum of 36,000.\nIt was in his auxiliary troops and in particular his cavalry, all of which vastly outnumbered Caesar's own, that Pompey had his greatest advantage. He seems to have had at his disposal anywhere between 5,000 and 7,000 cavalry, and thousands of archers, slingers and light infantrymen in general. These all formed a remarkably diverse group, including Gallic and Germanic horsemen alongside all polyglot peoples of the east \u2013 namely Greeks, Thracians, and Anatolians from the Balkans and Syrians, Phoenicians and Jews from the Levant. To this heterogeneous force Pompey added horsemen conscripted from his own slaves. Many of the foreigners were serving under their own rulers, for more than a dozen despots and petty kings under Roman influence in the east were Pompey's personal clients and some elected to attend in person, or send proxies.\nCaesarian legions.\nCaesar had the following legions with him:\nThe bulk of Caesar's army at Pharsalus was made up of his veterans from the Gallic Wars; very experienced, battle-hardened troops who were absolutely devoted to their commander.\nDeployment.\nThe two generals deployed their legions in the traditional three lines (\"triplex acies\"), with Pompey's right and Caesar's left flanks resting on river Enipeus. As the stream provided enough protection to that side, Pompey moved almost all of his cavalry, archers, and slingers to the left, to make the most of their numerical strength. Only a small force of 500\u2013600 Pontic cavalry and some Cappadocian light infantry was placed on his right flank. Pompey stationed his strongest legions in the center and wings of his infantry line, and dispersed some 2,000 re-enlisted veterans throughout the entire line in order to inspire the less experienced. The Pompeian cohorts were arrayed in an unusually thick formation, 10 men deep: their task was just to tie down the enemy foot while Pompey's cavalry, his key to victory, swept through Caesar's flank and rear. The column of legions was divided under command of three subordinates, with Lentulus in charge of the left, Scipio of the center and Ahenobarbus the right. Labienus was entrusted with command of the cavalry charge, while Pompey himself took up a position behind the left wing in order to oversee the course of the battle.\nCaesar also deployed his men in three lines, but, being outnumbered, had to thin his ranks to a depth of only six men, in order to match the frontage presented by Pompey. His left flank, resting on the Enipeus River, consisted of his battle worn IXth legion supplemented by the VIIIth legion, these were commanded by Mark Antony. The VI, XII, XI and XIII formed the centre and were commanded by Domitius, then came the VII and upon his right he placed his favored Xth legion, giving Sulla command of this flank \u2013 Caesar himself took his stand on the right, across from Pompey. Upon seeing the disposition of Pompey's army Caesar grew discomforted, and further thinned his third line in order to form a fourth line on his right: this to counter the onslaught of the enemy cavalry, which he knew his numerically inferior cavalry could not withstand. He gave this new line detailed instructions for the role they would play, hinting that upon them would rest the fortunes of the day, and gave strict orders to his third line not to charge until specifically ordered.\nBattle.\nThere was significant distance between the two armies, according to Caesar. Pompey ordered his men not to charge, but to wait until Caesar's legions came into close quarters; Pompey's adviser Gaius Triarius believed that Caesar's infantry would be fatigued and fall into disorder if they were forced to cover twice the expected distance of a battle march. Also, stationary troops were expected to be able to defend better against pila throws. Seeing that Pompey's army was not advancing, Caesar's infantry under Mark Antony and Gnaeus Domitius Calvinus started the advance. As Caesar's men neared throwing distance, without orders, they stopped to rest and regroup before continuing the charge; Pompey's right and centre line held as the two armies collided.\nAs Pompey's infantry fought, Labienus ordered the Pompeian cavalry on his left flank to attack Caesar's cavalry; as expected they successfully pushed back Caesar's cavalry. Caesar then revealed his hidden fourth line of infantry and surprised Pompey's cavalry charge; Caesar's men were ordered to leap up and use their pila to thrust at Pompey's cavalry instead of throwing them. Pompey's cavalry panicked and suffered hundreds of casualties, as Caesar's cavalry came about and charged after them. After failing to reform, the rest of Pompey's cavalry retreated to the hills, leaving the left wing of his legions exposed to the hidden troops as Caesar's cavalry wheeled around their flank. Caesar then ordered in his third line, containing his most battle-hardened veterans, to attack. This broke Pompey's left wing troops, who fled the battlefield.\nAfter routing Pompey's cavalry, Caesar threw in his last line of reserves\u00a0\u2013 a move which at this point meant that the battle was more or less decided. Pompey lost the will to fight as he watched both cavalry and legions under his command break formation and flee from battle, and he retreated to his camp, leaving the rest of his troops at the centre and right flank to their own devices. He ordered the garrisoned auxiliaries to defend the camp as he gathered his family, loaded up gold, and threw off his general's cloak to make a quick escape. As the rest of Pompey's army were left confused, Caesar urged his men to end the day by routing the rest of Pompey's troops and capturing the Pompeian camp. They complied with his wishes; after finishing off the remains of Pompey's men, they furiously attacked the camp walls. The Thracians and the other auxiliaries who were left in the Pompeian camp, in total seven cohorts, defended bravely, but were not able to fend off the assault.\nCaesar had won his greatest victory, claiming to have only lost about 200 soldiers and 30 centurions and assigning the Optimate losses to be 60,000 men. These numbers seem suspiciously exaggerated with Appian suggesting the Caesarean losses to be as many as 1,200 men and the Pompeian losses to be 6,000. In his history of the war, Caesar would praise his own men's discipline and experience, and remembered each of his centurions by name. He also questioned Pompey's decision not to charge.\nAftermath.\nPompey, despairing of the defeat, fled with his advisors overseas to Mytilene and thence to Cilicia where he held a council of war; at the same time, Cato and supporters at Dyrrachium attempted first to hand over command to Marcus Tullius Cicero, who refused, deciding instead to return to Italy. They then regrouped at Corcyra and went thence to Libya. Others, including Marcus Junius Brutus sought Caesar's pardon, travelling over marshlands to Larissa where he was then welcomed graciously by Caesar in his camp. Pompey's council of war decided to flee to Egypt, which had in the previous year supplied him with military aid.\nIn the aftermath of the battle, Caesar captured Pompey's camp and burned Pompey's correspondence. He then announced that he would forgive all who asked for mercy. Pompeian naval forces in the Adriatic and Italy mostly withdrew or surrendered.\nHearing of Pompey's flight to Egypt, Caesar remained in hot pursuit, first landing in Asia and reaching Alexandria on 2 October 48\u00a0BC, where he learnt of Pompey's murder and then was embroiled in a dynastic dispute between Ptolemy XIII and Cleopatra.\nImportance.\nPaul K. Davis wrote that \"Caesar's victory took him to the pinnacle of power, effectively ending the Republic.\" The battle itself did not end the civil war but it was decisive and gave Caesar a much needed boost in legitimacy. Until then much of the Roman world outside Italy supported Pompey and his allies due to the extensive list of clients he held in all corners of the Republic. After Pompey's defeat former allies began to align themselves with Caesar as some came to believe the gods favored him, while for others it was simple self-preservation. The ancients took great stock in success as a sign of favoritism by the gods. This is especially true of success in the face of almost certain defeat \u2013 as Caesar experienced at Pharsalus. This allowed Caesar to parlay this single victory into a huge network of willing clients to better secure his hold over power and force the Optimates into near exile in search for allies to continue the fight against Caesar.\nIn popular culture.\nThe battle gives its name to the following artistic, geographical, and business concerns:\nIn Alexander Dumas' \"The Three Musketeers\", the author makes reference to Caesar's purported order that his men try to cut the faces of their opponents \u2013 their vanity supposedly being of more value to them than their lives.\nIn Mankiewicz's 1963 film \"Cleopatra\", the immediate aftermath of Pharsalus is used as an opening scene to set the action in motion.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4009", "revid": "40451009", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4009", "title": "Bigfoot", "text": "Alleged North American cryptid\nBigfoot, also commonly referred to as Sasquatch, is a large and hairy human-like mythical creature purported to inhabit forests in North America, particularly in the Pacific Northwest. \nEnthusiasts of the subject have offered various forms of dubious evidence to prove Bigfoot's existence, including anecdotal claims of sightings, as well as alleged photographs, video and audio recordings, hair samples, and casts of large footprints. Most of this evidence has since been identified as hoaxes or misidentification, and the majority of scientists do not find any of the remaining evidence compelling.\nTales of wild, hair-covered humanoids exist throughout the world, and such creatures appear in the folklore of North America, including the mythologies of indigenous people. Bigfoot is an enduring element of popular culture, and an icon within the pseudoscience and subculture of cryptozoology.\nMost scientists have historically discounted the existence of Bigfoot, considering it to be the result of a combination of folklore, misidentification, and hoax, rather than a living animal. Folklorists trace the phenomenon of Bigfoot to a combination of factors and sources including indigenous cultures, the European wild man figure, and folk tales. Wishful thinking, a cultural increase in environmental concerns, and overall societal awareness of the subject have been cited as additional factors.\nOther creatures of relatively similar descriptions are alleged to inhabit various regions throughout the world, such as the Skunk ape of the southeastern United States; the Almas, Yeren, and Yeti in Asia; and the Australian Yowie; all of which are also engrained in the cultures of their regions.\nDescription.\nBigfoot is often described as a large, muscular, and bipedal ape or human-like creature covered in black, dark brown, or dark reddish hair. Anecdotal descriptions estimate a height of roughly , with some descriptions having the creatures standing as tall as . Some alleged observations describe Bigfoot as more human than ape, particularly in regards to the face. In 1971, multiple people in The Dalles, Oregon, filed a police report describing an \"overgrown ape\", and one of the men claimed to have sighted the creature in the scope of his rifle, but could not bring himself to shoot it because, \"It looked more human than animal\".\nCommon descriptions include broad shoulders, no visible neck, and long arms, which many skeptics attribute to misidentification of a bear standing upright. Some alleged nighttime sightings have stated the creature's eyes \"glowed\" yellow or red. However, eyeshine is not present in humans or any other known great apes and so proposed explanations for observable eyeshine off of the ground in the forest include owls, raccoons, or opossums perched in foliage.\nMichael Rugg, owner of the Bigfoot Discovery Museum, claims to have smelled Bigfoot, stating, \"Imagine a skunk that had rolled around in dead animals and had hung around the garbage pits\".\nThe enormous footprints for which the creature is named are claimed to be as large as long and wide. Some footprint casts have also contained claw marks, making it likely that they came from known animals such as bears, which have five toes and claws.\nHistory.\nIndigenous and early records.\nMany of the indigenous cultures across the North American continent include tales of mysterious hair-covered creatures living in forests, and according to anthropologist David Daegling, these legends existed long before contemporary reports of the creature described as Bigfoot. These stories differed in their details regionally and between families in the same community, and are particularly prevalent in the Pacific Northwest.\nOn the Tule River Indian Reservation, petroglyphs created by a tribe of Yokuts at a site called Painted Rock are alleged by some to depict a group of Bigfoot called \"the Family\". The local tribespeople call the largest of the glyphs \"Hairy Man\" and they are estimated to be between 500 and 1000 years old. 16th century Spanish explorers and Mexican settlers told tales of the \"los Vigilantes Oscuros\", or \"Dark Watchers\", large creatures alleged to stalk their camps at night. In the region that is now Mississippi, a Jesuit priest was living with the Natchez in 1721 and reported stories of hairy creatures in the forest known to scream loudly and steal livestock.\nEcologist Robert Pyle argues that most cultures have accounts of human-like giants in their folk history, expressing a need for \"some larger-than-life creature\". Each language had its name for the creature featured in the local version of such legends. Many names mean something along the lines of \"wild man\" or \"hairy man\", although other names described common actions that it was said to perform, such as eating clams or shaking trees. Chief Mischelle of the Nlaka'pamux at Lytton, British Columbia told such a story to Charles Hill-Tout in 1898.\nThe Sts'ailes people tell stories about \"sasq'ets\", a shapeshifting creature that protects the forest. The name \"Sasquatch\" is the anglicized version of \"sasq'ets\" (sas-kets), roughly translating to \"hairy man\" in the Halq'emeylem language.\nMembers of the Lummi tell tales about creatures known as \"Ts'emekwes\". The stories are similar to each other in the general descriptions of \"Ts'emekwes\", but details differed among various family accounts concerning the creature's diet and activities. Some regional versions tell of more threatening creatures: the \"stiyaha\" or \"kwi-kwiyai\" were a nocturnal race and children were warned against saying the names so that the \"monsters\" would not come and carry them off to be killed. The Iroquois tells of an aggressive, hair covered giant with rock-hard skin known as the \"Ot ne yar heh\" or \"Stone Giant\", more commonly referred to as the \"Genoskwa\". In 1847, Paul Kane reported stories by the natives about \"skoocooms\", a race of cannibalistic wild men living on the peak of Mount St. Helens. U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt, in his 1893 book, \"The Wilderness Hunter\", writes of a story he was told by an elderly mountain man named Bauman in which a foul-smelling, bipedal creature ransacked his beaver trapping camp, stalked him, and later became hostile when it fatally broke his companion's neck. Roosevelt notes that Bauman appeared fearful while telling the story, but attributed the trapper's German ancestry to have potentially influenced him.\nLess menacing versions have been recorded, such as one by Reverend Elkanah Walker in 1840. Walker was a Protestant missionary who recorded stories of giants among the natives living near Spokane, Washington. These giants were said to live on and around the peaks of the nearby mountains, stealing salmon from the fishermen's nets.\nApe Canyon incident.\nOn July 16, 1924, an article in \"The Oregonian\" made national news when a story was published describing a conflict between a group of gold prospectors and a group of \"ape-men\" in a gorge near Mount St. Helens. The prospectors reported encountering \"gorilla men\" near their remote cabin. One of the men, Fred Beck, indicated that he struck one of the creatures with rifle fire. That night, they reported coming under attack by the creatures who were said to have thrown large rocks at the cabin, damaging the roof and knocking Beck unconscious. The men fled the area the following morning. The U.S. Forest Service investigated the sight of the alleged incident. The investigators found no compelling evidence of the event and concluded it was likely a fabrication. Stories of large, hair covered bipedal ape-men or \"mountain devils\" had been a persistent piece of folklore in the area for centuries prior to the alleged incident. Today, the area is known as Ape Canyon and is cemented within Bigfoot-related folklore.\nOrigin of the \"Bigfoot\" name.\nJerry Crew and Andrew Genzoli.\nIn 1958, Jerry Crew, bulldozer operator for a logging company in Humboldt County, California, discovered a set of large, human-like footprints sunk deep within the mud in the Six Rivers National Forest. Upon informing his coworkers, many claimed to have seen similar tracks on previous job sites as well as telling of odd incidents such as an oil drum weighing having been moved without explanation. The logging company men soon began utilizing \"Bigfoot\" to describe the apparent culprit. Crew initially believed someone was playing a prank on them. After observing more of these massive footprints, he contacted reporter Andrew Genzoli of the \"Humboldt Times\" newspaper. Genzoli interviewed lumber workers and wrote articles about the mysterious footprints, introducing the name \"Bigfoot\" in relation to the tracks and the local tales of large, hairy wild men. A plaster cast was made of the footprints and Crew appeared, holding one of the casts, on the front page of the newspaper on October 6, 1958. The story spread rapidly as Genzoli began to receive correspondence from major media outlets including the \"New York Times\" and \"Los Angeles Times\". As a result, the term Bigfoot became widespread as a reference to an apparently large, unknown creature leaving massive footprints in Northern California. As a result, Willow Creek and Humboldt County are considered by some to be the \"Bigfoot Capital of the World\".\nRay Wallace and Rant Mullens.\nIn 2002, the family of Jerry Crew's deceased coworker Ray Wallace revealed a collection of large, carved wooden feet stored in his basement. They stated that Wallace had been secretly making the footprints and was responsible for the tracks discovered by Crew. Wallace was inspired by another hoaxer, Rant Mullens, who revealed information about his hoaxes in 1982. \nIn the 1930s in Toledo, Washington, Mullens and a group of other foresters carved pairs of large feet made of wood and used them to create footprints in the mud to scare huckleberry pickers in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest. The group would also claim to be responsible for hoaxing the alleged Ape Canyon incident in 1924. Mullens and the group of foresters began referring to themselves as the St. Helens Apes, and would later have a cave dedicated to them.\nWallace, also from Toledo, knew Mullens and stated he collaborated with him to obtain a pair of the large wooden feet and subsequently used them to create footprints on the 1958 construction site as a means to scare away potential thieves.\nOther historical uses of \"Bigfoot\".\nIn the 1830s, a Wyandot chief was nicknamed \"Big Foot\" due to his significant size, strength and large feet. Potawatomi Chief Maumksuck, known as Chief \"Big Foot\", is today synonymous with the area of Walworth County, Wisconsin and has a state park and school named for him. William A. A. Wallace, a famous 19th century Texas Ranger, was nicknamed \"Bigfoot\" due to his large feet and today has a town named for him: Bigfoot, Texas. Lakota leader Spotted Elk was also called \"Chief Big Foot\". In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, at least two enormous marauding grizzly bears were widely noted in the press and each nicknamed \"Bigfoot.\" The first grizzly bear called \"Bigfoot\" was reportedly killed near Fresno, California in 1895 after killing sheep for 15 years; his weight was estimated at 2,000 pounds (900\u00a0kg). The second one was active in Idaho in the 1890s and 1900s between the Snake and Salmon rivers, and supernatural powers were attributed to it.\nRegional and other names.\nMany regions have differentiating names for the creatures. In Canada, the name \"Sasquatch\" is widely used although often interchangeably with the name \"Bigfoot\". The United States uses both of these names but also has numerous names and descriptions of the creatures depending on the region and area in which they are allegedly sighted. These include the \"Skunk ape\" in Florida and other southern states, \"Grassman\" in Ohio, \"Fouke Monster\" in Arkansas, \"Wood Booger\" in Virginia, the \"Monster of Whitehall\" in Whitehall, New York, \"Momo\" in Missouri, \"Honey Island Swamp Monster\" in Louisiana, \"Dewey Lake Monster\" in Michigan, \"Mogollon Monster\" in Arizona, the \"Big Muddy Monster\" in southern Illinois, and \"The Old Men of the Mountain\" in West Virginia. The term \"Wood Ape\" is also used by some as a means to deviate from the perceived mythical connotation surrounding the name \"Bigfoot\". Other names include \"Bushman\", \"Treeman\", and \"Wildman\".\nProposed explanations.\nVarious explanations have been suggested for sightings and to offer conjecture on what existing animal has been misidentified in supposed sightings of Bigfoot. Scientists typically attribute sightings to hoaxes or misidentifications of known animals and their tracks, particularly black bears.\nMisidentification.\nBears.\nScientists theorize that mistaken identification of American black bears as Bigfoot are a likely explanation for most reported sightings, particularly when observers view a subject from afar, are in dense foliage, or there are poor lighting conditions. Additionally, black bears have been observed and recorded walking upright, often as the result of an injury. While upright, adult black bears stand roughly , and grizzly bears roughly , both within the range of anecdotal Bigfoot reports.\nAccording to data scientist Floe Foxon, more people report seeing Bigfoot in areas with documented black bear populations. Foxon concludes, \"If bigfoot is there, it may be many bears\". Foxon acknowledges that alleged Bigfoot sightings have been reported in areas with minimal or no known black bear populations. She states, \"Although this may be interpreted as evidence for the existence of an unknown hominid in North America, it is also explained by misidentification of other animals (including humans), among other possibilities\".\nEscaped apes.\nSome have proposed that sightings of Bigfoot may simply be people observing and misidentifying known great apes such as chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans that have escaped from captivity such as zoos, circuses, and exotic pets belonging to private owners. This explanation is often proposed in relation to the Skunk ape, as some scientists argue the humid subtropical climate of the southeastern United States could potentially support a population of escaped apes.\nHumans.\nHumans have been mistaken for Bigfoot, with some incidents leading to injuries. In 2013, a 21-year-old man in Oklahoma was arrested after he told law enforcement he accidentally shot his friend in the back while their group was allegedly hunting for Bigfoot. In 2017, a shamanist wearing clothing made of animal furs was vacationing in a North Carolina forest when local reports of alleged Bigfoot sightings flooded in. The Greenville Police Department issued a public notice not to shoot Bigfoot for fear of mistakenly injuring or killing someone in a fur suit. In 2018, a person was shot at multiple times by a hunter near Helena, Montana who claimed he mistook him for a Bigfoot.\nAdditionally, some have attributed feral humans or hermits living in the wilderness as being another explanation for alleged Bigfoot sightings. One story, the Wild Man of the Navidad, tells of a wild ape-man who roamed the wilderness of eastern Texas in the mid-19th century, stealing food and goods from residents. A search party allegedly captured an escaped African slave attributed to the story. During the 1980s, several psychologically damaged American Vietnam veterans were stated by the state of Washington's veterans' affairs director, Randy Fisher, to have been living in remote wooded areas of the state.\nPareidolia.\nSome have proposed that pareidolia may explain Bigfoot sightings, specifically the tendency to observe human-like faces and figures within the natural environment. Photos and videos of poor quality alleged to depict Bigfoots are often attributed to this phenomenon and commonly referred to as \"Blobsquatch\".\nMisidentified vocalizations.\nThe majority of mainstream scientists maintain that the source of the sounds often attributed to Bigfoot are either hoaxes, anthropomorphization, or likely misidentified and produced by known animals such as owl, wolf, coyote, and fox.\nHoaxes.\nBoth Bigfoot believers and non-believers agree that many reported sightings are hoaxes. Author Jerome Clark argues that the Jacko Affair was a hoax, involving an 1884 newspaper report of an ape-like creature captured in British Columbia. He cites research by John Green, who found that several contemporaneous British Columbia newspapers regarded the alleged capture as highly dubious. He notes that the \"Mainland Guardian\" of New Westminster, British Columbia wrote, \"Absurdity is written on the face of it.\"\n\"Gigantopithecus\".\nBigfoot proponents Grover Krantz and Geoffrey H. Bourne both believed that Bigfoot could be a relict population of the extinct southeast Asian ape species \"Gigantopithecus blacki\". According to Bourne, \"G. blacki\" may have followed the many other species of animals that migrated across the Bering land bridge to the Americas. To date, no \"Gigantopithecus\" fossils have been found in the Americas. In Asia, the only recovered fossils have been of mandibles and teeth, leaving uncertainty about \"G. blacki\"'s locomotion. Krantz has argued that \"G. blacki\" could have been bipedal, based on his extrapolation from the shape of its mandible. However, the relevant part of the mandible is not present in any fossils. The consensus view is that \"G. blacki\" was quadrupedal, as its enormous mass would have made it difficult for it to adopt a bipedal gait.\nAnthropologist Matt Cartmill criticizes the \"G. blacki\" hypothesis:\nThe trouble with this account is that \"Gigantopithecus\" was not a hominin and maybe not even a crown group hominoid; yet the physical evidence implies that Bigfoot is an upright biped with buttocks and a long, stout, permanently adducted hallux. These are hominin autapomorphies, not found in other mammals or other bipeds. It seems unlikely that \"Gigantopithecus\" would have evolved these uniquely hominin traits in parallel.\nPaleoanthropologist Bernard G. Campbell writes: \"That \"Gigantopithecus\" is in fact extinct has been questioned by those who believe it survives as the Yeti of the Himalayas and the Sasquatch of the north-west American coast. But the evidence for these creatures is not convincing.\"\nExtinct hominidae.\nPrimatologist John R. Napier and anthropologist Gordon Strasenburg have suggested a species of \"Paranthropus\" as a possible candidate for Bigfoot's identity, such as \"Paranthropus robustus\", with its gorilla-like crested skull and bipedal gait \u2014despite the fact that fossils of \"Paranthropus\" are found only in Africa.\nMichael Rugg of the Bigfoot Discovery Museum presented a comparison between human, \"Gigantopithecus,\" and \"Meganthropus\" skulls (reconstructions made by Grover Krantz) in episodes 131 and 132 of the Bigfoot Discovery Museum Show. Bigfoot enthusiasts that think Bigfoot may be the \"missing link\" between apes and humans have promoted the idea that Bigfoot is a descendent of \"Gigantopithecus blacki\", but that ape diverged from orangutans around 12 million years ago and is not related to humans.\nSome suggest Neanderthal, \"Homo erectus\", or \"Homo heidelbergensis\" to be the creature, but, like all other great apes, no remains of any of those species have been found in the Americas.\nScientific view.\nExpert consensus is that allegations of the existence of Bigfoot are not credible. Belief in the existence of such a large, ape-like creature is more often attributed to hoaxes, confusion, or delusion rather than to sightings of a genuine creature. In a 1996 \"USA Today\" article, Washington State zoologist John Crane said, \"There is no such thing as Bigfoot. No data other than material that's clearly been fabricated has ever been presented.\"\nAs with other similar beings, climate and food supply issues would make such a creature's survival in reported habitats unlikely. Bigfoot is alleged to live in regions unusual for a large, nonhuman primate, i.e., temperate latitudes in the northern hemisphere; all recognized nonhuman apes are found in the tropics of Africa and Asia. Great apes have not been found in the fossil record in the Americas, and no Bigfoot remains are known to have been found. Phillips Stevens, a cultural anthropologist at the University at Buffalo, summarized the scientific consensus as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It defies all logic that there is a population of these things sufficient to keep them going. What it takes to maintain any species, especially a long-lived species, is you gotta have a breeding population. That requires a substantial number, spread out over a fairly wide area where they can find sufficient food and shelter to keep hidden from all the investigators.\nIn the 1970s, when Bigfoot \"experts\" were frequently given high-profile media coverage, McLeod writes that the scientific community generally avoided lending credence to such fringe theories by refusing even to debate them.\nPrimatologist Jane Goodall was asked for her personal opinion of Bigfoot in a 2002 interview on National Public Radio's \"Science Friday\". She joked, \"Well, now you will be amazed when I tell you that I'm sure that they exist.\"\nShe later added, chuckling, \"Well, I'm a romantic, so I always wanted them to exist\", and finally, \"You know, why isn't there a body? I can't answer that, and maybe they don't exist, but I want them to.\" In 2012, when asked again by the \"Huffington Post\", Goodall said \"I'm fascinated and would actually love them to exist,\" adding, \"Of course, it's strange that there has never been a single authentic hide or hair of the Bigfoot, but I've read all the accounts.\"\nPaleontologist and author Darren Naish states in a 2016 article for \"Scientific American\" that if \"Bigfoot\" existed, an abundance of evidence would also exist that cannot be found anywhere today, making the existence of such a creature exceedingly unlikely.\nNaish summarizes the evidence for \"Bigfoot\" that would exist if the creature itself existed: \nResearchers.\nIvan T. Sanderson and Bernard Heuvelmans, founders of the study of cryptozoology, spent parts of their career searching for Bigfoot. Later scientists who researched the topic included Jason Jarvis, Carleton S. Coon, George Allen Agogino and William Charles Osman Hill, though they later stopped their research due to lack of evidence for the alleged creature.\nJohn Napier asserts that the scientific community's attitude towards Bigfoot stems primarily from insufficient evidence. Other scientists who have shown varying degrees of interest in the creature are Grover Krantz, Jeffrey Meldrum, John Bindernagel, David J. Daegling, George Schaller, Russell Mittermeier, Daris Swindler, Esteban Sarmiento, and Mireya Mayor.\nFormal studies.\nOne study was conducted by John Napier and published in his book \"Bigfoot: The Yeti and Sasquatch in Myth and Reality\" in 1973. Napier wrote that if a conclusion is to be reached based on scant extant \"'hard' evidence,\" science must declare \"Bigfoot does not exist.\" However, he found it difficult to entirely reject thousands of alleged tracks, \"scattered over 125,000 square miles\" (325,000\u00a0km2) or to dismiss all \"the many hundreds\" of eyewitness accounts. Napier concluded, \"I am convinced that Sasquatch exists, but whether it is all it is cracked up to be is another matter altogether. There must be \"something\" in north-west America that needs explaining, and that something leaves man-like footprints.\"\nIn 1974, the National Wildlife Federation funded a field study seeking Bigfoot evidence. No formal federation members were involved and the study made no notable discoveries. Also in 1974, the now defunct North American Wildlife Research Team constructed a \"Bigfoot trap\" in the Rogue River\u2013Siskiyou National Forest. It was baited with animal carcasses and captured multiple bears, but no Bigfoot. Upkeep of the trap ended in the early 1980s, but in 2006 the United States Forest Service repaired the trap, which today is a tourist destination along the Collings Mountain hiking trail.\nBeginning in the late 1970s, physical anthropologist Grover Krantz published several articles and four book-length treatments of Bigfoot. However, his work was found to contain multiple scientific failings including falling for hoaxes.\nA study published in the \"Journal of Biogeography\" in 2009 by J.D. Lozier et al. used ecological niche modeling on reported sightings of Bigfoot, using their locations to infer preferred ecological parameters. They found a very close match with the ecological parameters of the American black bear. They also note that an upright bear looks much like a Bigfoot's purported appearance and consider it highly improbable that two species should have very similar ecological preferences, concluding that Bigfoot sightings are likely misidentified sightings of black bears.\nIn the first systematic genetic analysis of 30 hair samples that were suspected to be from Bigfoot-like creatures, only one was found to be primate in origin, and that was identified as human. A joint study by the University of Oxford and Lausanne's Cantonal Museum of Zoology and published in the \"Proceedings of the Royal Society B\" in 2014, the team used a previously published cleaning method to remove all surface contamination and the ribosomal mitochondrial DNA 12S fragment of the sample. The sample was sequenced and then compared to GenBank to identify the species origin. The samples submitted were from different parts of the world, including the United States, Russia, the Himalayas, and Sumatra. Other than one sample of human origin, all but two are from common animals. Black and brown bears accounted for most of the samples, other animals include cow, horse, dog/wolf/coyote, sheep, goat, deer, raccoon, porcupine, and tapir. The last two samples were thought to match a fossilized genetic sample of a 40,000 year old polar bear of the Pleistocene epoch; a second test identified the hairs as being from a rare type of brown bear.\nIn 2019, the FBI declassified an analysis it conducted on alleged Bigfoot hairs in 1976. Bigfoot researcher Peter Byrnes sent the FBI 15 hairs attached to a small skin fragment and asked if the bureau could assist him in identifying it. Jay Cochran, Jr., assistant director of the FBI's Scientific and Technical Services division responded in 1977 that the hairs were of deer family origin.\nClaims.\nClaims about the origins and characteristics of Bigfoot vary. The subject of Bigfoot has crossed over with other paranormal claims, including that Bigfoot, extraterrestrials, and UFOs are related or that Bigfoot are psychic, can shapeshift, are able to cross into different dimensions, or are completely supernatural in origin. Additionally, claims regarding Bigfoot have been associated with conspiracy theories including a government cover-up.\nSightings.\nAccording to \"Live Science\", there have been over 10,000 reported Bigfoot sightings in the continental United States, with reports from every state except the island of Hawaii. About one-third of all claims of Bigfoot sightings are located in the Pacific Northwest, with the remaining reports spread throughout the rest of North America. Most reports are considered mistakes or hoaxes, even by those researchers who claim Bigfoot exists.\nSightings predominantly occur in the northwestern region of Washington state, Oregon, Northern California, and British Columbia. According to data collected from the Bigfoot Field Researchers Organization's (BFRO) Bigfoot sightings database in 2019, Washington has over 2,000 reported sightings, California over 1,600, Pennsylvania over 1,300, New York and Oregon over 1,000, and Texas has just over 800. The debate over the legitimacy of Bigfoot sightings reached a peak in the 1970s, and Bigfoot has been regarded as the first widely popularized example of pseudoscience in American culture.\nAlleged behavior.\nSome Bigfoot researchers allege that Bigfoot throws rocks as territorial displays and for communication. Other alleged behaviors include audible blows struck against trees or \"wood knocking\", further alleged to be communicative.\nSkeptics argue that these behaviors are easily hoaxed.\nAdditionally, structures of broken and twisted foliage seemingly placed in specific areas have been attributed by some to Bigfoot behavior. In some reports, lodgepole pine and other small trees have been observed bent, uprooted, or stacked in patterns such as weaved and crisscrossed, leading some to theorize that they are potential territorial markings. Some instances have also included entire deer skeletons being suspended high in trees. Some researchers and enthusiasts believe Bigfoot construct teepee-like structures out of dead trees and foliage. In Washington state, a team of amateur Bigfoot researchers called the Olympic Project claimed to have discovered a collection of nests. The group brought in primatologists to study them, with the conclusion being that they appear to have been created by a primate. \nJeremiah Byron, host of the \"Bigfoot Society Podcast\", believes Bigfoot are omnivores, stating, \"They eat both plants and meat. I've seen accounts that they eat everything from berries, leaves, nuts, and fruit to salmon, rabbit, elk, and bear. Ronny Le Blanc, host of \"Expedition Bigfoot\" on the Travel Channel indicated he has heard anecdotal reports of Bigfoot allegedly hunting and consuming deer. \nSome Bigfoot researchers have reported the creatures moving or taking possession of intentional \"gifts\" left by humans such as food and jewelry, and leaving items in their places such as rocks and twigs. \nMany alleged sightings are reported to occur at night leading some cryptozoologists to hypothesize that Bigfoot may possess nocturnal tendencies. However, experts find such behavior untenable in a supposed ape- or human-like creature, as all known apes, including humans, are diurnal, with only lesser primates exhibiting nocturnality. Most anecdotal sightings of Bigfoot describe the creatures allegedly observed as solitary, although some reports have described groups being allegedly observed together.\nAlleged vocalizations.\nAlleged vocalizations such as howls, screams, moans, grunts, whistles, and even a form of supposed language have been reported and allegedly recorded. Some of these alleged vocalization recordings have been analyzed by individuals such as retired U.S. Navy cryptologic linguist Scott Nelson. He analyzed audio recordings from the early 1970s said to be recorded in the Sierra Nevada mountains dubbed the \"Sierra Sounds\" and stated, \"It is definitely a language, it is definitely not human in origin, and it could not have been faked\". Les Stroud has spoken of a strange vocalization he heard in the wilderness while filming \"Survivorman\" that he stated sounded primate in origin. A number of anecdotal reports of Bigfoot encounters have resulted in witnesses claiming to be disoriented, dizzy and anxious. Some Bigfoot researchers, such as paranormal author Nick Redfern, have proposed that Bigfoot may produce infrasound, which could explain reports of this nature.\nAlleged encounters.\nIn Fouke, Arkansas in 1971, a family reported that a large, hair-covered creature startled a woman after reaching through a window. This alleged incident caused hysteria in the Fouke area and inspired the horror movie, \"The Legend of Boggy Creek\" (1972). The report was later deemed a hoax.\nIn 1974, the \"New York Times\" presented the dubious tale of Albert Ostman, a Canadian prospector, who stated that he was kidnapped and held captive by a family of Bigfoot for six days in 1924.\nIn 1994, former U.S. Forest Service ranger Paul Freeman, a Bigfoot researcher, videotaped an alleged Bigfoot he reportedly encountered in the Blue Mountains in Oregon. The tape, often referred to as the \"Freeman footage\", continues to be scrutinized and its authenticity debated. Freeman had previously gained media recognition in the 1980s for documenting alleged Bigfoot tracks, claiming they possessed dermal ridges.\nOn May 26, 1996, Lori Pate, who was on a camping trip near the Washington state-Canada border, videotaped a dark subject she encountered running across a field and claimed it was Bigfoot. The film, dubbed the \"Memorial Day Bigfoot footage\", is often depicted in Bigfoot-related media, most notably in the 2003 documentary, \"\". In his research, Daniel Perez of the \"Skeptical Inquirer\" concluded that the footage was likely a hoax perpetuated by a human in a gorilla costume, stating, \"In the end, the Memorial Day footage will probably always be controversial, but these latest revelations make it very questionable evidence for Sasquatch. A lot of time and money has been spent on this footage, and perhaps that is the real reason talk it might be a hoax only falls on deaf ears when it comes to its supporters\".\nIn the early 1990s, 9-1-1 audio recordings were made public in which a homeowner in Kitsap County, Washington called law enforcement for assistance with a large subject, described by him as being \"all in black\", having entered his backyard. He previously reported to law enforcement that his dog was killed recently when it was thrown over his fence. Anthropologist Jeffrey Meldrum notes that any large predatory animal is potentially dangerous, specifically if provoked, but indicates that most anecdotal accounts of Bigfoot encounter result in the creatures hiding or fleeing from people. The 2021 Hulu documentary series, \"Sasquatch\", describes marijuana farmers telling stories of Bigfoots harassing and killing people within the Emerald Triangle region in the 1970s through the 1990s; and specifically the alleged murder of three migrant workers in 1993. Investigative journalist David Holthouse attributes the stories to illegal drug operations using the local Bigfoot lore to scare away the competition, specifically superstitious immigrants, and that the high rate of murder and missing persons in the area is attributed to human actions.\nSkeptics argue that many of these alleged encounters are easily hoaxed, the result of misidentification, or are outright fabrications.\nPatterson-Gimlin film.\nThe most well-known video of an alleged Bigfoot, the \"Patterson-Gimlin film\", was recorded on October 20, 1967, by Roger Patterson and Robert \"Bob\" Gimlin in an area called Bluff Creek in Northern California. The 59.5-second-long video has become an iconic piece of Bigfoot lore, and continues to be a highly scrutinized, analyzed, and debated subject.\nAcademic experts from related fields have typically judged the film as providing \"no supportive data of any scientific value\" with perhaps the most common proposed explanation being that it was a hoax.\nEvidence claims.\nA body print taken in the year 2000 from the Gifford Pinchot National Forest in Washington state dubbed the Skookum cast is also believed by some to have been made by a Bigfoot that sat down in the mud to eat fruit left out by researchers during the filming of an episode of the \"Animal X\" television show. Skeptics believe the cast to have been made by a known animal such as an elk. \nAlleged Bigfoot footprints are often suggested by Bigfoot enthusiasts as evidence for the creature's existence. Anthropologist Jeffrey Meldrum, who specializes in the study of primate bipedalism, possesses over 300 footprint casts that he maintains could not be made by wood carvings or human feet based on their anatomy, but instead are evidence of a large, non-human primate present today in North America. In 2005, Matt Crowley obtained a copy of an alleged Bigfoot footprint cast, called the \"Onion Mountain Cast\", and was able to painstakingly recreate the dermal ridges. Michael Dennett of the \"Skeptical Inquirer\" spoke to police investigator and primate fingerprint expert Jimmy Chilcutt in 2006 for comment on the replica and he stated, \"Matt has shown artifacts can be created, at least under laboratory conditions, and field researchers need to take precautions\". Chilcutt had previously stated that some of the alleged Bigfoot footprint plaster casts he examined were genuine due to the presence of \"unique dermal ridges\". Dennett states that Chilcutt published nothing to substantiate his claims, nor had anyone else published anything on that topic, with Chilcutt making his statements solely through a posting on the Internet. Dennett states further that no reviews on Chilcutt's statements had been performed beyond those by what Dennett states to be, \"other Bigfoot enthusiasts\".\nIn 2007, the Bigfoot Field Researchers Organization claimed to have photographs depicting a juvenile Bigfoot allegedly captured on a camera trap in the Allegheny National Forest. The Pennsylvania Game Commission, however, stated that the photos were of a bear with mange. The Pennsylvania Game Commission unsuccessfully attempted to locate the suspected mangey bear. Scientist Vanessa Woods, after estimating that the subject in the photo had approximately long arms and a torso, concluded it was more comparable to a chimpanzee.\nIn 2015, Centralia College professor Michael Townsend claimed to have discovered prey bones with \"human-like\" bite impressions on the southside of Mount St. Helens. Townsend claimed the bites were over two times wider than a human bite, and that he and two of his students also found 16-inch footprints in the area.\nMelba Ketchum press release.\nAfter what \"The Huffington Post\" described as \"a five-year study of purported Bigfoot (also known as Sasquatch) DNA samples\", but prior to peer review of the work, DNA Diagnostics, a veterinary laboratory headed by veterinarian Melba Ketchum issued a press release on November 24, 2012, claiming that they had found proof that the Sasquatch \"is a human relative that arose approximately 15,000 years ago as a hybrid cross of modern \"Homo sapiens\" with an unknown primate species.\" Ketchum called for this to be recognized officially, saying that \"Government at all levels must recognize them as an indigenous people and immediately protect their human and Constitutional rights against those who would see in their physical and cultural differences a 'license' to hunt, trap, or kill them.\" Failing to find a scientific journal that would publish their results, Ketchum announced on February 13, 2013, that their research had been published in the \"DeNovo Journal of Science\". The title \"DeNovo: Journal of Science\" in which the paper was published was found to be a Web site\u2014registered anonymously only nine days before the paper was announced\u2014whose first and only \"journal\" issue contained nothing but the \"Sasquatch\" article.Shortly after publication, the paper was analyzed and outlined by Sharon Hill of Doubtful News for the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. Hill reported on the questionable journal, mismanaged DNA testing and poor quality paper, stating that \"The few experienced geneticists who viewed the paper reported a dismal opinion of it noting it made little sense.\" \"The Scientist\" magazine also analyzed the paper, reporting that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Geneticists who have seen the paper are not impressed. \"To state the obvious, no data or analyses are presented that in any way support the claim that their samples come from a new primate or human-primate hybrid,\" Leonid Kruglyak of Princeton University told the Houston Chronicle. \"Instead, analyses either come back as 100 percent human, or fail in ways that suggest technical artifacts.\" The website for the DeNovo Journal of Science was setup [\"sic\"] on February 4, and there is no indication that Ketchum's work, the only study it has published, was peer reviewed.\nOrganizations and events.\nThere are several organizations dedicated to the research and investigation of Bigfoot sightings. The oldest and largest is the Bigfoot Field Researchers Organization (BFRO). The BFRO also provides a free database to individuals and other organizations. Their website includes reports from across North America that have been investigated by researchers to determine credibility. Another includes the North American Wood Ape Conservancy (NAWAC), a nonprofit organization. Other similar organizations exist throughout many U.S. states and their members come from a variety of backgrounds. In 2004, David Fahrenthold of \"The Washington Post\" published an article describing a feud between Bigfoot researchers in the eastern and western United States. Fahrenthold writes, \"On the one hand, East Coast Bigfooters say they have to fight discrimination from Western counterparts who think the creature does not live east of the Rocky Mountains. On the other, they have to deal with reports from a more urban population, which includes some who are unfamiliar with wildlife and apt to mistake a black bear for the missing link\".\nSome organizations, as well as private researchers and enthusiasts own and operate Bigfoot museums. In 2022, The Bigfoot Crossroads of America Museum and Research Center in Hastings, Nebraska was selected for addition into the archives of the U.S. Library of Congress.\nConferences and festivals dedicated to Bigfoot are attended by thousands of people. These events commonly include guest speakers, research and lore presentations, and sometimes live music, vendors, food trucks, and other activities such as costume contests and \"Bigfoot howl\" competitions. The Chamber of Commerce in Willow Creek, California has hosted the \"Bigfoot Daze\" festival annually since the 1960s, drawing on the popularity of the local lore. Some receive collaboration between local government and corporations, such as the Smoky Mountain Bigfoot Festival in Townsend, Tennessee which is sponsored by Monster Energy. The 2023 Bigfoot Festival in Marion, North Carolina saw approximately 40,000 people in attendance, resulting in a large economic boost for the small town of less than 8,000 residents.\nIn February 2016, the University of New Mexico at Gallup held a two-day Bigfoot conference at a cost of $7,000 in university funds.\nIn popular culture.\nBigfoot has a demonstrable impact in popular culture, and has been compared to Michael Jordan as a cultural icon. October 20, the anniversary of the Patterson-Gimlin film recording, is considered by some as \"National Sasquatch Awareness Day\". In 2018, \"Smithsonian\" magazine declared \"Interest in the existence of the creature is at an all-time high\". According to a poll taken in May 2020, about 1 in 10 American adults believe that Bigfoot is a real animal. The creature has inspired the naming of a medical company, music festival, amusement park ride, monster truck, a Marvel Comics superhero and more. Two National Basketball Association teams located in the Pacific Northwest have used Bigfoot as a mascot; Squatch of the now-defunct Seattle SuperSonics from 1993 until 2008, and Douglas Fur of the Portland Trail Blazers as of 2023. Legend the Bigfoot was selected as the official mascot for the 2022 World Athletics Championships being held in Eugene, Oregon.\nLaws and ordinances exist regarding harming or killing a Bigfoot, specifically in the state of Washington. In 1969 in Skamania County, a law was passed making killing a Bigfoot punishable by a felony conviction resulting in a monetary fine up to $10,000 or five years imprisonment. In 1984, the law was amended to a misdemeanor and the entire county was declared a \"Sasquatch refuge\". Whatcom County followed suit in 1991, declaring the county a \"Sasquatch Protection and Refuge Area\". In 2022, Grays Harbor County, Washington, passed a similar resolution after a local elementary school in Hoquiam submitted a classroom project asking for a \"Sasquatch Protection and Refuge Area\" to be granted. In 2021, Rep. Justin Humphrey, in an effort to bolster tourism, proposed an official Bigfoot hunting season in Oklahoma, indicating that the Wildlife Conservation Commission would regulate permits and the state would offer a $3 million bounty if such a creature was captured alive and unharmed.\nIn 2015, World Champion taxidermist Ken Walker completed what he believes to be a lifelike Bigfoot model based on the subject in the Patterson\u2013Gimlin film. He entered it into the 2015 World Taxidermy &amp; Fish Carving Championships in Springfield, Missouri and was the subject of Dan Wayne's 2019 documentary \"Big Fur\".\nSome have been critical of Bigfoot's rise to fame, arguing that the appearance of the creatures in cartoons, reality shows, and advertisements further reduces the potential validity of serious scientific research. Others propose that society's fascination with the concept of Bigfoot stems from human interest in mystery, the paranormal, and loneliness. In a 2022 article discussing recent Bigfoot sightings, journalist John Keilman of the \"Chicago Tribune\" states, \"As UFOs have gained newfound respect, becoming the subject of a Pentagon investigative panel, the alleged Bigfoot sighting is a reminder that other paranormal phenomena are still out there, entrancing true believers and amusing skeptics\".\nIn the 2018 podcast \"Wild Thing\", creator and journalist Laura Krantz argues that the concept of Bigfoot can be an important part of environmental interest and protection, stating, \"If you look at it from the angle that Bigfoot is a creature that has eluded capture or hasn't left any concrete evidence behind, then you just have a group of people who are curious about the environment and want to know more about it, which isn't that far off from what naturalists have done for centuries\". Bigfoot has been used in official government environmental protection campaigns, albeit comedically, by entities such as the U.S. Forest Service in 2015.\nThe act of searching for or researching the creatures is often referred to as \"Squatching\" or \"Squatch'n\", popularized by the Animal Planet reality series, \"Finding Bigfoot\". Bigfoot researchers and believers are often called \"Squatchers\".\nDuring the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, Bigfoot became a part of many North American social distancing promotion campaigns, with the creature being referred to as the \"Social Distancing Champion\" and as the subject of various internet memes related to the pandemic.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4010", "revid": "14327502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4010", "title": "Bing Crosby", "text": "American singer and actor (1903\u20131977)\nHarry Lillis \"Bing\" Crosby Jr. (May 3, 1903\u00a0\u2013 October 14, 1977) was an American singer and actor. The first multimedia star, he was one of the most popular and influential musical artists of the 20th century worldwide. He was a leader in record sales, radio ratings, and motion picture grosses from 1926 to 1977. He was one of the first global cultural icons. He made over 70 feature films and recorded more than 1,600 songs.\nHis early career coincided with recording innovations that allowed him to develop an intimate singing style that influenced many male singers who followed, such as Frank Sinatra, Perry Como, Dean Martin, Dick Haymes, Elvis Presley, and John Lennon. \"Yank\" magazine said that he was \"the person who had done the most for the morale of overseas servicemen\" during World War II. In 1948, American polls declared him the \"most admired man alive\", ahead of Jackie Robinson and Pope Pius XII. In 1948, \"Music Digest\" estimated that his recordings filled more than half of the 80,000 weekly hours allocated to recorded radio music in America.\nCrosby won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance in \"Going My Way\" (1944) and was nominated for its sequel, \"The Bells of St. Mary's\" (1945), opposite Ingrid Bergman, becoming the first of six actors to be nominated twice for playing the same character. He was the number one box office attraction for five consecutive years, 1944 to 1948. At his screen apex in 1946, Crosby starred in three of the year's five highest-grossing films: \"The Bells of St. Mary's\", \"Blue Skies\" and \"Road to Utopia\". In 1963, Crosby received the first Grammy Global Achievement Award. He is one of 33 people to have three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, in the categories of motion pictures, radio, and audio recording. He was also known for his collaborations with his friend Bob Hope, starring in the \"Road to...\" films from 1940 to 1962.\nCrosby influenced the development of the post World War II recording industry. After seeing a demonstration of a German broadcast quality reel-to-reel tape recorder brought to the United States by John T. Mullin, he invested $50,000 in the California electronics company Ampex to build copies. He then persuaded ABC to allow him to tape his shows. He became the first performer to prerecord his radio shows and master his commercial recordings onto magnetic tape. Crosby has been associated with the Christmas season since Irving Berlin's musical film \"Holiday Inn\", in which he starred and famously sang \"White Christmas\". Through audio recordings, he produced his radio programs with the same directorial tools and craftsmanship (editing, retaking, rehearsal, time shifting) used in motion picture production, a practice that became the industry standard. In addition to his work with early audio tape recording, he helped finance the development of videotape, bought television stations, bred racehorses, and co-owned the Pittsburgh Pirates baseball team, during which time the team won two World Series (1960 and 1971).\nEarly life.\nCrosby was born on May 3, 1903, in Tacoma, Washington, in a house his father built at 1112 North J Street. In 1906, his family moved to Spokane in Eastern Washington state, where he was raised. In 1913, his father built a house at 508 E. Sharp Avenue. The house sits on the campus of his alma mater, Gonzaga University, as a museum housing over 200 artifacts from his life and career, including his Oscar.\nHe was the fourth of seven children: brothers Laurence Earl \"Larry\" (1895\u20131975), Everett Nathaniel (1896\u20131966), Edward John \"Ted\" (1900\u20131973), and George Robert \"Bob\" (1913\u20131993); and two sisters, Catherine Cordelia (1904\u20131974) and Mary Rose (1906\u20131990). His parents were Harry Lowe Crosby (1870\u20131950), a bookkeeper, and Catherine Helen \"Kate\" (n\u00e9e Harrigan; 1873\u20131964). His mother was a second-generation Irish-American. His father was of Scottish and English descent; an ancestor, Simon Crosby, emigrated from England to New England in the 1630s during the Puritan migration to New England. Through another line, also on his father's side, Crosby is descended from \"Mayflower\" passenger William Brewster (c. 1567 \u2013 1644).\nIn 1917, Crosby took a summer job as property boy at Spokane's Auditorium, where he witnessed some of the acts of the day, including Al Jolson, who held him spellbound with ad-libbing and parodies of Hawaiian songs. He later described Jolson's delivery as \"electric\".\nCrosby graduated from Gonzaga High School in 1920 and enrolled at Gonzaga University. He attended Gonzaga for three years but did not earn a degree. As a freshman, he played on the university's baseball team. The university granted him an honorary doctorate in 1937. Gonzaga University houses a large collection of photographs, correspondence, and other material related to Crosby.\nOn November 8, 1937, after Lux Radio Theatre's adaptation of \"She Loves Me Not\", Joan Blondell asked Crosby how he got his nickname:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Crosby: \"Well, I'll tell you, back in the knee-britches day, when I was a wee little tyke, a mere broth of a lad, as we say in Spokane, I used to totter around the streets, with a gun on each hip, my favorite after school pastime was a game known as \"Cops and Robbers\", I didn't care which side I was on, when a cop or robber came into view, I would haul out my trusty six-shooters, made of wood, and loudly exclaim \"bing\"! \"bing\"!, as my luckless victim fell clutching his side, I would shout \"bing\"! \"bing\"!, and I would let him have it again, and then as his friends came to his rescue, shooting as they came, I would shout \"bing\"! \"bing\"! \"bing\"! \"bing\"! \"bing\"! \"bing\"! \"bing\"! \"bing\"!\"Blondell: \"I'm surprised they didn't call you \"Killer\" Crosby! Now tell me another story, Grandpa!Crosby: \"No, so help me, it's the truth, ask Mister De Mille.\"De Mille: \"I'll vouch for it, Bing.\"\nAs it happens, that story was pure whimsy for dramatic effect; the Associated Press had reported as early as February 1932\u2014as would later be confirmed by both Bing himself and his biographer Charles Thompson\u2014that it was in fact a neighbor\u2014Valentine Hobart, circa 1910\u2014who had named him \"Bingo from Bingville\" after a comic feature in the local paper called \"The Bingville Bugle\" which the young Harry liked. In time, Bingo got shortened to Bing.\nCareer.\nEarly years.\nIn 1923, Crosby was invited to join a new band composed of high-school students a few years younger than himself. Al and Miles Rinker (brothers of singer Mildred Bailey), James Heaton, Claire Pritchard and Robert Pritchard, along with drummer Crosby, formed the Musicaladers, who performed at dances both for high school students and club-goers. The group performed on Spokane radio station KHQ, but disbanded after two years. Crosby and Al Rinker obtained work at the Clemmer Theatre in Spokane (now known as the Bing Crosby Theater).\nCrosby was initially a member of a vocal trio called The Three Harmony Aces with Al Rinker accompanying on piano from the pit, to entertain between the films. Crosby and Al continued at the Clemmer Theatre for several months often with three other men\u2014Wee Georgie Crittenden, Frank McBride, and Lloyd Grinnell\u2014and they were billed The Clemmer Trio or The Clemmer Entertainers depending who performed.\nIn October 1925, Crosby and Rinker decided to seek fame in California. They traveled to Los Angeles, where Bailey introduced them to her show business contacts. The Fanchon and Marco Time Agency hired them for thirteen weeks for the revue \"The Syncopation Idea\" starting at the Boulevard Theater in Los Angeles and then on the Loew's circuit. They each earned $75 a week. As minor parts of \"The Syncopation Idea\" Crosby and Rinker started to develop as entertainers. They had a lively style that was popular with college students. After \"The Syncopation Idea\" closed, they worked in the Will Morrissey Music Hall Revue. They honed their skills with Morrissey. When they got a chance to present an independent act, they were spotted by a member of the Paul Whiteman organization.\nWhiteman needed something different to break up his musical selections, and Crosby and Rinker filled this requirement. After less than a year in show business, they were attached to one of the biggest names. Hired for $150 a week in 1926, they debuted with Whiteman on December 6 at the Tivoli Theatre in Chicago. Their first recording, in October 1926, was \"I've Got the Girl\" with Don Clark's Orchestra, but the Columbia-issued record was inadvertently recorded at a slow speed, which increased the singers' pitch when played at 78\u00a0rpm. Throughout his career, Crosby often credited Bailey for getting him his first important job in the entertainment business.\nThe Rhythm Boys.\nSuccess with Whiteman was followed by disaster when they reached New York. Whiteman considered letting them go. However, the addition of pianist and aspiring songwriter Harry Barris made the difference, and The Rhythm Boys were born. The additional voice meant they could be heard more easily in large New York theaters. Crosby gained valuable experience on tour for a year with Whiteman and performing and recording with Bix Beiderbecke, Jack Teagarden, Tommy Dorsey, Jimmy Dorsey, Eddie Lang, and Hoagy Carmichael. He matured as a performer and was in demand as a solo singer.\nCrosby became the star attraction of the Rhythm Boys. In 1928 he had his first number one hit, a jazz-influenced rendition of \"Ol' Man River\". In 1929, the Rhythm Boys appeared in the film \"King of Jazz\" with Whiteman, but Crosby's growing dissatisfaction with Whiteman led to the Rhythm Boys leaving his organization. They joined the Gus Arnheim Orchestra, performing nightly in the Coconut Grove of the Ambassador Hotel. Singing with the Arnheim Orchestra, Crosby's solos began to steal the show while the Rhythm Boys' act gradually became redundant. Harry Barris wrote several of Crosby's hits, including \"At Your Command\", \"I Surrender Dear\", and \"Wrap Your Troubles in Dreams\". When Mack Sennett signed Crosby to a solo film contract in 1931, a break with the Rhythm Boys became almost inevitable. Crosby married Dixie Lee in September 1930. After a threat of divorce in March 1931, he applied himself to his career.\nSuccess as a solo singer.\n\"15 Minutes with Bing Crosby\", his nationwide solo radio debut, began broadcasting on September 2, 1931. The weekly broadcast made him a hit. Before the end of the year, he with both Brunswick Records and CBS Radio. \"Out of Nowhere\", \"Just One More Chance\", \"At Your Command\", and \"I Found a Million Dollar Baby (in a Five and Ten Cent Store)\" were among the best-selling songs of 1931.\nTen of the top 50 songs of 1931 included Crosby with others or as a solo act. A \"Battle of the Baritones\" with singer Russ Columbo proved short-lived, replaced with the slogan \"Bing Was King\". Crosby played the lead in a series of musical comedy short films for Mack Sennett, signed with Paramount, and starred in his first full-length film 1932's \"The Big Broadcast\" (1932), the first of 55 films in which he received top billing. He would appear in almost 80 pictures. He signed a contract with Jack Kapp's new record company, Decca, in late 1934.\nHis first commercial sponsor on radio was Cremo Cigars and his fame spread nationwide. After a long run in New York, he went back to Hollywood to film \"The Big Broadcast\". His appearances, records, and radio work substantially increased his impact. The success of his first film brought him a contract with Paramount, and he began a pattern of making three films a year. He led his radio show for Woodbury Soap for two seasons while his live appearances dwindled. His records produced hits during the Depression when sales were down. Audio engineer Steve Hoffman stated, \"By the way, Bing actually saved the record business in 1934 when he agreed to support Decca founder Jack Kapp's crazy idea of lowering the price of singles from a dollar to 35 cents and getting a royalty for records sold instead of a flat fee. Bing's name and his artistry saved the recording industry. All the other artists signed to Decca after Bing did. Without him, Jack Kapp wouldn't have had a chance in hell of making Decca work and the Great Depression would have wiped out phonograph records for good.\"\nHis social life was frantic. His first son Gary was born in 1933 with twin boys following in 1934. By 1936, he replaced his former boss, Paul Whiteman, as host of the weekly NBC radio program \"Kraft Music Hall\", where he remained for the next ten years. \"Where the Blue of the Night (Meets the Gold of the Day)\", with his trademark whistling, became his theme song and signature tune.\nCrosby's vocal style helped take popular singing beyond the \"belting\" associated with Al Jolson and Billy Murray, who had been obligated to reach the back seats in New York theaters without the aid of a microphone. As music critic Henry Pleasants noted in \"The Great American Popular Singers\", something new had entered American music, a style that might be called \"singing in American\" with conversational ease. This new sound led to the popular epithet \"crooner\".\nCrosby admired Louis Armstrong for his musical ability, and the trumpet maestro was a formative influence on Crosby's singing style. When the two met, they became friends. In 1936, Crosby exercised an option in his Paramount contract to regularly star in an out-of-house film. Signing an agreement with Columbia for a single motion picture, Crosby wanted Armstrong to appear in a screen adaptation of \"The Peacock Feather\" that eventually became \"Pennies from Heaven\". Crosby asked Harry Cohn, but Cohn had no desire to pay for the flight or to meet Armstrong's \"crude, mob-linked but devoted manager, Joe Glaser\". Crosby threatened to leave the film and refused to discuss the matter. Cohn gave in; Armstrong's musical scenes and comic dialogue extended his influence to the silver screen, creating more opportunities for him and other African Americans to appear in future films. Crosby also ensured behind the scenes that Armstrong received equal billing with his white co-stars. Armstrong appreciated Crosby's progressive attitudes on race, and often expressed gratitude for the role in later years.\nDuring World War II, Crosby made live appearances before American troops who had been fighting in the European Theater. He learned how to pronounce German from written scripts and read propaganda broadcasts intended for German forces. The nickname \"Der Bingle\" was common among Crosby's German listeners and came to be used by his English-speaking fans. In a poll of U.S. troops at the close of World War II, Crosby topped the list as the person who had done the most for G.I. morale, ahead of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, General Dwight Eisenhower, and Bob Hope.\nThe June 18, 1945, issue of \"Life\" magazine stated, \"America's number one star, Bing Crosby, has won more fans, made more money than any entertainer in history. Today he is a kind of national institution.\" \"In all, 60,000,000 Crosby discs have been marketed since he made his first record in 1931. His biggest best seller is \"White Christmas\" 2,000,000 impressions of which have been sold in the U.S. and 250,000 in Great Britain.\" \"Nine out of ten singers and bandleaders listen to Crosby's broadcasts each Thursday night and follow his lead. The day after he sings a song over the air\u2014any song\u2014some 50,000 copies of it are sold throughout the U.S. Time and again Crosby has taken some new or unknown ballad, has given it what is known in trade circles as the 'big goose' and made it a hit single-handed and overnight... Precisely what the future holds for Crosby neither his family nor his friends can conjecture. He has achieved greater popularity, made more money, attracted vaster audiences than any other entertainer in history. And his star is still in the ascendant. His contract with Decca runs until 1955. His contract with Paramount runs until 1954. Records which he made ten years ago are selling better than ever before. The nation's appetite for Crosby's voice and personality appears insatiable. To soldiers overseas and to foreigners he has become a kind of symbol of America, of the amiable, humorous citizen of a free land. Crosby, however, seldom bothers to contemplate his future. For one thing, he enjoys hearing himself sing, and if ever a day should dawn when the public wearies of him, he will complacently go right on singing\u2014to himself.\"\nWhite Christmas.\nThe biggest hit song of Crosby's career was his recording of Irving Berlin's \"White Christmas\", which he introduced on a Christmas Day radio broadcast in 1941. A copy of the recording from the radio program is owned by the estate of Bing Crosby and was loaned to \"CBS Sunday Morning\" for their December 25, 2011, program. The song appeared in his films \"Holiday Inn\" (1942), and\u2014a decade later\u2014in \"White Christmas\" (1954). His record hit the charts on October 3, 1942, and rose to number 1 on October 31, where it stayed for 11 weeks. A holiday perennial, the song was repeatedly re-released by Decca, charting another sixteen times. It topped the charts again in 1945 and a third time in January 1947. The song remains the bestselling single of all time. His recording of \"White Christmas\", has sold over 50 million copies around the world. His recording was so popular that he was obliged to re-record it in 1947 using the same musicians and backup singers; the original 1942 master had become damaged due to its frequent use in pressing additional singles. In 1977, after Crosby died, the song was re-released and reached No. 5 in the UK Singles Chart. Crosby was dismissive of his role in the song's success, saying \"a jackdaw with a cleft palate could have sung it successfully\".\nMotion pictures.\nIn the wake of a solid decade of headlining mainly smash hit musical comedy films in the 1930s, Crosby starred with Bob Hope and Dorothy Lamour in six of the seven \"Road to\" musical comedies between 1940 and 1962 (Lamour was replaced with Joan Collins in \"The Road to Hong Kong\" and limited to a lengthy cameo), cementing Crosby and Hope as an on-and-off duo, despite never declaring themselves a \"team\" in the sense that Laurel and Hardy or Martin and Lewis (Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis) were teams. The series consists of \"Road to Singapore\" (1940), \"Road to Zanzibar\" (1941), \"Road to Morocco\" (1942), \"Road to Utopia\" (1946), \"Road to Rio\" (1947), \"Road to Bali\" (1952), and \"The Road to Hong Kong\" (1962). When they appeared solo, Crosby and Hope frequently made note of the other in a comically insulting fashion. They performed together countless times on stage, radio, film, and television, and made numerous brief and not so brief appearances together in movies aside from the \"Road\" pictures, \"Variety Girl\" (1947) being an example of lengthy scenes and songs together along with billing.\nIn the 1949 Disney animated film \"The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad\", Crosby provided the narration and song vocals for \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\" segment. In 1960, he starred in \"High Time\", a collegiate comedy with Fabian Forte and Tuesday Weld that predicted the emerging gap between him and the new younger generation of musicians and actors who had begun their careers after World War II. The following year, Crosby and Hope reunited for one more \"Road\" movie, \"The Road to Hong Kong\", which teamed them up with the much younger Joan Collins and Peter Sellers. Collins was used in place of their longtime partner Dorothy Lamour, whom Crosby felt was getting too old for the role, though Hope refused to do the film without her, and she instead made a lengthy and elaborate cameo appearance. Shortly before his death in 1977, he had planned another \"Road\" film in which he, Hope, and Lamour search for the Fountain of Youth.\nHe won an Academy Award for Best Actor for \"Going My Way\" in 1944 and was nominated for the 1945 sequel, \"The Bells of St. Mary's\". He received critical acclaim for his performance as an alcoholic entertainer in \"The Country Girl\" and received his third Academy Award nomination.\nTelevision.\n\"The Fireside Theater\" (1950) was his first television production. The series of 26-minute shows was filmed at Hal Roach Studios rather than performed live on the air. The \"telefilms\" were syndicated to individual television stations. He was a frequent guest on the musical variety shows of the 1950s and 1960s, appearing on various variety shows as well as numerous late-night talk shows and his own highly rated specials. Bob Hope memorably devoted one of his monthly NBC specials to his long intermittent partnership with Crosby titled \"On the Road With Bing\". Crosby was associated with ABC's \"The Hollywood Palace\" as the show's first and most frequent guest host and appeared annually on its Christmas edition with his wife Kathryn and his younger children, and continued after \"The Hollywood Palace\" was eventually canceled. In the early 1970s, he made two late appearances on the \"Flip Wilson Show\", singing duets with the comedian. His last TV appearance was a Christmas special, \"Merrie Olde Christmas\", taped in London in September 1977 and aired weeks after his death. It was on this special that he recorded a duet of \"The Little Drummer Boy\" and \"Peace on Earth\" with rock musician David Bowie. Their duet was released in 1982 as a single 45 rpm record and reached No. 3 in the UK singles charts. It has since become a staple of holiday radio and the final popular hit of Crosby's career. At the end of the 20th century, \"TV Guide\" listed the Crosby-Bowie duet one of the 25 most memorable musical moments of 20th-century television.\nBing Crosby Productions, affiliated with Desilu Studios and later CBS Television Studios, produced a number of television series, including Crosby's own unsuccessful ABC sitcom \"The Bing Crosby Show\" in the 1964\u20131965 season (with co-stars Beverly Garland and Frank McHugh). The company produced two ABC medical dramas, \"Ben Casey\" (1961\u20131966) and \"Breaking Point\" (1963\u20131964), the popular \"Hogan's Heroes\" (1965\u20131971) military comedy on CBS, as well as the lesser-known show \"Slattery's People\" (1964\u20131965).\nSinging style and vocal characteristics.\nCrosby was one of the first singers to exploit the intimacy of the microphone rather than use the deep, loud vaudeville style associated with Al Jolson. He was, by his own definition, a \"phraser\", a singer who placed equal emphasis on both the lyrics and the music. Paul Whiteman's hiring of Crosby, with phrasing that echoed jazz, particularly his bandmate Bix Beiderbecke's trumpet, helped bring the genre to a wider audience. In the framework of the novelty-singing style of the Rhythm Boys, he bent notes and added off-tune phrasing, an approach that was rooted in jazz. He had already been introduced to Louis Armstrong and Bessie Smith before his first appearance on record. Crosby and Armstrong remained warm acquaintances for decades, occasionally singing together in later years, e.g. \"Now You Has Jazz\" in the film \"High Society\" (1956). In Crosby's performances, the presence of jazz phrasing, jazz rhythm and jazz improvisation varied depending on the piece of music, but those were elements that Crosby frequently used. This can be observed particularly in his straight jazz work during the late 1920s/early 1930s, his recordings with Buddy Cole and His Trio from the mid-1950s, as well as in his numerous collaborations with such jazz musicians as Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald, Joe Venuti, or Eddie Lang. However, while Crosby can be called a jazz singer, he was not strictly only a jazz singer as he modeled the style and techniques to a broad scope of music that he performed, ranging from Jazz to Country to even such material as operetta arias.\nDuring the early portion of his solo career (about 1931\u20131934), Crosby's emotional, often pleading style of crooning was popular. But Jack Kapp, manager of Brunswick and later Decca, talked him into dropping many of his jazzier mannerisms in favor of a clear vocal style. Crosby credited Kapp for choosing hit songs, working with many other musicians, and most important, diversifying his repertoire into several styles and genres. Kapp helped Crosby have number one hits in Christmas music, Hawaiian music, and country music, and top-thirty hits in Irish music, French music, rhythm and blues, and ballads.\nCrosby elaborated on an idea of Al Jolson's: phrasing, or the art of making a song's lyric ring true. \"I used to tell Sinatra over and over,\" said Tommy Dorsey, \"there's only one singer you ought to listen to and his name is Crosby. All that matters to him is the words, and that's the only thing that ought to for you, too.\"\nCritic Henry Pleasants wrote in 1985: [While] the octave B flat to B flat in Bing's voice at that time [1930s] is, to my ears, one of the loveliest I have heard in forty-five years of listening to baritones, both classical and popular, it dropped conspicuously in later years. From the mid-1950s, Bing was more comfortable in a bass range while maintaining a baritone quality, with the best octave being G to G, or even F to F. In a recording he made of 'Dardanella' with Louis Armstrong in 1960, he attacks lightly and easily on a low E flat. This is lower than most opera basses care to venture, and they tend to sound as if they were in the cellar when they get there.\nCareer achievements.\nCrosby's was among the most popular and successful musical acts of the 20th century. \"Billboard\" magazine used different methodologies during his career. But his chart success remains impressive: 396 chart singles, including roughly 41 number 1 hits. Crosby had separate charting singles every year between 1931 and 1954; the annual re-release of \"White Christmas\" extended that streak to 1957. He had 24 separate popular singles in 1939 alone. Statistician Joel Whitburn at \"Billboard\" determined that Crosby was America's most successful recording act of the 1930s and again in the 1940s. In 1960 Crosby was honored as \"First Citizen of Record Industry\" based on having sold 200 million discs. Sources differ regarding the number of copies he sold: 300 million or even 500 million. The single \"White Christmas\" sold over 50 million copies according to \"Guinness World Records\".\nFor fifteen years (1934, 1937, 1940, 1943\u20131954), Crosby was among the top ten acts in box-office sales, and for five of those years (1944\u20131948) he topped the world. He sang four Academy Award-winning songs\u2014\"Sweet Leilani\" (1937), \"White Christmas\" (1942), \"Swinging on a Star\" (1944), \"In the Cool, Cool, Cool of the Evening\" (1951)\u2014and won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in \"Going My Way\" (1944).\nA survey in 2000 found that with 1,077,900,000 movie tickets sold, Crosby was the third-most-popular actor of all time, behind Clark Gable (1,168,300,000) and John Wayne (1,114,000,000). The \"International Motion Picture Almanac\" lists him in a tie for second-most years at number one on the All Time Number One Stars List with Clint Eastwood, Tom Hanks, and Burt Reynolds. His most popular film, \"White Christmas\", grossed $30 million in 1954 ($ million in current value).\nHe received 23 gold and platinum records, according to the book \"Million Selling Records\". The Recording Industry Association of America did not institute its gold record certification program until 1958 when Crosby's record sales were low. Before 1958, gold records were awarded by record companies. Crosby charted 23 \"Billboard\" hits from 47 recorded songs with the Andrews Sisters, whose Decca record sales were second only to Crosby's throughout the 1940s. They were his most frequent collaborators on disc from 1939 to 1952, a partnership that produced four million-selling singles: \"Pistol Packin' Mama\", \"Jingle Bells\", \"Don't Fence Me In\", and \"South America, Take it Away\". They made one film appearance together in \"Road to Rio\" singing \"You Don't Have to Know the Language\", and sang together on the radio throughout the 1940s and 1950s. They appeared as guests on each other's shows and on Armed Forces Radio Service during and after World War II. The quartet's Top-10 \"Billboard\" hits from 1943 to 1945 include \"The Vict'ry Polka\", \"There'll Be a Hot Time in the Town of Berlin (When the Yanks Go Marching In)\", and \"Is You Is or Is You Ain't (Ma' Baby?)\" and helped morale of the American public.\nIn 1962, Crosby was given the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. He has been inducted into the halls of fame for both radio and popular music. In 2007, he was inducted into the Hit Parade Hall of Fame and in 2008 the Western Music Hall of Fame.\nPopularity and influence.\nCrosby's popularity around the world was such that Dorothy Masuka, the best-selling African recording artist, stated that, \"Only Bing Crosby the famous American crooner sold more records than me in Africa.\" His great popularity throughout the continent led other African singers to emulate him, including Masuka, Dolly Rathebe, and M\u00edriam Makeba, known locally as \"The Bing Crosby of Africa.\"\nPresenter Mike Douglas commented in a 1975 interview, \"During my days in the Navy in World War II, I remember walking the streets of Calcutta, India, on the coast; it was a lonely night, so far from my home and from my new wife, Gen. I needed something to lift my spirits. As I passed a Hindu sitting on the corner of a street, I heard something surprisingly familiar. I came back to see the man playing one of those old Vitrolas, like those of RCA with the horn speaker. The man was listening to Bing Crosby sing, \"Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate The Positive\". I stopped and smiled in grateful acknowledgment. The Hindu nodded and smiled back. The whole world knew and loved Bing Crosby.\" His popularity in India led many Hindu singers to imitate and emulate him, notably Kishore Kumar, considered the \"Bing Crosby of India\".\nThroughout Europe and Russia, Crosby was also known as \"Der Bingle\", a pseudonym coined in 1944 by Bob Musel, an American journalist based in London, after Crosby had recorded three 15-minute programs with Jack Russin for broadcast to Germany from ABSIE.\nEntrepreneurship.\nAccording to Shoshana Klebanoff, Crosby became one of the richest men in the history of show business. He had investments in real estate, mines, oil wells, cattle ranches, race horses, music publishing, baseball teams, and television. He made a fortune from the Minute Maid Orange Juice Corporation, in which he was a principal stockholder.\nRole in early tape recording.\nDuring the Golden Age of Radio, performers had to create their shows live, sometimes even redoing the program a second time for the West Coast time zone. Crosby had to do two live radio shows on the same day, three hours apart, for the East and West Coasts. Crosby's radio career took a significant turn in 1945, when he clashed with NBC over his insistence that he be allowed to pre-record his radio shows. (The live production of radio shows was also reinforced by the musicians' union and ASCAP, which wanted to ensure continued work for their members.) In \"On the Air: The Encyclopedia of Old-Time Radio\", John Dunning wrote about German engineers having developed a tape recorder with a near-professional broadcast quality standard:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Crosby saw] an enormous advantage in prerecording his radio shows. The scheduling could now be done at the star's convenience. He could do four shows a week, if he chose, and then take a month off. But the networks and sponsors were adamantly opposed. The public wouldn't stand for 'canned' radio, the networks argued. There was something magical for listeners in the fact that what they were hearing was being performed and heard live everywhere, at that precise instant. Some of the best moments in comedy came when a line was blown and the star had to rely on wit to rescue a bad situation. Fred Allen, Jack Benny, Phil Harris, and also Crosby were masters at this, and the networks weren't about to give it up easily.\nCrosby's insistence eventually factored into the further development of magnetic tape sound recording and the radio industry's widespread adoption of it. He used his clout, both professionally and financially, for innovations in audio. But NBC and CBS refused to broadcast prerecorded radio programs. Crosby left the network and remained off the air for seven months, creating a legal battle with his sponsor Kraft that was settled out of court. He returned to broadcasting for the last 13 weeks of the 1945\u20131946 season.\nThe Mutual Network, on the other hand, pre-recorded some of its programs as early as 1938 for \"The Shadow\" with Orson Welles. ABC was formed from the sale of the NBC Blue Network in 1943 after a federal antitrust suit and was willing to join Mutual in breaking the tradition. ABC offered Crosby $30,000 per week to produce a recorded show every Wednesday that would be sponsored by Philco. He would get an additional $40,000 from 400 independent stations for the rights to broadcast the 30-minute show, which was sent to them every Monday on three lacquer discs that played ten minutes per side at rpm.\nMurdo MacKenzie of Bing Crosby Enterprises had seen a demonstration of the German Magnetophon in June 1947\u2014the same device that Jack Mullin had brought back from Radio Frankfurt with 50 reels of tape, at the end of the war. It was one of the magnetic tape recorders that BASF and AEG had built in Germany starting in 1935. The 6.5\u00a0mm ferric-oxide-coated tape could record 20 minutes per reel of high-quality sound. Alexander M. Poniatoff ordered Ampex, which he founded in 1944, to manufacture an improved version of the Magnetophone.\nCrosby hired Mullin to start recording his \"Philco Radio Time\" show on his German-made machine in August 1947 using the same 50 reels of I.G. Farben magnetic tape that Mullin had found at a radio station at Bad Nauheim near Frankfurt while working for the U.S. Army Signal Corps. The advantage was editing. As Crosby wrote in his autobiography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By using tape, I could do a thirty-five- or forty-minute show, then edit it down to the twenty-six or twenty-seven minutes the program ran. In that way, we could take out jokes, gags, or situations that didn't play well and finish with only the prime meat of the show; the solid stuff that played big. We could also take out the songs that didn't sound good. It gave us a chance to first try a recording of the songs in the afternoon without an audience, then another one in front of a studio audience. We'd dub the one that came off best into the final transcription. It gave us a chance to ad-lib as much as we wanted, knowing that excess ad-libbing could be sliced from the final product. If I made a mistake in singing a song or in the script, I could have some fun with it, then retain any of the fun that sounded amusing.\nMullin's 1976 memoir of these early days of experimental recording agrees with Crosby's account:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the evening, Crosby did the whole show before an audience. If he muffed a song then, the audience loved it\u2014thought it was very funny\u2014but we would have to take out the show version and put in one of the rehearsal takes. Sometimes, if Crosby was having fun with a song and not really working at it, we had to make it up out of two or three parts. This ad-lib way of working is commonplace in the recording studios today, but it was all new to us.\nCrosby invested $50,000 in Ampex with the intent to produce more machines. In 1948, the second season of Philco shows was recorded with the Ampex Model 200A and Scotch 111 tape from 3M. Mullin explained how one new broadcasting technique was invented on the Crosby show with these machines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One time Bob Burns, the hillbilly comic, was on the show, and he threw in a few of his folksy farm stories, which of course were not in Bill Morrow's script. Today they wouldn't seem very off-color, but things were different on radio then. They got enormous laughs, which just went on and on. We couldn't use the jokes, but Bill asked us to save the laughs. A couple of weeks later he had a show that wasn't very funny, and he insisted that we put in the salvaged laughs. Thus the laugh-track was born.\nCrosby started the tape recorder revolution in America. In his 1950 film \"Mr. Music\", he is seen singing into an Ampex tape recorder that reproduced his voice better than anything else. Also quick to adopt tape recording was his friend Bob Hope. He gave one of the first Ampex Model 300 recorders to his friend, guitarist Les Paul, which led to Paul's invention of multitrack recording. His organization, the Crosby Research Foundation, held tape recording patents and developed equipment and recording techniques such as the laugh track that are still in use.\nWith Frank Sinatra, Crosby was one of the principal backers for the United Western Recorders studio complex in Los Angeles.\nVideotape development.\nMullin continued to work for Crosby to develop a videotape recorder (VTR). Television production was mostly live television in its early years, but Crosby wanted the same ability to record that he had achieved in radio. \"The Fireside Theater\" (1950) sponsored by Procter &amp; Gamble, was his first television production. Mullin had not yet succeeded with videotape, so Crosby filmed the series of 26-minute shows at the Hal Roach Studios, and the \"telefilms\" were syndicated to individual television stations.\nCrosby continued to finance the development of videotape. Bing Crosby Enterprises gave the world's first demonstration of videotape recording in Los Angeles on November 11, 1951. Developed by John T. Mullin and Wayne R. Johnson since 1950, the device aired what were described as \"blurred and indistinct\" images, using a modified Ampex 200 tape recorder and standard quarter-inch (6.3\u00a0mm) audio tape moving at per second.\nTelevision station ownership.\nA Crosby-led group purchased station KCOP-TV, in Los Angeles, California, in 1954. NAFI Corporation and Crosby purchased television station KPTV in Portland, Oregon, for $4 million on September 1, 1959. In 1960, NAFI purchased KCOP from Crosby's group. In the early 1950s, Crosby helped establish the CBS television affiliate in his hometown of Spokane, Washington. He partnered with Ed Craney, who owned the CBS radio affiliate KXLY (AM) and built a television studio west of Crosby's alma mater, Gonzaga University. After it began broadcasting, the station was sold within a year to Northern Pacific Radio and Television Corporation.\nThoroughbred horse racing.\nCrosby was a fan of thoroughbred horse racing and bought his first racehorse in 1935. In 1937, he became a founding partner of the Del Mar Thoroughbred Club and a member of its board of directors. Operating from the Del Mar Racetrack at Del Mar, California, the group included millionaire businessman Charles S. Howard, who owned a successful racing stable that included Seabiscuit. Charles' son, Lindsay C. Howard, became one of Crosby's closest friends; Crosby named his son Lindsay after him, and would purchase his 40-room Hillsborough, California estate from Lindsay in 1965.\nCrosby and Lindsay Howard formed Binglin Stable to race and breed thoroughbred horses at a ranch in Moorpark in Ventura County, California. They also established the Binglin Stock Farm in Argentina, where they raced horses at Hip\u00f3dromo de Palermo in Palermo, Buenos Aires. A number of Argentine-bred horses were purchased and shipped to race in the United States. On August 12, 1938, the Del Mar Thoroughbred Club hosted a $25,000 winner-take-all match race won by Charles S. Howard's Seabiscuit over Binglin's horse Ligaroti. In 1943, Binglin's horse Don Bingo won the Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park in Elmont, New York. The Binglin Stable partnership came to an end in 1953 as a result of a liquidation of assets by Crosby, who needed to raise enough funds to pay the hefty federal and state inheritance taxes on his deceased wife's estate. The Bing Crosby Breeders' Cup Handicap at Del Mar Racetrack is named in his honor.\nSports.\nCrosby had a keen interest in sports. In the 1930s, his friend and former college classmate, Gonzaga head coach Mike Pecarovich, appointed Crosby as an assistant football coach. From 1946 until his death, he owned a 25% share of the Pittsburgh Pirates. Although he was passionate about the team, he was too nervous to watch the deciding game 7 of the 1960 World Series, choosing to go to Paris with Kathryn and listen to its radio broadcast. Crosby had arranged for Ampex, another of his financial investments, to record the NBC telecast on kinescope. The game was one of the most famous in baseball history, capped off by Bill Mazeroski's walk-off home run that won the game for Pittsburgh. He apparently viewed the complete film just once, and then stored it in his wine cellar, where it remained undisturbed until it was discovered in December 2009. The restored broadcast was shown on MLB Network in December 2010.\nCrosby was also an avid golfer. He first took up golf at age 12 as a caddy. He was already spending much time on the golf course while touring the country in a vaudeville act or with Paul Whiteman's orchestra in the mid to late 1920s. Eventually, Crosby became accomplished at the sport, at his best reaching a two handicap. He competed in both the British and U.S. Amateur championships, was a five-time club champion at Lakeside Golf Club in Hollywood, and once made a hole-in-one on the 16th hole at Cypress Point.\nIn 1937, Crosby hosted the first 'Crosby Clambake', a pro-am tournament at Rancho Santa Fe Golf Club in Rancho Santa Fe, California, the event's location prior to World War II. After the war, the event resumed play in 1947 on golf courses in Pebble Beach, where it has been played ever since. Now the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach Pro-Am, the tournament is a staple of the PGA Tour, having featured Hollywood stars and other celebrities.\nIn 1950, Crosby became the third person to win the William D. Richardson award, which is given to a non-professional golfer \"who has consistently made an outstanding contribution to golf\". In 1978, he and Bob Hope were voted the Bob Jones Award, the highest honor given by the United States Golf Association in recognition of distinguished sportsmanship. He is a member of the World Golf Hall of Fame, having been inducted in 1978.\nCrosby also was a keen fisherman. In the summer of 1966, he spent a week as the guest of Lord Egremont, staying in Cockermouth and fishing on the River Derwent. His trip was filmed for \"The American Sportsman\" on ABC, although all did not go well at first as the salmon were not running. He did make up for it at the end of the week by catching a number of sea trout.\nIn Front Royal Virginia a baseball stadium was named in his honor. The Front Royal Cardinals of the Valley Baseball League play their home games here. The Bing is also home to both of the county's high schools baseball teams.\nPersonal life.\nCrosby was married twice. His first wife was actress and nightclub singer Dixie Lee, to whom he was married from 1930 until her death from ovarian cancer in 1952. They had four sons: Gary, twins Dennis and Phillip, and Lindsay. \"\" (1947) is based on Lee's life. The Crosby family lived at 10500 Camarillo Street in North Hollywood for more than five years. After his wife died, Crosby had relationships with model Pat Sheehan (who married his son Dennis in 1958) and actresses Inger Stevens and Grace Kelly before marrying actress Kathryn Grant, who converted to Catholicism, in 1957. They had three children: Harry Lillis III (who played Bill in \"Friday the 13th\"), Mary Frances (best known for portraying Kristin Shepard on TV's \"Dallas\"), and Nathaniel (the 1981 U.S. Amateur champion in golf).\nParticularly during the late 1930s and through the 1940s Bing Crosby's domestic life was dominated by his wife's excessive drinking. His efforts to cure her with the help of specialists failed. Tired of Dixie's drinking, he even asked her for a divorce in January 1941. During the 1940s, Crosby consistently had difficulties trying to stay away from home while also trying to be there as much as possible for his children.\nCrosby had one confirmed extramarital affair between 1945 and the late 1940s, while married to his first wife Dixie. Actress Patricia Neal (who herself at the time was having an affair with the married Gary Cooper) wrote in her 1988 autobiography \"As I Am\" about a trip on a cruise ship to England with actress Joan Caulfield in 1948:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She [Joan Caulfield] was a lovely girl and we had some good talks. She, too, was in love with an older married man who was quite as famous as Gary [Cooper]. She confided to me that she desperately wanted to marry Bing Crosby. We were in the same boat in more ways than one, but I could not tell her so.\nIn the most recent Crosby biography, \"Bing Crosby: Swinging on a Star; the War Years, 1940-1946\", Gary Giddins published excerpts from an original diary of two sisters, Violet and Mary Barsa, who, as young women, used to stalk Crosby in New York City during December 1945 and January 1946 and who detailed their observations in the diary. The document reveals that during that time Crosby was indeed taking Joan Caulfield out to dinner, visited theaters and opera houses with her and that Caulfield and a person in her company entered the Waldorf Hotel where Crosby was staying. However, the document also clearly indicates that at their meetings a third person, on most instances Caulfield's mother, was present. In 1954, Joan Caulfield admitted to a relationship with a \"top film star\" who was a married man with children who at the end chose his wife and children over her. Joan's sister Betty Caulfield confirmed the romantic relationship between Joan and Bing Crosby. Despite being a Catholic, Crosby was seriously considering divorce in order to marry Caulfield. Either in December 1945 or January 1946 Crosby approached Cardinal Francis Spellman with his difficulties with dealing with his wife's alcoholism and his love for Caulfield and his plan to file for divorce. According to Betty Caulfield, Spellman told Crosby: \"Bing, you are Father O'Malley and under no circumstances can Father O'Malley get a divorce.\" Around the same time, Crosby talked to his mother about his intentions and she protested. Ultimately, Crosby chose to end the relationship and to stay with his wife. Bing and Dixie reconciled and he continued trying to help her overcome her alcohol issues.\nCrosby reportedly had an alcohol problem between the late 1920s and early 1930s, but he got a handle on his drinking in 1931.\nCrosby told Barbara Walters in a 1977 televised interview that he thought marijuana should be legalized because he figured it would make it much easier for the authorities to have a proper legal control over the market.\nIn December 1999 the New York Post published an article by Bill Hoffmann and Murray Weiss called \"Bing Crosby's Single Life\" which claimed that \"recently published\" FBI files revealed connections with figures in the Mafia \"since his youth\". However, Crosby's FBI files had already been published in 1992 and provide no indication that Crosby had ties to the Mafia except for one major, but accidental encounter in Chicago in 1929 which is not mentioned in the files, but is told by Crosby himself in his as-told-to autobiography \"Call Me Lucky\". In the over 280 pages of Crosby's FBI files all but one reference to organized crime or gambling dens are content of a few of the many threats that Bing Crosby received throughout his life. The comments made by FBI investigators in the memos discredited the claims made in the letters. In all the files there is only one single reference to a person associated with the Mafia. In a memorandum dated January 16, 1959, it is said:\n\"The Salt Lake City Office has developed information indicating that Moe Dalitz received an invitation to join a deer hunting party at Bing Crosby's Elko, Nevada, ranch, together with the crooner, his Las Vegas dentist and several business associates.\"\nHowever, Crosby had already sold his Elko ranch a year earlier, in 1958, and it is doubtful how much he was really involved in that meeting.\nCrosby and his family lived in the San Francisco area for many years. In 1963, he and his wife Kathryn moved with their 3 young children from Los Angeles to a $175,000 ten-bedroom Tudor estate in Hillsborough because they did not want to raise their children in Hollywood, according to son Nathaniel. This house went up for sale by its current owners in 2021 for $13.75 million.\nIn 1965, the Crosbys moved to a larger, 40-room French chateau-style house on nearby Jackling Drive, where Kathryn Crosby continued to reside after Bing's death. This house served as a setting for some of the family's Minute Maid orange juice television commercials.\nAfter Crosby's death, his eldest son, Gary, wrote a highly critical memoir, \"Going My Own Way\" (1983), depicting his father as cruel, cold, remote, and physically and psychologically abusive.\nWhile acknowledging that corporal punishments took place, there were reports of all of Gary's immediate siblings distancing themselves from the abuse claims, either in public or in private.\nCrosby's younger son Phillip disputed his brother Gary's claims about their father. Around the time Gary published his claims, Phillip stated to the press that \"Gary is a whining, bitching crybaby, walking around with a two-by-four on his shoulder and just daring people to nudge it off.\" Nevertheless, Phillip did not deny that Crosby believed in corporal punishment. In an interview with \"People\" magazine, Phillip stated that \"we never got an extra whack or a cuff we didn't deserve\".\nShortly before Gary's book was actually published, Lindsay said, \"I'm glad [Gary] did it. I hope it clears up a lot of the old lies and rumors.\" Unlike Gary, Lindsay stated that he preferred to remember \"all the good things I did with my dad and forget the times that were rough\". \"Lindsay Crosby supported his brother (Gary) at the time of its publication but had a tempered view of its revelations. 'I never expected affection from my father so it didn't bother me,' he once told an interviewer.'\" However, after the book was published, Lindsay addressed the abuse claims and what the media had made out of them:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was a good father. It was a happy childhood. We had our differences, but we were raised to respect our parents, to do what they said. If we didn't, we got punished. As far as I know [Gary] wrote it because it was about himself and what he felt his life was about. I don't think it had anything to do with Daddy Dearest. I understand what he's trying to prove. I don't think he did anything wrong.\nDennis Crosby reportedly \"said his older brother (Gary) was the most severely treated of the four boys. 'He got the first licking, and we got the second.'\"\nGary's first wife of 19 years, Barbara Cosentino, of whom Gary wrote in his book, \"I could confide in her about Mom and Dad and my childhood\", and with whom Gary stayed friendly after the divorce, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do not know if what's in the book is true but he never said anything to me about whippings. I think it all got a little out of hand. I certainly never witnessed anything between him and his father. I couldn't believe it when I read the book because it just didn't sound like Gary. I can't pinpoint it. Gary said to me before I read it, \"It's not the same book I wrote.\"\nGary Crosby's adopted son, Steven Crosby, said in a 2003 interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the early years, I think, like any family you are going to butt heads with your mom, your dad and your brothers and sisters. I think there was some father-son stuff that everyone has. The book was I think an attempt of my dad to come to grips with some things in his life.\nBing's younger brother, singer and jazz bandleader Bob Crosby, recalled at the time of Gary's revelations that Bing was a \"disciplinarian\", as their mother and father had been. He added, \"We were brought up that way.\"\nIn an interview for the same article, Gary clarified that Bing \"was like a lot of fathers of that time. He was not out to be vicious, to beat children for his kicks.\"\nThe author of the most recent biography on Bing Crosby, Gary Giddins, claims that Gary Crosby's memoir is not reliable on many instances and cannot be trusted on the abuse stories.\nCrosby's will established a blind trust in which none of the sons received an inheritance until they reached the age of 65, intended by Crosby to keep them out of trouble. They were instead receiving several thousand dollars per month from a trust left in 1952 by their mother, Dixie Lee. The trust, tied to high-performing oil stocks, folded in December 1989 following the 1980s oil glut.\nLindsay Crosby died in 1989 at age 51, and Dennis Crosby died in 1991 at age 56, both by suicide from self-inflicted gunshot wounds. Gary Crosby died of lung cancer in 1995 at age 62, and Phillip Crosby died of a heart attack in 2004 at age 69.\nWidow Kathryn Crosby dabbled in local theater productions intermittently and appeared in television tributes to her late husband.\nNathaniel Crosby, Crosby's younger son from his second marriage, is a former high-level golfer who won the U.S. Amateur in 1981 at age 19, becoming the youngest winner in the history of that event at the time. Harry Crosby is an investment banker who occasionally makes singing appearances.\nDenise Crosby, Dennis Crosby's daughter, is also an actress and is known for her role as Tasha Yar on \"\" and for the recurring role of the Romulan Sela after her withdrawal from the series as a regular cast member. She also appeared in the 1989 film adaptation of Stephen King's novel \"Pet Sematary\".\nIn 2006, Crosby's niece through his sister Mary Rose, Carolyn Schneider, published the laudatory book \"Me and Uncle Bing\".\nThere have been disputes between Crosby's two families beginning in the late 1990s. When Dixie died in 1952, her will provided that her share of the community property be distributed in trust to her sons. After Crosby's death in 1977, he left the residue of his estate to a marital trust for the benefit of his widow, Kathryn, and HLC Properties, Ltd., was formed for the purpose of managing his interests, including his right of publicity. In 1996, Dixie's trust sued HLC and Kathryn for declaratory relief as to the trust's entitlement to interest, dividends, royalties, and other income derived from the community property of Crosby and Dixie. In 1999, the parties settled for approximately $1.5 million. Relying on a retroactive amendment to the California Civil Code, Dixie's trust brought suit again, in 2010, alleging that Crosby's right of publicity was community property, and that Dixie's trust was entitled to a share of the revenue it produced. The trial court granted Dixie's trust's claim. The California Court of Appeal reversed, however, holding that the 1999 settlement barred the claim. In light of the court's ruling, it was unnecessary for the court to decide whether a right of publicity can be characterized as community property under California law.\nHealth and death.\nFollowing his recovery from a life-threatening fungal infection in his right lung in January 1974, Crosby emerged from semi-retirement to start a new spate of albums and concerts. On March 20, 1977, after videotaping a CBS concert special, \"Bing \u2013 50th Anniversary Gala\", at the Ambassador Auditorium with Bob Hope looking on, Crosby fell off the stage into an orchestra pit, rupturing a disc in his back requiring a month-long stay in the hospital. His first performance after the accident was his last American concert, on August 16, 1977, the day Elvis Presley died, at the Concord Pavilion in Concord, California. When the electric power failed during his performance, he continued singing without amplification.\nIn September, Crosby, his family and singer Rosemary Clooney began a concert tour of Britain that included two weeks at the London Palladium. While in the UK, Crosby recorded his final album, \"Seasons\", and his final TV Christmas special with guest David Bowie on September 11 (which aired a little over a month after Crosby's death). His last concert was in the Brighton Centre on October 10, four days before his death, with British entertainer Gracie Fields in attendance. The following day he made his final appearance in a recording studio and sang eight songs at the BBC's Maida Vale Studios for a radio program, which also included an interview with Alan Dell. Accompanied by the Gordon Rose Orchestra, Crosby's last recorded performance was of the song \"Once in a While\". Later that afternoon, he met with Chris Harding to take photographs for the \"Seasons\" album jacket.\nOn October 13, 1977, Crosby flew alone to Spain to play golf and hunt partridge. On October 14, at the La Moraleja Golf Course near Madrid, Crosby played 18 holes of golf. His partner was World Cup champion Manuel Pi\u00f1ero; their opponents were club president C\u00e9sar de Zulueta and Valent\u00edn Barrios. According to Barrios, Crosby was in good spirits throughout the day, and was photographed several times during the round. At the ninth hole, construction workers building a house nearby recognized him, and when asked for a song, Crosby sang \"Strangers in the Night\". Crosby, who had a 13 handicap, won with his partner by one stroke. At about 6:30 pm, as Crosby and his party headed back to the clubhouse, Crosby said, \"That was a great game of golf, fellas. Let's go have a Coca-Cola.\" These were his last words. About from the clubhouse entrance, Crosby collapsed and died instantly from a massive heart attack. At the clubhouse and later in the ambulance, house physician Dr. Laiseca tried to revive him, but was unsuccessful. At Reina Victoria Hospital he was administered the last rites of the Catholic Church and was pronounced dead. He was 74 years old.\nOn October 18, 1977, following a private funeral Mass at St. Paul's Catholic Church in Westwood, Crosby was buried at Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City, California.\nLegacy.\nCrosby is a member of the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame in the radio division.\nThe family created an official website on October 14, 2007, the 30th anniversary of Crosby's death.\nIn his autobiography \"Don't Shoot, It's Only Me!\" (1990), Bob Hope wrote, \"Dear old Bing, as we called him, the \"Economy-sized Sinatra\". And what a voice. God I miss that voice. I can't even turn on the radio around Christmas time without crying anymore.\"\nCalypso musician Roaring Lion wrote a tribute song in 1939 titled \"Bing Crosby\", in which he wrote: \"Bing has a way of singing with his very heart and soul / Which captivates the world / His millions of listeners never fail to rejoice / At his golden voice...\"\nBing Crosby Stadium in Front Royal, Virginia, was named after Crosby in honor of his fundraising and cash contributions for its construction from 1948 to 1950.\nIn 2006, the former Metropolitan Theater of Performing Arts ('The Met') in Spokane, Washington, was renamed to The Bing Crosby Theater.\nCrosby has three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. One each for radio, recording, and motion pictures.\nCompositions.\nCrosby wrote or co-wrote lyrics to 22 songs. His composition \"At Your Command\" was number 1 for three weeks on the U.S. pop singles chart beginning on August 8, 1931. \"I Don't Stand a Ghost of a Chance With You\" was his most successful composition, recorded by Duke Ellington, Frank Sinatra, Thelonious Monk, Billie Holiday, and Mildred Bailey, among others. Songs co-written by Crosby include:\nGrammy Hall of Fame.\nFour performances by Bing Crosby have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have \"qualitative or historical significance\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4011", "revid": "41438237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4011", "title": "Base", "text": "Base or BASE may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "4012", "revid": "44246576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4012", "title": "Basel Convention", "text": "Environmental treaty on disposal of waste\nThe Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, usually known as the Basel Convention, is an international treaty that was designed to reduce the movements of hazardous waste between nations, and specifically to prevent transfer of hazardous waste from developed to less developed countries. It does not, however, address the movement of radioactive waste. The convention is also intended to minimize the rate and toxicity of wastes generated, to ensure their environmentally sound management as closely as possible to the source of generation, and to assist developing countries in environmentally sound management of the hazardous and other wastes they generate.\nThe convention was opened for signature on 21 March 1989, and entered into force on 5 May 1992. As of June 2023, there are 191 parties to the convention. In addition, Haiti and the United States have signed the convention but not ratified it.\nFollowing a petition urging action on the issue signed by more than a million people around the world, most of the world's countries, but not the United States, agreed in May 2019 to an amendment of the Basel Convention to include plastic waste as regulated material. Although the United States is not a party to the treaty, export shipments of plastic waste from the United States are now \"criminal traffic as soon as the ships get on the high seas,\" according to the Basel Action Network (BAN), and carriers of such shipments may face liability, because the transportation of plastic waste is prohibited in just about every other country.\nHistory.\nWith the tightening of environmental laws (for example, RCRA) in developed nations in the 1970s, disposal costs for hazardous waste rose dramatically. At the same time, the globalization of shipping made cross-border movement of waste easier, and many less developed countries were desperate for foreign currency. Consequently, the trade in hazardous waste, particularly to poorer countries, grew rapidly. In 1990, OECD countries exported around 1.8 million tons of hazardous waste. Although most of this waste was shipped other developed countries, a number of high-profile incidents of hazardous waste-dumping led to calls for regulation.\nOne of the incidents which led to the creation of the Basel Convention was the \"Khian Sea\" waste disposal incident, in which a ship carrying incinerator ash from the city of Philadelphia in the United States dumped half of its load on a beach in Haiti before being forced away. It sailed for many months, changing its name several times. Unable to unload the cargo in any port, the crew was believed to have dumped much of it at sea.\nAnother incident was a 1988 case in which five ships transported 8,000 barrels of hazardous waste from Italy to the small Nigerian town of Koko in exchange for $100 monthly rent which was paid to a Nigerian for the use of his farmland.\nAt its meeting that took place from 27 November to 1 December 2006, the parties of the Basel Agreement focused on issues of electronic waste and the dismantling of ships.\nIncreased trade in recyclable materials has led to an increase in a market for used products such as computers. This market is valued in billions of dollars. At issue is the distinction when used computers stop being a \"commodity\" and become a \"waste\".\nAs of June 2023, there are 191 parties to the treaty, which includes 188 UN member states, the Cook Islands, the European Union, and the State of Palestine. The five UN member states that are not party to the treaty are East Timor, Fiji, Haiti, South Sudan, and United States.\nDefinition of \"hazardous waste\".\nWaste falls under the scope of the convention if it is within the category of wastes listed in Annex I of the convention and it exhibits one of the hazardous characteristics contained in Annex III.\nIn other words, it must both be listed and possess a characteristic such as being explosive, flammable, toxic, or corrosive. The other way that a waste may fall under the scope of the convention is if it is defined as or considered to be a hazardous waste under the laws of either the exporting country, the importing country, or any of the countries of transit.\nThe definition of the term disposal is made in Article 2 al 4 and just refers to annex IV, which gives a list of operations which are understood as disposal or recovery. Examples of disposal are broad, including recovery and recycling.\nAlternatively, to fall under the scope of the convention, it is sufficient for waste to be included in Annex II, which lists other wastes, such as household wastes and residue that comes from incinerating household waste.\nRadioactive waste that is covered under other international control systems and wastes from the normal operation of ships are not covered.\nAnnex IX attempts to define wastes which are not considered hazardous wastes and which would be excluded from the scope of the Basel Convention. If these wastes however are contaminated with hazardous materials to an extent causing them to exhibit an Annex III characteristic, they are not excluded.\nObligations.\nIn addition to conditions on the import and export of the above wastes, there are stringent requirements for notice, consent and tracking for movement of wastes across national boundaries. It is of note that the convention places a general prohibition on the exportation or importation of wastes between parties and non-parties. The exception to this rule is where the waste is subject to another treaty that does not take away from the Basel Convention. The United States is a notable non-party to the convention and has a number of such agreements for allowing the shipping of hazardous wastes to Basel Party countries.\nThe OECD Council also has its own control system that governs the transboundary movement of hazardous materials between OECD member countries. This allows, among other things, the OECD countries to continue trading in wastes with countries like the United States that have not ratified the Basel Convention.\nParties to the convention must honor import bans of other parties.\nArticle 4 of the Basel Convention calls for an overall reduction of waste generation. By encouraging countries to keep wastes within their boundaries and as close as possible to its source of generation, the internal pressures should provide incentives for waste reduction and pollution prevention. Parties are generally prohibited from exporting covered wastes to, or importing covered waste from, non-parties to the convention.\nThe convention states that illegal hazardous waste traffic is criminal but contains no enforcement provisions.\nAccording to Article 12, parties are directed to adopt a protocol that establishes liability rules and procedures that are appropriate for damage that comes from the movement of hazardous waste across borders.\nThe current consensus is that as space is not classed as a \"country\" under the specific definition, export of e-waste to non-terrestrial locations would not be covered.\nBasel Ban Amendment.\nAfter the initial adoption of the convention, some least developed countries and environmental organizations argued that it did not go far enough. Many nations and NGOs argued for a total ban on shipment of all hazardous waste to developing countries. In particular, the original convention did not prohibit waste exports to any location except Antarctica but merely required a notification and consent system known as \"prior informed consent\" or PIC. Further, many waste traders sought to exploit the good name of recycling and begin to justify all exports as moving to recycling destinations. Many believed a full ban was needed including exports for recycling. These concerns led to several regional waste trade bans, including the Bamako Convention.\nLobbying at 1995 Basel conference by developing countries, Greenpeace and several European countries such as Denmark, led to the adoption of an amendment to the convention in 1995 termed the Basel Ban Amendment to the Basel Convention. The amendment has been accepted by 86 countries and the European Union, but has not entered into force (as that requires ratification by three-fourths of the member states to the convention). On 6 September 2019, Croatia became the 97th country to ratify the amendment which will enter into force after 90 days on 5 December 2019. The amendment prohibits the export of hazardous waste from a list of developed (mostly OECD) countries to developing countries. The Basel Ban applies to export for any reason, including recycling. An area of special concern for advocates of the amendment was the sale of ships for salvage, shipbreaking. The Ban Amendment was strenuously opposed by a number of industry groups as well as nations including Australia and Canada. The number of ratification for the entry-into force of the Ban Amendment is under debate: Amendments to the convention enter into force after ratification of \"three-fourths of the Parties who accepted them\" [Art. 17.5]; so far, the parties of the Basel Convention could not yet agree whether this would be three-fourths of the parties that were party to the Basel Convention when the ban was adopted, or three-fourths of the current parties of the convention [see Report of COP 9 of the Basel Convention]. The status of the amendment ratifications can be found on the Basel Secretariat's web page. The European Union fully implemented the Basel Ban in its Waste Shipment Regulation (EWSR), making it legally binding in all EU member states. Norway and Switzerland have similarly fully implemented the Basel Ban in their legislation.\nIn the light of the blockage concerning the entry into force of the Ban Amendment, Switzerland and Indonesia have launched a \"Country-led Initiative\" (CLI) to discuss in an informal manner a way forward to ensure that the trans boundary movements of hazardous wastes, especially to developing countries and countries with economies in the transition, do not lead to an unsound management of hazardous wastes. This discussion aims at identifying and finding solutions to the reasons why hazardous wastes are still brought to countries that are not able to treat them in a safe manner. It is hoped that the CLI will contribute to the realization of the objectives of the Ban Amendment. The Basel Convention's website informs about the progress of this initiative.\nRegulation of plastic waste.\nIn the wake of popular outcry, in May 2019 most of the world's countries, but not the United States, agreed to amend the Basel Convention to include plastic waste as a regulated material. The world's oceans are estimated to contain 100 million metric tons of plastic, with up to 90% of this quantity originating in land-based sources. The United States, which produces an annual 42 million metric tons of plastic waste, more than any other country in the world, opposed the amendment, but since it is not a party to the treaty it did not have an opportunity to vote on it to try to block it. Information about, and visual images of, wildlife, such as seabirds, ingesting plastic, and scientific findings that nanoparticles do penetrate through the blood\u2013brain barrier were reported to have fueled public sentiment for coordinated international legally binding action. Over a million people worldwide signed a petition demanding official action. Although the United States is not a party to the treaty, export shipments of plastic waste from the United States are now \"criminal traffic as soon as the ships get on the high seas,\" according to the Basel Action Network (BAN), and carriers of such shipments may face liability, because the Basel Convention as amended in May 2019 prohibits the transportation of plastic waste to just about every other country.\nThe Basel Convention contains three main entries on plastic wastes in Annex II, VIII and IX of the Convention. The Plastic Waste Amendments of the convention are now binding on 186 States. In addition to ensuring the trade in plastic waste is more transparent and better regulated, under the Basel Convention governments must take steps not only to ensure the environmentally sound management of plastic waste, but also to tackle plastic waste at its source.\nBasel watchdog.\nThe Basel Action Network (BAN) is a charitable civil society non-governmental organization that works as a consumer watchdog for implementation of the Basel Convention. BAN's principal aims is fighting exportation of toxic waste, including plastic waste, from industrialized societies to developing countries. BAN is based in Seattle, Washington, United States, with a partner office in the Philippines. BAN works to curb trans-border trade in hazardous electronic waste, land dumping, incineration, and the use of prison labor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under Cc BY-SA 3.0 IGO (license statement/permission). Text taken from \"Drowning in Plastics \u2013 Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics\u200b\", United Nations Environment Programme. "}
{"id": "4013", "revid": "1117754963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4013", "title": "Bar Kokhba (album)", "text": "Bar Kokhba is a double album by John Zorn, recorded between 1994 and 1996. It features music from Zorn's \"Masada\" project, rearranged for small ensembles. It also features the original soundtrack from \"The Art of Remembrance \u2013 Simon Wiesenthal\", a film by Hannah Heer and Werner Schmiedel (1994\u201395).\nReception.\nThe AllMusic review by Marc Gilman noted: \"While some compositions retain their original structure and sound, some are expanded and probed by Zorn's arrangements, and resemble avant-garde classical music more than jazz. But this is the beauty of the album; the ensembles provide a forum for Zorn to expand his compositions. The album consistently impresses.\"\nTrack listing.\n\"All compositions by John Zorn\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4014", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4014", "title": "Bipolar Disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "4015", "revid": "4788526", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4015", "title": "BASIC", "text": "Family of programming languages\nBASIC (Beginners' All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code) is a family of general-purpose, high-level programming languages designed for ease of use. The original version was created by John G. Kemeny and Thomas E. Kurtz at Dartmouth College in 1963. They wanted to enable students in non-scientific fields to use computers. At the time, nearly all computers required writing custom software, which only scientists and mathematicians tended to learn.\nIn addition to the program language, Kemeny and Kurtz developed the Dartmouth Time Sharing System (DTSS), which allowed multiple users to edit and run BASIC programs simultaneously on remote terminals. This general model became very popular on minicomputer systems like the PDP-11 and Data General Nova in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Hewlett-Packard produced an entire computer line for this method of operation, introducing the HP2000 series in the late 1960s and continuing sales into the 1980s. Many early video games trace their history to one of these versions of BASIC.\nThe emergence of microcomputers in the mid-1970s led to the development of multiple BASIC dialects, including Microsoft BASIC in 1975. Due to the tiny main memory available on these machines, often 4\u00a0KB, a variety of Tiny BASIC dialects were also created. BASIC was available for almost any system of the era, and became the \"de facto\" programming language for home computer systems that emerged in the late 1970s. These PCs almost always had a BASIC interpreter installed by default, often in the machine's firmware or sometimes on a ROM cartridge.\nBASIC declined in popularity in the 1990s, as more powerful microcomputers came to market and programming languages with advanced features (such as Pascal and C) became tenable on such computers. In 1991, Microsoft released Visual Basic, combining an updated version of BASIC with a visual forms builder. This reignited use of the language and \"VB\" remains a major programming language in the forms of VB.NET.\nOrigin.\nJohn G. Kemeny was the math department chairman at Dartmouth College. Based largely on his reputation as an innovator in math teaching, in 1959 the school won an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation award for $500,000 to build a new department building. Thomas E. Kurtz had joined the department in 1956, and from the 1960s Kemeny and Kurtz agreed on the need for programming literacy among students outside the traditional STEM fields. Kemeny later noted that \"Our vision was that every student on campus should have access to a computer, and any faculty member should be able to use a computer in the classroom whenever appropriate. It was as simple as that.\"\nKemeny and Kurtz had made two previous experiments with simplified languages, DARSIMCO (Dartmouth Simplified Code) and DOPE (Dartmouth Oversimplified Programming Experiment). These did not progress past a single freshman class. New experiments using Fortran and ALGOL followed, but Kurtz concluded these languages were too tricky for what they desired. As Kurtz noted, Fortran had numerous oddly-formed commands, notably an \"almost impossible-to-memorize convention for specifying a loop: . Is it '1, 10, 2' or '1, 2, 10', and is the comma after the line number required or not?\"\nMoreover, the lack of any sort of immediate feedback was a key problem; the machines of the era used batch processing and took a long time to complete a run of a program. While Kurtz was visiting MIT, John McCarthy suggested that time-sharing offered a solution; a single machine could divide up its processing time among many users, giving them the illusion of having a (slow) computer to themselves. Small programs would return results in a few seconds. This led to increasing interest in a system using time-sharing and a new language specifically for use by non-STEM students.\nKemeny wrote the first version of BASIC. The acronym \"BASIC\" comes from the name of an unpublished paper by Thomas Kurtz. The new language was heavily patterned on FORTRAN II; statements were one-to-a-line, numbers were used to indicate the target of loops and branches, and many of the commands were similar or identical to Fortran. However, the syntax was changed wherever it could be improved. For instance, the difficult to remember codice_1 loop was replaced by the much easier to remember , and the line number used in the DO was instead indicated by the codice_2. Likewise, the cryptic codice_3 statement of Fortran, whose syntax matched a particular instruction of the machine on which it was originally written, became the simpler . These changes made the language much less idiosyncratic while still having an overall structure and feel similar to the original FORTRAN.\nThe project received a $300,000 grant from the National Science Foundation, which was used to purchase a GE-225 computer for processing, and a Datanet-30 realtime processor to handle the Teletype Model 33 teleprinters used for input and output. A team of a dozen undergraduates worked on the project for about a year, writing both the DTSS system and the BASIC compiler. The first version BASIC language was released on 1 May 1964.\nInitially, BASIC concentrated on supporting straightforward mathematical work, with matrix arithmetic support from its initial implementation as a batch language, and character string functionality being added by 1965. Usage in the university rapidly expanded, requiring the main CPU to be replaced by a GE-235, and still later by a GE-635. By the early 1970s there were hundreds of terminals connected to the machines at Dartmouth, some of them remotely.\nWanting use of the language to become widespread, its designers made the compiler available free of charge. In the 1960s, software became a chargeable commodity; until then, it was provided without charge as a service with the very expensive computers, usually available only to lease. They also made it available to high schools in the Hanover, New Hampshire area and regionally throughout New England on Teletype Model 33 and Model 35 teleprinter terminals connected to Dartmouth via dial-up phone lines, and they put considerable effort into promoting the language. In the following years, as other dialects of BASIC appeared, Kemeny and Kurtz's original BASIC dialect became known as \"Dartmouth BASIC\".\nNew Hampshire recognized the accomplishment in 2019 when it erected a highway historical marker in Hanover describing the creation of \"the first user-friendly programming language\".\nSpread on time-sharing services.\nThe emergence of BASIC took place as part of a wider movement towards time-sharing systems. First conceptualized during the late 1950s, the idea became so dominant in the computer industry by the early 1960s that its proponents were speaking of a future in which users would \"buy time on the computer much the same way that the average household buys power and water from utility companies\".\nGeneral Electric, having worked on the Dartmouth project, wrote their own underlying operating system and launched an online time-sharing system known as Mark I. It featured BASIC as one of its primary selling points. Other companies in the emerging field quickly followed suit; Tymshare introduced SUPER BASIC in 1968, CompuServe had a version on the DEC-10 at their launch in 1969, and by the early 1970s BASIC was largely universal on general-purpose mainframe computers. Even IBM eventually joined the club with the introduction of VS-BASIC in 1973.\nAlthough time-sharing services with BASIC were successful for a time, the widespread success predicted earlier was not to be. The emergence of minicomputers during the same period, and especially low-cost microcomputers in the mid-1970s, allowed anyone to purchase and run their own systems rather than buy online time which was typically billed at dollars per minute.\nSpread on minicomputers.\nBASIC, by its very nature of being small, was naturally suited to porting to the minicomputer market, which was emerging at the same time as the time-sharing services. These machines had very small main memory, perhaps as little as 4\u00a0KB in modern terminology, and lacked high-performance storage like hard drives that make compilers practical. On these systems, BASIC was normally implemented as an interpreter rather than a compiler due to the reduced need for working memory.\nA particularly important example was HP Time-Shared BASIC, which, like the original Dartmouth system, used two computers working together to implement a time-sharing system. The first, a low-end machine in the HP 2100 series, was used to control user input and save and load their programs to tape or disk. The other, a high-end version of the same underlying machine, ran the programs and generated output. For a cost of about $100,000, one could own a machine capable of running between 16 and 32 users at the same time. The system, bundled as the HP 2000, was the first mini platform to offer time-sharing and was an immediate runaway success, catapulting HP to become the third-largest vendor in the minicomputer space, behind DEC and Data General (DG).\nDEC, the leader in the minicomputer space since the mid-1960s, had initially ignored BASIC. This was due to their work with RAND Corporation, who had purchased a PDP-6 to run their JOSS language, which was conceptually very similar to BASIC. This led DEC to introduce a smaller, cleaned up version of JOSS known as FOCAL, which they heavily promoted in the late 1960s. However, with timesharing systems widely offering BASIC, and all of their competition in the minicomputer space doing the same, DEC's customers were clamoring for BASIC. After management repeatedly ignored their pleas, David H. Ahl took it upon himself to buy a BASIC for the PDP-8, which was a major success in the education market. By the early 1970s, FOCAL and JOSS had been forgotten and BASIC had become almost universal in the minicomputer market. DEC would go on to introduce their updated version, BASIC-PLUS, for use on the RSTS/E time-sharing operating system.\nDuring this period a number of simple text-based games were written in BASIC, most notably Mike Mayfield's \"Star Trek\". David Ahl collected these, some ported from FOCAL, and published them in an educational newsletter he compiled. He later collected a number of these into book form, \"101 BASIC Computer Games\", published in 1973. During the same period, Ahl was involved in the creation of a small computer for education use, an early personal computer. When management refused to support the concept, Ahl left DEC in 1974 to found the seminal computer magazine, \"Creative Computing\". The book remained popular, and was re-published on several occasions.\nExplosive growth: the home computer era.\nThe introduction of the first microcomputers in the mid-1970s was the start of explosive growth for BASIC. It had the advantage that it was fairly well known to the young designers and computer hobbyists who took an interest in microcomputers, many of whom had seen BASIC on minis or mainframes. Despite Dijkstra's famous judgement in 1975, \"It is practically impossible to teach good programming to students that have had a prior exposure to BASIC: as potential programmers they are mentally mutilated beyond hope of regeneration\", BASIC was one of the few languages that was both high-level enough to be usable by those without training and small enough to fit into the microcomputers of the day, making it the \"de facto\" standard programming language on early microcomputers.\nThe first microcomputer version of BASIC was co-written by Bill Gates, Paul Allen and Monte Davidoff for their newly formed company, Micro-Soft. This was released by MITS in punch tape format for the Altair 8800 shortly after the machine itself, immediately cementing BASIC as the primary language of early microcomputers. Members of the Homebrew Computer Club began circulating copies of the program, causing Gates to write his Open Letter to Hobbyists, complaining about this early example of software piracy.\nPartially in response to Gates's letter, and partially to make an even smaller BASIC that would run usefully on 4\u00a0KB machines, Bob Albrecht urged Dennis Allison to write their own variation of the language. How to design and implement a stripped-down version of an interpreter for the BASIC language was covered in articles by Allison in the first three quarterly issues of the \"People's Computer Company\" newsletter published in 1975 and implementations with source code published in \"\". This led to a wide variety of Tiny BASICs with added features or other improvements, with versions from Tom Pittman and Li-Chen Wang becoming particularly well known.\nMicro-Soft, by this time Microsoft, ported their interpreter for the MOS 6502, which quickly become one of the most popular microprocessors of the 8-bit era. When new microcomputers began to appear, notably the \"1977 trinity\" of the TRS-80, Commodore PET and Apple II, they either included a version of the MS code, or quickly introduced new models with it. Ohio Scientific's personal computers also joined this trend at that time. By 1978, MS BASIC was a \"de facto\" standard and practically every home computer of the 1980s included it in ROM. Upon boot, a BASIC interpreter in direct mode was presented.\nCommodore Business Machines included Commodore BASIC, based on Microsoft BASIC. The Apple II and TRS-80 each had two versions of BASIC, a smaller introductory version introduced with the initial releases of the machines and an MS-based version introduced as interest in the platforms increased. As new companies entered the field, additional versions were added that subtly changed the BASIC family. The Atari 8-bit family had its own Atari BASIC that was modified in order to fit on an 8\u00a0KB ROM cartridge. Sinclair BASIC was introduced in 1980 with the Sinclair ZX80, and was later extended for the Sinclair ZX81 and the Sinclair ZX Spectrum. The BBC published BBC BASIC, developed by Acorn Computers Ltd, incorporating many extra structured programming keywords and advanced floating-point operation features.\nAs the popularity of BASIC grew in this period, computer magazines published complete source code in BASIC for video games, utilities, and other programs. Given BASIC's straightforward nature, it was a simple matter to type in the code from the magazine and execute the program. Different magazines were published featuring programs for specific computers, though some BASIC programs were considered universal and could be used in machines running any variant of BASIC (sometimes with minor adaptations). Many books of type-in programs were also available, and in particular, Ahl published versions of the original 101 BASIC games converted into the Microsoft dialect and published it from \"Creative Computing\" as \"BASIC Computer Games\". This book, and its sequels, provided hundreds of ready-to-go programs that could be easily converted to practically any BASIC-running platform. The book reached the stores in 1978, just as the home computer market was starting off, and it became the first million-selling computer book. Later packages, such as Learn to Program BASIC would also have gaming as an introductory focus. On the business-focused CP/M computers which soon became widespread in small business environments, Microsoft BASIC (MBASIC) was one of the leading applications.\nIn 1978, David Lien published the first edition of \"The BASIC Handbook: An Encyclopedia of the BASIC Computer Language\", documenting keywords across over 78 different computers. By 1981, the second edition documented keywords from over 250 different computers, showcasing the explosive growth of the microcomputer era.\nIBM PC and compatibles.\nWhen IBM was designing the IBM PC, they followed the paradigm of existing home computers in having a built-in BASIC interpreter. They sourced this from Microsoft \u2013 IBM Cassette BASIC \u2013 but Microsoft also produced several other versions of BASIC for MS-DOS/PC DOS including IBM Disk BASIC (BASIC D), IBM BASICA (BASIC A), GW-BASIC (a BASICA-compatible version that did not need IBM's ROM) and QBasic, all typically bundled with the machine. In addition they produced the Microsoft BASIC Compiler aimed at professional programmers. Turbo Pascal-publisher Borland published Turbo Basic 1.0 in 1985 (successor versions are still being marketed under the name PowerBASIC).\nThese later variations introduced many extensions, such as improved string manipulation and graphics support, access to the file system and additional data types. More important were the facilities for structured programming, including additional control structures and proper subroutines supporting local variables. However, by the latter half of the 1980s, users were increasingly using pre-made applications written by others rather than learning programming themselves; while professional programmers now had a wide range of more advanced languages available on small computers. C and later C++ became the languages of choice for professional \"shrink wrap\" application development.\nVisual Basic.\nIn 1991, Microsoft introduced Visual Basic, an evolutionary development of QuickBASIC. It included constructs from that language such as block-structured control statements, parameterized subroutines and optional static typing as well as object-oriented constructs from other languages such as \"With\" and \"For Each\". The language retained some compatibility with its predecessors, such as the Dim keyword for declarations, \"Gosub\"/Return statements and optional line numbers which could be used to locate errors. An important driver for the development of Visual Basic was as the new macro language for Microsoft Excel, a spreadsheet program. To the surprise of many at Microsoft who still initially marketed it as a language for hobbyists, the language came into widespread use for small custom business applications shortly after the release of VB version 3.0, which is widely considered the first relatively stable version.\nWhile many advanced programmers still scoffed at its use, VB met the needs of small businesses efficiently as by that time, computers running Windows 3.1 had become fast enough that many business-related processes could be completed \"in the blink of an eye\" even using a \"slow\" language, as long as large amounts of data were not involved. Many small business owners found they could create their own small, yet useful applications in a few evenings to meet their own specialized needs. Eventually, during the lengthy lifetime of VB3, knowledge of Visual Basic had become a marketable job skill. Microsoft also produced VBScript in 1996 and Visual Basic .NET in 2001. The latter has essentially the same power as C# and Java but with syntax that reflects the original Basic language. The IDE, with its event-driven GUI builder, was also influential on other tools, most notably Borland Software's Delphi for Object Pascal and its own descendants such as Lazarus.\nMainstream support for the final version 6.0 of the original Visual Basic ended on March 31, 2005, followed by extended support in March 2008. Owing to its persistent remaining popularity, third-party attempts to further support it, such as Rubberduck, exist. On February 2, 2017 Microsoft announced that development on VB.NET would no longer be in parallel with that of C#, and on March 11, 2020 it was announced that evolution of the VB.NET language had also concluded, although it was still supported. Meanwhile, competitors exist such as B4X, RAD Basic, twinBASIC, Mercury, VisualFBEditor, Xojo, and Gambas.\nPost-1990 versions and dialects.\nMany other BASIC dialects have also sprung up since 1990, including the open source QB64 and FreeBASIC, inspired by QBasic, and the Visual Basic-styled RapidQ, HBasic, Basic For Qt and Gambas. Modern commercial incarnations include PureBasic, PowerBASIC, Xojo, Monkey X and True BASIC (the direct successor to Dartmouth BASIC from a company controlled by Kurtz).\nSeveral web-based simple BASIC interpreters also now exist, including Microsoft's Small Basic. Many versions of BASIC are also now available for smartphones and tablets via the Apple App Store, or Google Play store for Android. On game consoles, an application for the Nintendo 3DS and Nintendo DSi called \"Petit Computer\" allows for programming in a slightly modified version of BASIC with DS button support. A version has also been released for Nintendo Switch.\nCalculators.\nVariants of BASIC are available on graphing and otherwise programmable calculators made by Texas Instruments, HP, Casio, and others.\nWindows command-line.\nQBasic, a version of Microsoft QuickBASIC without the linker to make EXE files, is present in the Windows NT and DOS-Windows 95 streams of operating systems and can be obtained for more recent releases like Windows 7 which do not have them. Prior to DOS 5, the Basic interpreter was GW-Basic. QuickBasic is part of a series of three languages issued by Microsoft for the home and office power user and small-scale professional development; QuickC and QuickPascal are the other two. For Windows 95 and 98, which do not have QBasic installed by default, they can be copied from the installation disc, which will have a set of directories for old and optional software; other missing commands like Exe2Bin and others are in these same directories.\nOther.\nThe various Microsoft, Lotus, and Corel office suites and related products are programmable with Visual Basic in one form or another, including LotusScript, which is very similar to VBA 6. The Host Explorer terminal emulator uses WWB as a macro language; or more recently the programme and the suite in which it is contained is programmable in an in-house Basic variant known as Hummingbird Basic. The VBScript variant is used for programming web content, Outlook 97, Internet Explorer, and the Windows Script Host. WSH also has a Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) engine installed as the third of the default engines along with VBScript, JScript, and the numerous proprietary or open source engines which can be installed like PerlScript, a couple of Rexx-based engines, Python, Ruby, Tcl, Delphi, XLNT, PHP, and others; meaning that the two versions of Basic can be used along with the other mentioned languages, as well as LotusScript, in a WSF file, through the component object model, and other WSH and VBA constructions. VBScript is one of the languages that can be accessed by the 4Dos, 4NT, and Take Command enhanced shells. SaxBasic and WWB are also very similar to the Visual Basic line of Basic implementations. The pre-Office 97 macro language for Microsoft Word is known as WordBASIC. Excel 4 and 5 use Visual Basic itself as a macro language. Chipmunk Basic, an old-school interpreter similar to BASICs of the 1970s, is available for Linux, Microsoft Windows and macOS.\nLegacy.\nThe ubiquity of BASIC interpreters on personal computers was such that textbooks once included simple \"Try It In BASIC\" exercises that encouraged students to experiment with mathematical and computational concepts on classroom or home computers. Popular computer magazines of the day typically included type-in programs.\nFuturist and sci-fi writer David Brin mourned the loss of ubiquitous BASIC in a 2006 \"Salon\" article as have others who first used computers during this era. In turn, the article prompted Microsoft to develop and release Small Basic; it also inspired similar projects like Basic-256. Dartmouth held a 50th anniversary celebration for BASIC on 1 May 2014, as did other organisations; at least one organisation of VBA programmers organised a 35th anniversary observance in 1999.\nDartmouth College celebrated the 50th anniversary of the BASIC language with a day of events on April 30, 2014. A short documentary film was produced for the event.\nSyntax.\nData types and variables.\nMinimal versions of BASIC had only integer variables and one- or two-letter variable names, which minimized requirements of limited and expensive memory (RAM). More powerful versions had floating-point arithmetic, and variables could be labelled with names six or more characters long. There were some problems and restrictions in early implementations; for example, Applesoft BASIC allowed variable names to be several characters long, but only the first two were significant, thus it was possible to inadvertently write a program with variables \"LOSS\" and \"LOAN\", which would be treated as being the same; assigning a value to \"LOAN\" would silently overwrite the value intended as \"LOSS\". Keywords could not be used in variables in many early BASICs; \"SCORE\" would be interpreted as \"SC\" OR \"E\", where OR was a keyword. String variables are usually distinguished in many microcomputer dialects by having $ suffixed to their name as a sigil, and values are often identified as strings by being delimited by \"double quotation marks\". Arrays in BASIC could contain integers, floating point or string variables.\nSome dialects of BASIC supported matrices and matrix operations, which can be used to solve sets of simultaneous linear algebraic equations. These dialects would directly support matrix operations such as assignment, addition, multiplication (of compatible matrix types), and evaluation of a determinant. Many microcomputer BASICs did not support this data type; matrix operations were still possible, but had to be programmed explicitly on array elements.\nExamples.\nUnstructured BASIC.\nNew BASIC programmers on a home computer might start with a simple program, perhaps using the language's PRINT statement to display a message on the screen; a well-known and often-replicated example is Kernighan and Ritchie's \"Hello, World!\" program:\n10 PRINT \"Hello, World!\"\n20 END\nAn infinite loop could be used to fill the display with the message:\n10 PRINT \"Hello, World!\"\n20 GOTO 10\nNote that the codice_58 statement is optional and has no action in most dialects of BASIC. It was not always included, as is the case in this example. This same program can be modified to print a fixed number of messages using the common codice_59 statement:\n10 LET N=10\n20 FOR I=1 TO N\n30 PRINT \"Hello, World!\"\n40 NEXT I\nMost first-generation BASIC versions, such as MSX BASIC and GW-BASIC, supported simple data types, loop cycles, and arrays. The following example is written for GW-BASIC, but will work in most versions of BASIC with minimal changes:\n10 INPUT \"What is your name: \"; U$\n20 PRINT \"Hello \"; U$\n30 INPUT \"How many stars do you want: \"; N\n40 S$ = \"\"\n50 FOR I = 1 TO N\n60 S$ = S$ + \"*\"\n70 NEXT I\n80 PRINT S$\n90 INPUT \"Do you want more stars? \"; A$\n100 IF LEN(A$) = 0 THEN GOTO 90\n110 A$ = LEFT$(A$, 1)\n120 IF A$ = \"Y\" OR A$ = \"y\" THEN GOTO 30\n130 PRINT \"Goodbye \"; U$\n140 END\nThe resulting dialog might resemble:\n What is your name: Mike\n Hello Mike\n How many stars do you want: 7\n Do you want more stars? yes\n How many stars do you want: 3\n Do you want more stars? no\n Goodbye Mike\nThe original Dartmouth Basic was unusual in having a matrix keyword, MAT. Although not implemented by most later microprocessor derivatives, it is used in this example from the 1968 manual which averages the numbers that are input:\n5 LET S = 0\n10 MAT INPUT V \n20 LET N = NUM \n30 IF N = 0 THEN 99 \n40 FOR I = 1 TO N \n45 LET S = S + V(I) \n50 NEXT I \n60 PRINT S/N \n70 GO TO 5 \n99 END\nStructured BASIC.\nSecond-generation BASICs (for example, VAX Basic, SuperBASIC, True BASIC, QuickBASIC, BBC BASIC, Pick BASIC, PowerBASIC, Liberty BASIC and (arguably) COMAL) introduced a number of features into the language, primarily related to structured and procedure-oriented programming. Usually, line numbering is omitted from the language and replaced with labels (for GOTO) and procedures to encourage easier and more flexible design. In addition keywords and structures to support repetition, selection and procedures with local variables were introduced.\nThe following example is in Microsoft QuickBASIC:\nREM QuickBASIC example\nREM Forward declaration - allows the main code to call a\nREM subroutine that is defined later in the source code\nDECLARE SUB PrintSomeStars (StarCount!)\nREM Main program follows\nINPUT \"What is your name: \", UserName$\nPRINT \"Hello \"; UserName$\nDO\n INPUT \"How many stars do you want: \", NumStars\n CALL PrintSomeStars(NumStars)\n DO\n INPUT \"Do you want more stars? \", Answer$\n LOOP UNTIL Answer$ &lt;&gt; \"\"\n Answer$ = LEFT$(Answer$, 1)\nLOOP WHILE UCASE$(Answer$) = \"Y\"\nPRINT \"Goodbye \"; UserName$\nEND\nREM subroutine definition\nSUB PrintSomeStars (StarCount)\n REM This procedure uses a local variable called Stars$\n Stars$ = STRING$(StarCount, \"*\")\n PRINT Stars$\nEND SUB\nObject-oriented BASIC.\nThird-generation BASIC dialects such as Visual Basic, Xojo, Gambas, StarOffice Basic, BlitzMax and PureBasic introduced features to support object-oriented and event-driven programming paradigm. Most built-in procedures and functions are now represented as \"methods\" of standard objects rather than \"operators\". Also, the operating system became increasingly accessible to the BASIC language.\nThe following example is in Visual Basic .NET:\nPublic Module StarsProgram\n Private Function Ask(prompt As String) As String\n Console.Write(prompt)\n Return Console.ReadLine()\n End Function\n Public Sub Main()\n Dim userName = Ask(\"What is your name: \")\n Console.WriteLine(\"Hello {0}\", userName)\n Dim answer As String\n Do\n Dim numStars = CInt(Ask(\"How many stars do you want: \"))\n Dim stars As New String(\"*\"c, numStars)\n Console.WriteLine(stars)\n Do\n answer = Ask(\"Do you want more stars? \")\n Loop Until answer &lt;&gt; \"\"\n Loop While answer.StartsWith(\"Y\", StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase)\n Console.WriteLine(\"Goodbye {0}\", userName)\n End Sub\nEnd Module\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4016", "revid": "990344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4016", "title": "List of Byzantine emperors", "text": "Roman emperors in the East from 330 from 1453\nThis is a list of the Byzantine emperors from the foundation of Constantinople in 330 AD, which marks the conventional start of the Eastern Roman Empire, to its fall to the Ottoman Empire in 1453 AD. Only the emperors who were recognized as legitimate rulers and exercised sovereign authority are included, to the exclusion of junior co-emperors (\"symbasileis\") who never attained the status of sole or senior ruler, as well as of the various usurpers or rebels who claimed the imperial title.\nThe following list starts with Constantine the Great, the first Christian emperor, who rebuilt the city of Byzantium as an imperial capital, Constantinople, and who was regarded by the later emperors as the model ruler. Modern historians distinguish this later phase of the Roman Empire as Byzantine due to the imperial seat moving from Rome to Byzantium, the Empire's integration of Christianity, and the predominance of Greek instead of Latin.\nThe Byzantine Empire was the direct legal continuation of the eastern half of the Roman Empire following the division of the Roman Empire in 395. Emperors listed below up to Theodosius I in 395 were sole or joint rulers of the entire Roman Empire. The Western Roman Empire continued until 476. Byzantine emperors considered themselves to be Roman emperors in direct succession from Augustus; the term \"Byzantine\" became convention in Western historiography in the 19th century. The use of the title \"Roman Emperor\" by those ruling from Constantinople was not contested until after the papal coronation of the Frankish Charlemagne as Holy Roman Emperor (25 December 800).\nIn practice, according to the Hellenistic political system, the Byzantine emperor had been given total power through God to shape the state and its subjects, he was the last authority and legislator of the empire and all his work was in imitation of the sacred kingdom of God, also according to the Christian principles, he was the ultimate benefecator and protector of his people.\nThe title of all Emperors preceding Heraclius was officially \"\"Augustus\", although other titles such as \"Dominus\" were also used. Their names were preceded by \"Imperator Caesar\" and followed by \"Augustus\". Following Heraclius, the title commonly became the Greek \"Basileus\" (Gr. \u0392\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bb\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2), which had formerly meant sovereign, though \"Augustus\" continued to be used in a reduced capacity. Following the establishment of the rival Holy Roman Empire in Western Europe, the title \"Autokrator\"\" (Gr. \u0391\u1f50\u03c4\u03bf\u03ba\u03c1\u03ac\u03c4\u03c9\u03c1) was increasingly used. In later centuries, the Emperor could be referred to by Western Christians as the \"Emperor of the Greeks\". Towards the end of the Empire, the standard imperial formula of the Byzantine ruler was \"[Emperor's name] in Christ, Emperor and Autocrat of the Romans\" (cf. \u1fec\u03c9\u03bc\u03b1\u1fd6\u03bf\u03b9 and R\u00fbm).\nIn the medieval period, dynasties were common, but the principle of hereditary succession was never formalized in the Empire, and hereditary succession was a custom rather than an inviolable principle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4021", "revid": "4440889", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4021", "title": "B.C.E.", "text": ""}
{"id": "4022", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4022", "title": "B.C.E", "text": ""}
{"id": "4024", "revid": "46051363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4024", "title": "Butterfly effect", "text": "Idea that small causes can have large effects\nIn chaos theory, the butterfly effect is the sensitive dependence on initial conditions in which a small change in one state of a deterministic nonlinear system can result in large differences in a later state.\nThe term is closely associated with the work of mathematician and meteorologist Edward Norton Lorenz. He noted that the butterfly effect is derived from the metaphorical example of the details of a tornado (the exact time of formation, the exact path taken) being influenced by minor perturbations such as a distant butterfly flapping its wings several weeks earlier. Lorenz originally used a seagull causing a storm but was persuaded to make it more poetic with the use of a butterfly and tornado by 1972. He discovered the effect when he observed runs of his weather model with initial condition data that were rounded in a seemingly inconsequential manner. He noted that the weather model would fail to reproduce the results of runs with the unrounded initial condition data. A very small change in initial conditions had created a significantly different outcome.\nThe idea that small causes may have large effects in weather was earlier acknowledged by French mathematician and engineer Henri Poincar\u00e9. American mathematician and philosopher Norbert Wiener also contributed to this theory. Lorenz's work placed the concept of \"instability\" of the Earth's atmosphere onto a quantitative base and linked the concept of instability to the properties of large classes of dynamic systems which are undergoing nonlinear dynamics and deterministic chaos.\nThe butterfly effect concept has since been used outside the context of weather science as a broad term for any situation where a small change is supposed to be the cause of larger consequences.\nHistory.\nIn \"The Vocation of Man\" (1800), Johann Gottlieb Fichte says \"you could not remove a single grain of sand from its place without thereby ... changing something throughout all parts of the immeasurable whole\".\nChaos theory and the sensitive dependence on initial conditions were described in numerous forms of literature. This is evidenced by the case of the three-body problem by Poincar\u00e9 in 1890. He later proposed that such phenomena could be common, for example, in meteorology.\nIn 1898, Jacques Hadamard noted general divergence of trajectories in spaces of negative curvature. Pierre Duhem discussed the possible general significance of this in 1908.\nIn 1950, Alan Turing noted: \"The displacement of a single electron by a billionth of a centimetre at one moment might make the difference between a man being killed by an avalanche a year later, or escaping.\"\nThe idea that the death of one butterfly could eventually have a far-reaching ripple effect on subsequent historical events made its earliest known appearance in \"A Sound of Thunder\", a 1952 short story by Ray Bradbury. \"A Sound of Thunder\" features time travel.\nMore precisely, though, almost the exact idea and the exact phrasing \u2014of a tiny insect's wing affecting the entire atmosphere's winds\u2014 was published in a children's book which became extremely successful and well-known globally in 1962, the year before Lorenz published:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"...whatever we do affects everything and everyone else, if even in the tiniest way. Why, when a housefly flaps his wings, a breeze goes round the world.\"\n-- The Princess of Pure Reason\nIn 1961, Lorenz was running a numerical computer model to redo a weather prediction from the middle of the previous run as a shortcut. He entered the initial condition 0.506 from the printout instead of entering the full precision 0.506127 value. The result was a completely different weather scenario.\nLorenz wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt one point I decided to repeat some of the computations in order to examine what was happening in greater detail. I stopped the computer, typed in a line of numbers that it had printed out a while earlier, and set it running again. I went down the hall for a cup of coffee and returned after about an hour, during which time the computer had simulated about two months of weather. The numbers being printed were nothing like the old ones. I immediately suspected a weak vacuum tube or some other computer trouble, which was not uncommon, but before calling for service I decided to see just where the mistake had occurred, knowing that this could speed up the servicing process. Instead of a sudden break, I found that the new values at first repeated the old ones, but soon afterward differed by one and then several units in the last [decimal] place, and then began to differ in the next to the last place and then in the place before that. In fact, the differences more or less steadily doubled in size every four days or so, until all resemblance with the original output disappeared somewhere in the second month. This was enough to tell me what had happened: the numbers that I had typed in were not the exact original numbers, but were the rounded-off values that had appeared in the original printout. The initial round-off errors were the culprits; they were steadily amplifying until they dominated the solution. \nIn 1963, Lorenz published a theoretical study of this effect in a highly cited, seminal paper called \"Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow\" (the calculations were performed on a Royal McBee LGP-30 computer). Elsewhere he stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One meteorologist remarked that if the theory were correct, one flap of a sea gull's wings would be enough to alter the course of the weather forever. The controversy has not yet been settled, but the most recent evidence seems to favor the sea gulls.\nFollowing proposals from colleagues, in later speeches and papers, Lorenz used the more poetic butterfly. According to Lorenz, when he failed to provide a title for a talk he was to present at the 139th meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 1972, Philip Merilees concocted \"Does the flap of a butterfly's wings in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas?\" as a title. Although a butterfly flapping its wings has remained constant in the expression of this concept, the location of the butterfly, the consequences, and the location of the consequences have varied widely.\nThe phrase refers to the idea that a butterfly's wings might create tiny changes in the atmosphere that may ultimately alter the path of a tornado or delay, accelerate, or even prevent the occurrence of a tornado in another location. The butterfly does not power or directly create the tornado, but the term is intended to imply that the flap of the butterfly's wings can \"cause\" the tornado: in the sense that the flap of the wings is a part of the initial conditions of an interconnected complex web; one set of conditions leads to a tornado, while the other set of conditions doesn't. The flapping wing represents a small change in the initial condition of the system, which cascades to large-scale alterations of events (compare: domino effect). Had the butterfly not flapped its wings, the trajectory of the system might have been vastly different\u2014but it's also equally possible that the set of conditions without the butterfly flapping its wings is the set that leads to a tornado.\nThe butterfly effect presents an obvious challenge to prediction, since initial conditions for a system such as the weather can never be known to complete accuracy. This problem motivated the development of ensemble forecasting, in which a number of forecasts are made from perturbed initial conditions.\nSome scientists have since argued that the weather system is not as sensitive to initial conditions as previously believed. David Orrell argues that the major contributor to weather forecast error is model error, with sensitivity to initial conditions playing a relatively small role. Stephen Wolfram also notes that the Lorenz equations are highly simplified and do not contain terms that represent viscous effects; he believes that these terms would tend to damp out small perturbations. Recent studies using generalized Lorenz models that included additional dissipative terms and nonlinearity suggested that a larger heating parameter is required for the onset of chaos.\nWhile the \"butterfly effect\" is often explained as being synonymous with sensitive dependence on initial conditions of the kind described by Lorenz in his 1963 paper (and previously observed by Poincar\u00e9), the butterfly metaphor was originally applied to work he published in 1969 which took the idea a step further. Lorenz proposed a mathematical model for how tiny motions in the atmosphere scale up to affect larger systems. He found that the systems in that model could only be predicted up to a specific point in the future, and beyond that, reducing the error in the initial conditions would not increase the predictability (as long as the error is not zero). This demonstrated that a deterministic system could be \"observationally indistinguishable\" from a non-deterministic one in terms of predictability. Recent re-examinations of this paper suggest that it offered a significant challenge to the idea that our universe is deterministic, comparable to the challenges offered by quantum physics.\nIn the book entitled \"The Essence of Chaos\" published in 1993, Lorenz defined butterfly effect as: \"The phenomenon that a small alteration in the state of a dynamical system will cause subsequent states to differ greatly from the states that would have followed without the alteration.\" This feature is the same as sensitive dependence of solutions on initial conditions (SDIC) in . In the same book, Lorenz applied the activity of skiing and developed an idealized skiing model for revealing the sensitivity of time-varying paths to initial positions. A predictability horizon is determined before the onset of SDIC.\nTheory and mathematical definition.\nRecurrence, the approximate return of a system toward its initial conditions, together with sensitive dependence on initial conditions, are the two main ingredients for chaotic motion. They have the practical consequence of making complex systems, such as the weather, difficult to predict past a certain time range (approximately a week in the case of weather) since it is impossible to measure the starting atmospheric conditions completely accurately.\nA dynamical system displays sensitive dependence on initial conditions if points arbitrarily close together separate over time at an exponential rate. The definition is not topological, but essentially metrical. Lorenz defined sensitive dependence as follows:\n\"The property characterizing an orbit (i.e., a solution) if most other orbits that pass close to it at some point do not remain close to it as time advances.\"\nIf \"M\" is the state space for the map formula_1, then formula_1 displays sensitive dependence to initial conditions if for any x in \"M\" and any \u03b4\u00a0&gt;\u00a00, there are y in \"M\", with distance \"d\"(. , .) such that formula_3 and such that\nformula_4\nfor some positive parameter \"a\". The definition does not require that all points from a neighborhood separate from the base point \"x\", but it requires one positive Lyapunov exponent. In addition to a positive Lyapunov exponent, boundedness is another major feature within chaotic systems.\nThe simplest mathematical framework exhibiting sensitive dependence on initial conditions is provided by a particular parametrization of the logistic map:\nformula_5\nwhich, unlike most chaotic maps, has a closed-form solution:\nformula_6\nwhere the initial condition parameter formula_7 is given by formula_8. For rational formula_7, after a finite number of iterations formula_10 maps into a periodic sequence. But almost all formula_7 are irrational, and, for irrational formula_7, formula_10 never repeats itself \u2013 it is non-periodic. This solution equation clearly demonstrates the two key features of chaos \u2013 stretching and folding: the factor 2\"n\" shows the exponential growth of stretching, which results in sensitive dependence on initial conditions (the butterfly effect), while the squared sine function keeps formula_10 folded within the range\u00a0[0,\u00a01].\nIn physical systems.\nIn weather.\nThe butterfly effect is most familiar in terms of weather; it can easily be demonstrated in standard weather prediction models, for example. The climate scientists James Annan and William Connolley explain that chaos is important in the development of weather prediction methods; models are sensitive to initial conditions. They add the caveat: \"Of course the existence of an unknown butterfly flapping its wings has no direct bearing on weather forecasts, since it will take far too long for such a small perturbation to grow to a significant size, and we have many more immediate uncertainties to worry about. So the direct impact of this phenomenon on weather prediction is often somewhat wrong.\" The two kinds of butterfly effects, including the sensitive dependence on initial conditions, and the ability of a tiny perturbation to create an organized circulation at large distances, are not exactly the same. A comparison of the two kinds of butterfly effects and the third kind of butterfly effect has been documented. In recent studies, it was reported that both meteorological and non-meteorological linear models have shown that instability plays a role in producing a butterfly effect, which is characterized by brief but significant exponential growth resulting from a small disturbance.\nBy revealing coexisting chaotic and non-chaotic attractors within Lorenz models, Shen and his colleagues proposed a revised view that \"weather possesses chaos and order\", in contrast to the conventional view of \"weather is chaotic\". As a result, sensitive dependence on initial conditions (SDIC) does not always appear. Namely, SDIC appears when two orbits (i.e., solutions) become the chaotic attractor; it does not appear when two orbits move toward the same point attractor. The above animation for double pendulum motion provides an analogy. For large angles of swing the motion of the pendulum is often chaotic. By comparison, for small angles of swing, motions are non-chaotic.\nMultistability is defined when a system (e.g., the double pendulum system) contains more than one bounded attractor that depends only on initial conditions. The multistability was illustrated using kayaking in Figure on the right side (i.e., Figure 1 of ) where the appearance of strong currents and a stagnant area suggests instability and local stability, respectively. As a result, when two kayaks move along strong currents, their paths display SDIC. On the other hand, when two kayaks move into a stagnant area, they become trapped, showing no typical SDIC (although a chaotic transient may occur). Such features of SDIC or no SDIC suggest two types of solutions and illustrate the nature of multistability.\nBy taking into consideration time-varying multistability that is associated with the modulation of large-scale processes (e.g., seasonal forcing) and aggregated feedback of small-scale processes (e.g., convection), the above revised view is refined as follows:\n\"The atmosphere possesses chaos and order; it includes, as examples, emerging organized systems (such as tornadoes) and time varying forcing from recurrent seasons.\"\nIn quantum mechanics.\nThe potential for sensitive dependence on initial conditions (the butterfly effect) has been studied in a number of cases in semiclassical and quantum physics including atoms in strong fields and the anisotropic Kepler problem. Some authors have argued that extreme (exponential) dependence on initial conditions is not expected in pure quantum treatments; however, the sensitive dependence on initial conditions demonstrated in classical motion is included in the semiclassical treatments developed by Martin Gutzwiller and John B. Delos and co-workers. The random matrix theory and simulations with quantum computers prove that some versions of the butterfly effect in quantum mechanics do not exist.\nOther authors suggest that the butterfly effect can be observed in quantum systems. Zbyszek P. Karkuszewski et al. consider the time evolution of quantum systems which have slightly different Hamiltonians. They investigate the level of sensitivity of quantum systems to small changes in their given Hamiltonians. David Poulin et al. presented a quantum algorithm to measure fidelity decay, which \"measures the rate at which identical initial states diverge when subjected to slightly different dynamics\". They consider fidelity decay to be \"the closest quantum analog to the (purely classical) butterfly effect\". Whereas the classical butterfly effect considers the effect of a small change in the position and/or velocity of an object in a given Hamiltonian system, the quantum butterfly effect considers the effect of a small change in the Hamiltonian system with a given initial position and velocity. This quantum butterfly effect has been demonstrated experimentally. Quantum and semiclassical treatments of system sensitivity to initial conditions are known as quantum chaos.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4025", "revid": "169380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4025", "title": "B.C.", "text": ""}
{"id": "4026", "revid": "378390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4026", "title": "Buckminister Fuller", "text": ""}
{"id": "4027", "revid": "44645973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4027", "title": "Borland", "text": "Defunct American software company\nBorland Software Corporation was a computer technology company founded in 1983 by Niels Jensen, Ole Henriksen, Mogens Glad, and Philippe Kahn. Its main business was the development and sale of software development and software deployment products. Borland was first headquartered in Scotts Valley, California, then in Cupertino, California, and then in Austin, Texas. In 2009 the company became a full subsidiary of the British firm Micro Focus International plc.\nHistory.\nThe 1980s: Foundations.\nBorland Ltd. was founded in August 1981 by three Danish citizens, Niels Jensen, Ole Henriksen, and Mogens Glad, to develop products like Word Index for the CP/M operating system using an off-the-shelf company. However, the response to the company's products at the CP/M-82 show in San Francisco showed that a U.S. company would be needed to reach the American market. They met Philippe Kahn, who had just moved to Silicon Valley, and had been a key developer of the Micral. The three Danes had embarked, at first successfully, on marketing software first from Denmark, and later from Ireland, before running into some challenges at the time when they met Philippe Kahn. Kahn was chairman, president, and CEO of Borland Inc. from its beginning in 1983 until 1995. The main shareholders at the incorporation of Borland were Niels Jensen (250,000 shares), Ole Henriksen (160,000), Mogens Glad (100,000), and Kahn (80,000). \nBorland International, Inc. era.\nBorland developed various of software development tools. Its first product was Turbo Pascal in 1983, developed by Anders Hejlsberg (who later developed .NET and C# for Microsoft) and before Borland acquired the product sold in Scandinavia under the name of Compas Pascal. 1984 saw the launch of Borland Sidekick, a time organization, notebook, and calculator utility that was an early terminate-and-stay-resident program (TSR) for DOS operating systems.\nBy the mid-1980s, the company had an exhibit at the 1985 West Coast Computer Faire other than IBM or AT&amp;T. Bruce Webster reported that \"the legend of Turbo Pascal has by now reached mythic proportions, as evidenced by the number of firms that, in marketing meetings, make plans to become 'the next Borland'\". After Turbo Pascal and Sidekick, the company launched other applications such as SuperKey and Lightning, all developed in Denmark. While the Danes remained majority shareholders, board members included Kahn, Tim Berry, John Nash, and David Heller. With the assistance of John Nash and David Heller, both British members of the Borland Board, the company was taken public on London's Unlisted Securities Market (USM) in 1986. Schroders was the lead investment banker. According to the London IPO filings, the management team was Philippe Kahn as president, Spencer Ozawa as VP of Operations, Marie Bourget as CFO, and Spencer Leyton as VP of sales and business development. While all software development continued to take place in Denmark and later London as the Danish co-founders moved there. A first US IPO followed in 1989 after Ben Rosen joined the Borland board with Goldman Sachs as the lead banker and a second offering in 1991 with Lazard as the lead banker.\nIn 1985, Borland acquired Analytica and its Reflex database product. The engineering team of Analytica, managed by Brad Silverberg and including Reflex co-founder Adam Bosworth, became the core of Borland's engineering team in the US. Brad Silverberg was VP of engineering until he left in early 1990 to head up the Personal Systems division at Microsoft. Adam Bosworth initiated and headed up the Quattro project until moving to Microsoft later in 1990 to take over the project which eventually became Access.\nIn 1987, Borland purchased Wizard Systems and incorporated portions of the Wizard C technology into Turbo C. Bob Jervis, the author of Wizard C became a Borland employee. Turbo C was released on May 18, 1987. This drove a wedge between Borland and Niels Jensen and the other members of his team who had been working on a brand new series of compilers at their London development center. They reached an agreement and spun off a company called Jensen &amp; Partners International (JPI), later TopSpeed. JPI first launched an MS-DOS compiler named JPI Modula-2, which later became TopSpeed Modula-2, and followed up with TopSpeed C, TopSpeed C++, and TopSpeed Pascal compilers for both the MS-DOS and OS/2 operating systems. The TopSpeed compiler technology still exists as the underlying technology of the Clarion 4GL programming language, a Windows development tool.\nIn September 1987, Borland purchased Ansa-Software, including their Paradox (version 2.0) database management tool. Richard Schwartz, a cofounder of Ansa, became Borland's CTO and Ben Rosen joined the Borland board.\nThe Quattro Pro spreadsheet was launched in 1989, with an improvement and charting capabilities at the time. Lotus Development, under the leadership of Jim Manzi, sued Borland for copyright infringement (see Look and feel). The litigation, \"Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int'l, Inc.\", brought forward Borland's open standards position as opposed to Lotus' closed approach. Borland, under Kahn's leadership, took a position of principle and announced that they would defend against Lotus' legal position and \"fight for programmer's rights\". After a decision in favor of Borland by the First Circuit Court of Appeals, the case went to the United States Supreme Court. Because Justice John Paul Stevens had recused himself, only eight justices heard the case, and concluded in a 4\u20134 tie. The result of the First Circuit Court decision remained standing since the Supreme Court result, since it was a tie, did not bind any other court and set no national precedent.\nAdditionally, Borland's approach towards software piracy and intellectual property (IP) included its \"Borland no-nonsense license agreement\"; allowing the developer/user to utilize its products \"just like a book\". The user was allowed to make multiple copies of a program, as long as it was the only copy in use at any point in time.\nThe 1990s: Rise and change.\nIn September 1991, Borland purchased Ashton-Tate, bringing the dBASE and InterBase databases to the house, in an all-stock transaction. However, competition with Microsoft was fierce. Microsoft launched the competing database Microsoft Access and bought the dBASE clone FoxPro in 1992, undercutting Borland's prices. During the early 1990s, Borland's implementation of C and C++ outsold Microsoft's. Borland survived as a company, but no longer dominated the software tools that it once had. It went through a radical transition in products, financing, and staff, and became a very different company from the one which challenged Microsoft and Lotus in the early 1990s.\nThe internal problems that arose with the Ashton-Tate merger were a large part of the downfall. Ashton-Tate's product portfolio proved to be weak, with no provision for evolution into the GUI environment of Windows. Almost all product lines were discontinued. The consolidation of duplicate support and development offices was costly and disruptive. Worst of all, the highest revenue earner of the combined company was dBASE with no Windows version ready. Borland had an internal project to clone dBASE which was intended to run on Windows and was part of the strategy of the acquisition, but by late 1992 this was abandoned due to technical flaws and the company had to constitute a replacement team (the ObjectVision team, redeployed) headed by Bill Turpin to redo the job. Borland lacked the financial strength to project its marketing and move internal resources off other products to shore up the dBASE/W effort. Layoffs occurred in 1993 to keep the company afloat, the third instance of this was in five years. By the time dBASE for Windows eventually shipped, the developer community had moved on to other products such as Clipper or FoxBase, and dBASE never regained a significant share of Ashton-Tate's former market. This happened against the backdrop of the rise in Microsoft's combined Office product marketing.\nA change in market conditions also contributed to Borland's fall from prominence. In the 1980s, companies had few people who understood the growing personal computer phenomenon and so most technical people were given free rein to purchase whatever software they thought they needed. Borland had done an excellent job marketing to those with a highly technical bent. By the mid-1990s, however, companies were beginning to ask what the return was on the investment they had made in this loosely controlled PC software buying spree. Company executives were starting to ask questions that were hard for technically minded staff to answer, and so corporate standards began to be created. This required new kinds of marketing and support materials from software vendors, but Borland remained focused on the technical side of its products.\nIn 1993 Borland explored ties with WordPerfect as a possible way to form a suite of programs to rival Microsoft's nascent integration strategy. WordPerfect itself was struggling with a late and troubled transition to Windows. The eventual joint company effort, named Borland Office for Windows (a combination of the WordPerfect word processor, Quattro Pro spreadsheet, and Paradox database) was introduced at the 1993 Comdex computer show. Borland Office never made significant inroads against Microsoft Office. WordPerfect was then bought by Novell. In October 1994, Borland sold Quattro Pro and rights to sell up to million copies of Paradox to Novell for $140 million in cash, repositioning the company on its core software development tools and the Interbase database engine and shifting toward client-server scenarios in corporate applications. This later proved a good foundation for the shift to web development tools.\nPhilippe Kahn and the Borland board disagreed on how to focus the company, and Kahn resigned as chairman, CEO and president, after 12 years, in January 1995. Kahn remained on the board until November 7, 1996. Borland named Gary Wetsel as CEO, but he resigned in July 1996. William F. Miller was interim CEO until September of that year, when Whitney G. Lynn became interim president and CEO (along with other executive changes), followed by a succession of CEOs including Dale Fuller and Tod Nielsen.\nThe Delphi 1 rapid application development (RAD) environment was launched in 1995, under the leadership of Anders Hejlsberg.\nIn 1996 Borland acquired Open Environment Corporation, a Cambridge-based company founded by John J. Donovan.\nOn November 25, 1996, Del Yocam was hired as Borland CEO and chairman.\nIn 1997, Borland sold Paradox to Corel, but retained all development rights for the core BDE. In November 1997, Borland acquired Visigenic, a middleware company that was focused on implementations of CORBA.\nInprise Corporation Era.\nIn April 1998, Borland International, Inc. announced it had become Inprise Corporation.\nFor several years (both before and during the Inprise name) Borland suffered from serious financial losses and poor public image. When the name was changed to Inprise, many thought Borland had gone out of business. In March 1999, dBase was sold to KSoft, Inc. which was soon renamed dBASE Inc. (In 2004 dBASE Inc. was renamed to DataBased Intelligence, Inc.).\nIn 1999, Dale L. Fuller replaced Yocam. At this time Fuller's title was \"interim president and CEO.\" The \"interim\" was dropped in December 2000. Keith Gottfried served in senior executive positions with the company from 2000 to 2004.\nA proposed merger between Inprise and Corel was announced in February 2000, aimed at producing Linux-based products. The scheme was abandoned when Corel's shares fell and it became clear that there was no strategic fit.\nInterBase 6.0 was made available as open-source software in July 2000.\nIn November 2000, Inprise Corporation announced the company intended to officially change its name to Borland Software Corporation. The legal name of the company would continue to be Inprise Corporation until the completion of the renaming process during the first quarter of 2001. Once the name change was completed, the company would also expect to change its Nasdaq market symbol from 'INPR' to 'BORL'.\nBorland Software Corporation Era.\nOn January 2, 2001, Borland Software Corporation announced it has completed its name change from Inprise Corporation. Effective at the open of trading on Nasdaq, the company's Nasdaq market symbol would also be changed from 'INPR' to 'BORL'.\nUnder the Borland name and a new management team headed by president and CEO Dale L. Fuller, a now-smaller and profitable Borland refocused on Delphi and created a version of Delphi and C++ Builder for Linux, both under the name Kylix. This brought Borland's expertise in integrated development environments to the Linux platform for the first time. Kylix was launched in 2001.\nPlans to spin off the InterBase division as a separate company were abandoned after Borland and the people who were to run the new company could not agree on terms for the separation. Borland stopped open-source releases of InterBase and has developed and sold new versions at a fast pace.\nIn 2001, Delphi 6 became the first integrated development environment to support web services. All of the company's development platforms now support web services.\nC#Builder was released in 2003 as a native C# development tool, competing with Visual Studio .NET. By the 2005 release, C#Builder, Delphi for Win32, and Delphi for .NET were combined into a single IDE called \"Borland Developer Studio\" (though the combined IDE is still popularly known as \"Delphi\"). In late 2002 Borland purchased design tool vendor TogetherSoft and tool publisher Starbase, makers of the StarTeam configuration management tool and the CaliberRM requirements management tool (eventually, CaliberRM was renamed as \"Caliber\"). The latest releases of JBuilder and Delphi integrate these tools to give developers a broader set of tools for development.\nFormer CEO Dale Fuller quit in July 2005, but remained on the board of directors. Former COO Scott Arnold took the title of interim president and chief executive officer until November 8, 2005, when it was announced that Tod Nielsen would take over as CEO effective November 9, 2005. Nielsen remained with the company until January 2009, when he accepted the position of chief operating officer at VMware; CFO Erik Prusch then took over as acting president and CEO.\nIn early 2007 Borland announced new branding for its focus around open application life-cycle management. In April 2007 Borland announced that it would relocate its headquarters and development facilities to Austin, Texas. It also has development centers at Singapore, Santa Ana, California, and Linz, Austria.\nOn May 6, 2009, the company announced it was to be acquired by Micro Focus for $75 million. The transaction was approved by Borland shareholders on July 22, 2009, with Micro Focus acquiring the company for $1.50 per share. Following Micro Focus shareholder approval and the required corporate filings, the transaction was completed in late July 2009. It was estimated to have 750 employees at the time.\nOn April 5, 2015, Micro Focus announced the completion of integrating Attachmate Group of companies that was merged on November 20, 2014. During the integration period, the affected companies were merged into a single organization. In the announced reorganization, Borland products would be part of Micro Focus portfolio.\nProducts.\nRecent.\nThe products acquired from Segue Software include Silk Central, Silk Performer, and Silk Test. The Silk line was first announced in 1997. Other programs are:\nMarketing.\nRenaming to Inprise Corporation.\nAlong with renaming from Borland International, Inc. to Inprise Corporation, the company refocused its efforts on targeting enterprise applications development. Borland hired a marketing firm Lexicon Branding to come up with a new name for the company. Yocam explained that the new name, Inprise, was meant to evoke \"integrating the enterprise\". The idea was to integrate Borland's tools, Delphi, C++ Builder, and JBuilder with enterprise environment software, including Visigenic's implementations of CORBA, Visibroker for C++ and Java, and the new product, Application Server.\nFrank Borland.\nFrank Borland is a mascot character for Borland products. According to Philippe Kahn, the mascot first appeared in advertisements and cover of Borland Sidekick 1.0 manual, which was in 1984 during Borland International, Inc. era. Frank Borland also appeared in Turbo Tutor - A Turbo Pascal Tutorial, Borland JBuilder 2.\nA live action version of Frank Borland was made after Micro Focus plc had acquired Borland Software Corporation. This version was created by True Agency Limited. An introductory film was also made about the mascot.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4031", "revid": "40764242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4031", "title": "Buckminster Fuller", "text": "American architect, systems theorist, author, designer, inventor, and futurist\nRichard Buckminster Fuller (; July 12, 1895\u00a0\u2013 July 1, 1983) was an American architect, systems theorist, writer, designer, inventor, philosopher, and futurist. He styled his name as R. Buckminster Fuller in his writings, publishing more than 30 books and coining or popularizing such terms as \"Spaceship Earth\", \"Dymaxion\" (e.g., Dymaxion house, Dymaxion car, Dymaxion map), \"ephemeralization\", \"synergetics\", and \"tensegrity\".\nFuller developed numerous inventions, mainly architectural designs, and popularized the widely known geodesic dome; carbon molecules known as fullerenes were later named by scientists for their structural and mathematical resemblance to geodesic spheres. He also served as the second World President of Mensa International from 1974 to 1983.\nFuller was awarded 28 United States patents and many honorary doctorates. In 1960, he was awarded the Frank P. Brown Medal from The Franklin Institute. He was elected an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa in 1967, on the occasion of the 50-year reunion of his Harvard class of 1917 (from which he was expelled in his first year). He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1968. The same year, he was elected into the National Academy of Design as an Associate member. He became a full Academician in 1970, and he received the Gold Medal award from the American Institute of Architects the same year. In 1976, he received the St. Louis Literary Award from the Saint Louis University Library Associates. In 1977, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. He also received numerous other awards, including the Presidential Medal of Freedom, presented to him on February 23, 1983, by President Ronald Reagan.\nLife and work.\nFuller was born on July 12, 1895, in Milton, Massachusetts, the son of Richard Buckminster Fuller and Caroline Wolcott Andrews, and grand-nephew of Margaret Fuller, an American journalist, critic, and women's rights advocate associated with the American transcendentalism movement. The unusual middle name, Buckminster, was an ancestral family name. As a child, Richard Buckminster Fuller tried numerous variations of his name. He used to sign his name differently each year in the guest register of his family summer vacation home at Bear Island, Maine. He finally settled on R. Buckminster Fuller.\nFuller spent much of his youth on Bear Island, in Penobscot Bay off the coast of Maine. He attended Froebelian Kindergarten. He was dissatisfied with the way geometry was taught in school, disagreeing with the notions that a chalk dot on the blackboard represented an \"empty\" mathematical point, or that a line could stretch off to infinity. To him these were illogical, and led to his work on synergetics. He often made items from materials he found in the woods, and sometimes made his own tools. He experimented with designing a new apparatus for human propulsion of small boats. By age 12, he had invented a 'push pull' system for propelling a rowboat by use of an inverted umbrella connected to the transom with a simple oar lock which allowed the user to face forward to point the boat toward its destination. Later in life, Fuller took exception to the term \"invention\".\nYears later, he decided that this sort of experience had provided him with not only an interest in design, but also a habit of being familiar with and knowledgeable about the materials that his later projects would require. Fuller earned a machinist's certification, and knew how to use the press brake, stretch press, and other tools and equipment used in the sheet metal trade.\nEducation.\nFuller attended Milton Academy in Massachusetts, and after that began studying at Harvard College, where he was affiliated with Adams House. He was expelled from Harvard twice: first for spending all his money partying with a vaudeville troupe, and then, after having been readmitted, for his \"irresponsibility and lack of interest\". By his own appraisal, he was a non-conforming misfit in the fraternity environment.\nWartime experience.\nBetween his sessions at Harvard, Fuller worked in Canada as a mechanic in a textile mill, and later as a laborer in the meat-packing industry. He also served in the U.S. Navy in World War I, as a shipboard radio operator, as an editor of a publication, and as commander of the crash rescue boat USS \"Inca\". After discharge, he worked again in the meat-packing industry, acquiring management experience. In 1917, he married Anne Hewlett. During the early 1920s, he and his father-in-law developed the Stockade Building System for producing lightweight, weatherproof, and fireproof housing\u2014although the company would ultimately fail in 1927.\nDepression and epiphany.\nFuller recalled 1927 as a pivotal year of his life. His daughter Alexandra had died in 1922 of complications from polio and spinal meningitis just before her fourth birthday. Barry Katz, a Stanford University scholar who wrote about Fuller, found signs that around this time in his life Fuller had developed depression and anxiety. Fuller dwelled on his daughter's death, suspecting that it was connected with the Fullers' damp and drafty living conditions. This provided motivation for Fuller's involvement in Stockade Building Systems, a business which aimed to provide affordable, efficient housing.\nIn 1927, at age 32, Fuller lost his job as president of Stockade. The Fuller family had no savings, and the birth of their daughter Allegra in 1927 added to the financial challenges. Fuller drank heavily and reflected upon the solution to his family's struggles on long walks around Chicago. During the autumn of 1927, Fuller contemplated suicide by drowning in Lake Michigan, so that his family could benefit from a life insurance payment.\nFuller said that he had experienced a profound incident which would provide direction and purpose for his life. He felt as though he was suspended several feet above the ground enclosed in a white sphere of light. A voice spoke directly to Fuller, and declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFuller stated that this experience led to a profound re-examination of his life. He ultimately chose to embark on \"an experiment, to find what a single individual could contribute to changing the world and benefiting all humanity\".\nSpeaking to audiences later in life, Fuller would frequently recount the story of his Lake Michigan experience, and its transformative impact on his life.\nRecovery.\nIn 1927 Fuller resolved to think independently which included a commitment to \"the search for the principles governing the universe and help advance the evolution of humanity in accordance with them\u00a0... finding ways of \"doing more with less\" to the end that all people everywhere can have more and more\". By 1928, Fuller was living in Greenwich Village and spending much of his time at the popular caf\u00e9 Romany Marie's, where he had spent an evening in conversation with Marie and Eugene O'Neill several years earlier. Fuller accepted a job decorating the interior of the caf\u00e9 in exchange for meals, giving informal lectures several times a week, and models of the Dymaxion house were exhibited at the caf\u00e9. Isamu Noguchi arrived during 1929\u2014Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, an old friend of Marie's, had directed him there\u2014and Noguchi and Fuller were soon collaborating on several projects, including the modeling of the Dymaxion car based on recent work by Aurel Persu. It was the beginning of their lifelong friendship.\nGeodesic domes.\nFuller taught at Black Mountain College in North Carolina during the summers of 1948 and 1949, serving as its Summer Institute director in 1949. Fuller had been shy and withdrawn, but he was persuaded to participate in a theatrical performance of Erik Satie's \"Le pi\u00e8ge de M\u00e9duse\" produced by John Cage, who was also teaching at Black Mountain. During rehearsals, under the tutelage of Arthur Penn, then a student at Black Mountain, Fuller broke through his inhibitions to become confident as a performer and speaker.\nAt Black Mountain, with the support of a group of professors and students, he began reinventing a project that would make him famous: the geodesic dome. Although the geodesic dome had been created, built and awarded a German patent on June 19, 1925, by Dr. Walther Bauersfeld, Fuller was awarded United States patents. Fuller's patent application made no mention of Bauersfeld's self-supporting dome built some 26 years prior. Although Fuller undoubtedly popularized this type of structure he is mistakenly given credit for its design.\nOne of his early models was first constructed in 1945 at Bennington College in Vermont, where he lectured often. Although Bauersfeld's dome could support a full skin of concrete it was not until 1949 that Fuller erected a geodesic dome building that could sustain its own weight with no practical limits. It was in diameter and constructed of aluminium aircraft tubing and a vinyl-plastic skin, in the form of an icosahedron. To prove his design, Fuller suspended from the structure's framework several students who had helped him build it. The U.S. government recognized the importance of this work, and employed his firm Geodesics, Inc. in Raleigh, North Carolina to make small domes for the Marines. Within a few years, there were thousands of such domes around the world.\nFuller's first \"continuous tension \u2013 discontinuous compression\" geodesic dome (full sphere in this case) was constructed at the University of Oregon Architecture School in 1959 with the help of students. These continuous tension \u2013 discontinuous compression structures featured single force compression members (no flexure or bending moments) that did not touch each other and were 'suspended' by the tensional members.\nDymaxion Chronofile.\nFor half of a century, Fuller developed many ideas, designs and inventions, particularly regarding practical, inexpensive shelter and transportation. He documented his life, philosophy and ideas scrupulously by a daily diary (later called the \"Dymaxion Chronofile\"), and by twenty-eight publications. Fuller financed some of his experiments with inherited funds, sometimes augmented by funds invested by his collaborators, one example being the Dymaxion car project.\nWorld stage.\nInternational recognition began with the success of huge geodesic domes during the 1950s. Fuller lectured at North Carolina State University in Raleigh in 1949, where he met James Fitzgibbon, who would become a close friend and colleague. Fitzgibbon was director of Geodesics, Inc. and Synergetics, Inc. the first licensees to design geodesic domes. Thomas C. Howard was lead designer, architect and engineer for both companies. Richard Lewontin, a new faculty member in population genetics at North Carolina State University, provided Fuller with computer calculations for the lengths of the domes' edges.\nFuller began working with architect Shoji Sadao in 1954, together designing a hypothetical Dome over Manhattan in 1960, and in 1964 they co-founded the architectural firm Fuller &amp; Sadao Inc., whose first project was to design the large geodesic dome for the U.S. Pavilion at Expo 67 in Montreal. This building is now the \"Montreal Biosph\u00e8re\".\nIn 1962, the artist and searcher John McHale wrote the first monograph on Fuller, published by George Braziller in New York.\nAfter employing several Southern Illinois University Carbondale graduate students to rebuild his models following an apartment fire in the summer of 1959, Fuller was recruited by longtime friend Harold Cohen to serve as a research professor of \"design science exploration\" at the institution's School of Art and Design. According to SIU architecture professor Jon Davey, the position was \"unlike most faculty appointments\u00a0... more a celebrity role than a teaching job\" in which Fuller offered few courses and was only stipulated to spend two months per year on campus. Nevertheless, his time in Carbondale was \"extremely productive\", and Fuller was promoted to university professor in 1968 and distinguished university professor in 1972.\nWorking as a designer, scientist, developer, and writer, he continued to lecture for many years around the world. He collaborated at SIU with John McHale. In 1965, they inaugurated the World Design Science Decade (1965 to 1975) at the meeting of the International Union of Architects in Paris, which was, in Fuller's own words, devoted to \"applying the principles of science to solving the problems of humanity.\"\nFrom 1972 until retiring as university professor emeritus in 1975, Fuller held a joint appointment at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, where he had designed the dome for the campus Religious Center in 1971. During this period, he also held a joint fellowship at a consortium of Philadelphia-area institutions, including the University of Pennsylvania, Bryn Mawr College, Haverford College, Swarthmore College and the University City Science Center; as a result of this affiliation, the University of Pennsylvania appointed him university professor emeritus in 1975.\nFuller believed human societies would soon rely mainly on renewable sources of energy, such as solar- and wind-derived electricity. He hoped for an age of \"omni-successful education and sustenance of all humanity\". Fuller referred to himself as \"the property of universe\" and during one radio interview he gave later in life, declared himself and his work \"the property of all humanity\". For his lifetime of work, the American Humanist Association named him the 1969 Humanist of the Year.\nIn 1976, Fuller was a key participant at UN Habitat I, the first UN forum on human settlements.\nLast filmed appearance.\nFuller's last filmed interview took place on June 21, 1983, in which he spoke at Norman Foster's Royal Gold Medal for architecture ceremony. His speech can be watched in the archives of the AA School of Architecture, in which he spoke after Sir Robert Sainsbury's introductory speech and Foster's keynote address.\nDeath.\nIn the year of his death, Fuller described himself as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Guinea Pig B:\nI am now close to 88 and I am confident that the only thing important about me is that I am an average healthy human. I am also a living case history of a thoroughly documented, half-century, search-and-research project designed to discover what, if anything, an unknown, moneyless individual, with a dependent wife and newborn child, might be able to do effectively on behalf of all humanity that could not be accomplished by great nations, great religions or private enterprise, no matter how rich or powerfully armed.\nFuller died on July 1, 1983, 11 days before his 88th birthday. During the period leading up to his death, his wife had been lying comatose in a Los Angeles hospital, dying of cancer. It was while visiting her there that he exclaimed, at a certain point: \"She is squeezing my hand!\" He then stood up, had a heart attack, and died an hour later, at age 87. His wife of 66 years died 36 hours later. They are buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts.\nPhilosophy.\nBuckminster Fuller was a Unitarian, and, like his grandfather Arthur Buckminster Fuller (brother of Margaret Fuller), a Unitarian minister. Fuller was also an early environmental activist, aware of Earth's finite resources, and promoted a principle he termed \"ephemeralization\", which, according to futurist and Fuller disciple Stewart Brand, was defined as \"doing more with less\". Resources and waste from crude, inefficient products could be recycled into making more valuable products, thus increasing the efficiency of the entire process. Fuller also coined the word synergetics, a catch-all term used broadly for communicating experiences using geometric concepts, and more specifically, the empirical study of systems in transformation; his focus was on total system behavior unpredicted by the behavior of any isolated components.\nFuller was a pioneer in thinking globally, and explored energy and material efficiency in the fields of architecture, engineering and design. In his book \"Critical Path\" (1981) he cited the opinion of Fran\u00e7ois de Chaden\u00e8des (1920-1999) that petroleum, from the standpoint of its replacement cost in our current energy \"budget\" (essentially, the net incoming solar flux), had cost nature \"over a million dollars\" per U.S. gallon ($300,000 per litre) to produce. From this point of view, its use as a transportation fuel by people commuting to work represents a huge net loss compared to their actual earnings. An encapsulation quotation of his views might best be summed up as: \"There is no energy crisis, only a crisis of ignorance.\"\nThough Fuller was concerned about sustainability and human survival under the existing socioeconomic system, he remained optimistic about humanity's future. Defining wealth in terms of knowledge, as the \"technological ability to protect, nurture, support, and accommodate all growth needs of life\", his analysis of the condition of \"Spaceship Earth\" caused him to conclude that at a certain time during the 1970s, humanity had attained an unprecedented state. He was convinced that the accumulation of relevant knowledge, combined with the quantities of major recyclable resources that had already been extracted from the earth, had attained a critical level, such that competition for necessities had become unnecessary. Cooperation had become the optimum survival strategy. He declared: \"selfishness is unnecessary and hence-forth unrationalizable\u00a0... War is obsolete.\" He criticized previous utopian schemes as too exclusive, and thought this was a major source of their failure. To work, he thought that a utopia needed to include everyone.\nFuller was influenced by Alfred Korzybski's idea of general semantics. In the 1950s, Fuller attended seminars and workshops organized by the Institute of General Semantics, and he delivered the annual Alfred Korzybski Memorial Lecture in 1955. Korzybski is mentioned in the Introduction of his book \"Synergetics\". The two shared a remarkable amount of similarity in their formulations of general semantics.\nIn his 1970 book \"I Seem To Be a Verb\", he wrote: \"I live on Earth at present, and I don't know what I am. I know that I am not a category. I am not a thing\u2014a noun. I seem to be a verb, an evolutionary process\u2014an integral function of the universe.\"\nFuller wrote that the natural analytic geometry of the universe was based on arrays of tetrahedra. He developed this in several ways, from the close-packing of spheres and the number of compressive or tensile members required to stabilize an object in space. One confirming result was that the strongest possible homogeneous truss is cyclically tetrahedral.\nHe had become a guru of the design, architecture, and \"alternative\" communities, such as Drop City, the community of experimental artists to whom he awarded the 1966 \"Dymaxion Award\" for \"poetically economic\" domed living structures.\nMajor design projects.\nThe geodesic dome.\nFuller was most famous for his lattice shell structures \u2013 geodesic domes, which have been used as parts of military radar stations, civic buildings, environmental protest camps and exhibition attractions. An examination of the geodesic design by Walther Bauersfeld for the Zeiss-Planetarium, built some 28 years prior to Fuller's work, reveals that Fuller's Geodesic Dome patent (U.S. 2,682,235; awarded in 1954) is the same design as Bauersfeld's.\nTheir construction is based on extending some basic principles to build simple \"tensegrity\" structures (tetrahedron, octahedron, and the closest packing of spheres), making them lightweight and stable. The geodesic dome was a result of Fuller's exploration of nature's constructing principles to find design solutions. The Fuller Dome is referenced in the Hugo Award-winning novel \"Stand on Zanzibar\" by John Brunner, in which a geodesic dome is said to cover the entire island of Manhattan, and it floats on air due to the hot-air balloon effect of the large air-mass under the dome (and perhaps its construction of lightweight materials).\nTransportation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Omni-Media-Transport:With such a vehicle at our disposal, [Fuller] felt that human travel, like that of birds, would no longer be confined to airports, roads, and other bureaucratic boundaries, and that autonomous free-thinking human beings could live and prosper wherever they chose.\n\u2014\"Lloyd S. Sieden, Bucky Fuller's Universe\", 2000\nTo his young daughter Allegra:\nFuller described the Dymaxion as a \"\"zoom-mobile\", explaining that it could hop off the road at will, fly about, then, as deftly as a bird, settle back into a place in traffic\".\nThe Dymaxion car was a vehicle designed by Fuller, featured prominently at Chicago's 1933-1934 Century of Progress World's Fair. During the Great Depression, Fuller formed the \"Dymaxion Corporation\" and built three prototypes with noted naval architect Starling Burgess and a team of 27 workmen \u2014 using donated money as well as a family inheritance.\nFuller associated the word \"Dymaxion\", a blend of the words dynamic\", maximum\", and \"tension\" to sum up the goal of his study, \"maximum gain of advantage from minimal energy input\".\nThe Dymaxion was not an automobile but rather the 'ground-taxying mode' of a vehicle that might one day be designed to fly, land and drive \u2014 an \"Omni-Medium Transport\" for air, land and water. Fuller focused on the landing and taxiing qualities, and noted severe limitations in its handling. The team made improvements and refinements to the platform, and Fuller noted the Dymaxion \"was an invention that could not be made available to the general public without considerable improvements\".\nThe bodywork was aerodynamically designed for increased fuel efficiency and its platform featured a lightweight cromoly-steel hinged chassis, rear-mounted V8 engine, front-drive and three-wheels. The vehicle was steered via the third wheel at the rear, capable of 90\u00b0 steering lock. Able to steer in a tight circle, the Dymaxion often caused a sensation, bringing nearby traffic to a halt.\nShortly after launch, a prototype rolled over and crashed, killing the Dymaxion's driver and seriously injuring its passengers. Fuller blamed the accident on a second car that collided with the Dymaxion. Eyewitnesses reported, however, that the other car hit the Dymaxion only after it had begun to roll over.\nDespite courting the interest of important figures from the auto industry, Fuller used his family inheritance to finish the second and third prototypes \u2014 eventually selling all three, dissolving \"Dymaxion Corporation\" and maintaining the Dymaxion was never intended as a commercial venture. One of the three original prototypes survives.\nHousing.\nFuller's energy-efficient and inexpensive Dymaxion house garnered much interest, but only two prototypes were ever produced. Here the term \"Dymaxion\" is used in effect to signify a \"radically strong and light tensegrity structure\". One of Fuller's Dymaxion Houses is on display as a permanent exhibit at the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan. Designed and developed during the mid-1940s, this prototype is a round structure (not a dome), shaped something like the flattened \"bell\" of certain jellyfish. It has several innovative features, including revolving dresser drawers, and a fine-mist shower that reduces water consumption. According to Fuller biographer Steve Crooks, the house was designed to be delivered in two cylindrical packages, with interior color panels available at local dealers. A circular structure at the top of the house was designed to rotate around a central mast to use natural winds for cooling and air circulation.\nConceived nearly two decades earlier, and developed in Wichita, Kansas, the house was designed to be lightweight, adapted to windy climates, cheap to produce and easy to assemble. Because of its light weight and portability, the Dymaxion House was intended to be the ideal housing for individuals and families who wanted the option of easy mobility. The design included a \"Go-Ahead-With-Life Room\" stocked with maps, charts, and helpful tools for travel \"through time and space\". It was to be produced using factories, workers, and technologies that had produced World War II aircraft. It looked ultramodern at the time, built of metal, and sheathed in polished aluminum. The basic model enclosed of floor area. Due to publicity, there were many orders during the early Post-War years, but the company that Fuller and others had formed to produce the houses failed due to management problems.\nIn 1967, Fuller developed a concept for an offshore floating city named Triton City and published a report on the design the following year. Models of the city aroused the interest of President Lyndon B. Johnson who, after leaving office, had them placed in the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum.\nIn 1969, Fuller began the Otisco Project, named after its location in Otisco, New York. The project developed and demonstrated concrete spray with mesh-covered wireforms for producing large-scale, load-bearing spanning structures built on-site, without the use of pouring molds, other adjacent surfaces or hoisting. The initial method used a circular concrete footing in which anchor posts were set. Tubes cut to length and with ends flattened were then bolted together to form a duodeca-rhombicahedron (22-sided hemisphere) geodesic structure with spans ranging to . The form was then draped with layers of \u00bc-inch wire mesh attached by twist ties. Concrete was sprayed onto the structure, building up a solid layer which, when cured, would support additional concrete to be added by a variety of traditional means. Fuller referred to these buildings as monolithic ferroconcrete geodesic domes. However, the tubular frame form proved problematic for setting windows and doors. It was replaced by an iron rebar set vertically in the concrete footing and then bent inward and welded in place to create the dome's wireform structure and performed satisfactorily. Domes up to three stories tall built with this method proved to be remarkably strong. Other shapes such as cones, pyramids and arches proved equally adaptable.\nThe project was enabled by a grant underwritten by Syracuse University and sponsored by U.S. Steel (rebar), the Johnson Wire Corp, (mesh) and Portland Cement Company (concrete). The ability to build large complex load bearing concrete spanning structures in free space would open many possibilities in architecture, and is considered one of Fuller's greatest contributions.\nDymaxion map and World Game.\nFuller, along with co-cartographer Shoji Sadao, also designed an alternative projection map, called the Dymaxion map. This was designed to show Earth's continents with minimum distortion when projected or printed on a flat surface.\nIn the 1960s, Fuller developed the World Game, a collaborative simulation game played on a 70-by-35-foot Dymaxion map, in which players attempt to solve world problems. The object of the simulation game is, in Fuller's words, to \"make the world work, for 100% of humanity, in the shortest possible time, through spontaneous cooperation, without ecological offense or the disadvantage of anyone\".\nAppearance and style.\nBuckminster Fuller wore thick-lensed spectacles to correct his extreme hyperopia, a condition that went undiagnosed for the first five years of his life. Fuller's hearing was damaged during his naval service in World War I and deteriorated during the 1960s. After experimenting with bullhorns as hearing aids during the mid-1960s, Fuller adopted electronic hearing aids from the 1970s onward.\nIn public appearances, Fuller always wore dark-colored suits, appearing like \"an alert little clergyman\". Previously, he had experimented with unconventional clothing immediately after his 1927 epiphany, but found that breaking social fashion customs made others devalue or dismiss his ideas. Fuller learned the importance of physical appearance as part of one's credibility, and decided to become \"the invisible man\" by dressing in clothes that would not draw attention to himself. With self-deprecating humor, Fuller described this black-suited appearance as resembling a \"second-rate bank clerk\".\nWriter Guy Davenport met him in 1965 and described him thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He's a dwarf, with a worker's hands, all callouses and squared fingers. He carries an ear trumpet, of green plastic, with WORLD SERIES 1965 printed on it. His smile is golden and frequent; the man's temperament is angelic, and his energy is just a touch more than that of [Robert] Gallway (champeen runner, footballeur, and swimmer). One leg is shorter than the other, and the prescription shoe worn to correct the imbalance comes from a country doctor deep in the wilderness of Maine. Blue blazer, Khrushchev trousers, and a briefcase full of Japanese-made wonderments;\nLifestyle.\nFollowing his global prominence from the 1960s onward, Fuller became a frequent flier, often crossing time zones to lecture. In the 1960s and 1970s, he wore three watches simultaneously; one for the time zone of his office at Southern Illinois University, one for the time zone of the location he would next visit, and one for the time zone he was currently in. In the 1970s, Fuller was only in 'homely' locations (his personal home in Carbondale, Illinois; his holiday retreat in Bear Island, Maine; and his daughter's home in Pacific Palisades, California) roughly 65 nights per year\u2014the other 300 nights were spent in hotel beds in the locations he visited on his lecturing and consulting circuits.\nIn the 1920s, Fuller experimented with polyphasic sleep, which he called \"Dymaxion sleep\". Inspired by the sleep habits of animals such as dogs and cats, Fuller worked until he was tired, and then slept short naps. This generally resulted in Fuller sleeping 30-minute naps every 6 hours. This allowed him \"twenty-two thinking hours a day\", which aided his work productivity. Fuller reportedly kept this Dymaxion sleep habit for two years, before quitting the routine because it conflicted with his business associates' sleep habits. Despite no longer personally partaking in the habit, in 1943 Fuller suggested Dymaxion sleep as a strategy that the United States could adopt to win World War II.\nDespite only practicing true polyphasic sleep for a period during the 1920s, Fuller was known for his stamina throughout his life. He was described as \"tireless\" by Barry Farrell in \"Life\" magazine, who noted that Fuller stayed up all night replying to mail during Farrell's 1970 trip to Bear Island. In his seventies, Fuller generally slept for 5\u20138 hours per night.\nFuller documented his life copiously from 1915 to 1983, approximately of papers in a collection called the Dymaxion Chronofile. He also kept copies of all incoming and outgoing correspondence. The enormous R. Buckminster Fuller Collection is currently housed at Stanford University.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If somebody kept a very accurate record of a human being, going through the era from the Gay 90s, from a very different kind of world through the turn of the century\u2014as far into the twentieth century as you might live. I decided to make myself a good case history of such a human being and it meant that I could not be judge of what was valid to put in or not. I must put everything in, so I started a very rigorous record.\nLanguage and neologisms.\nBuckminster Fuller spoke and wrote in a unique style and said it was important to describe the world as accurately as possible. Fuller often created long run-on sentences and used unusual compound words (omniwell-informed, intertransformative, omni-interaccommodative, omniself-regenerative) as well as terms he himself invented. His style of speech was characterized by progressively rapid and breathless delivery and rambling digressions of thought, which Fuller described as \"thinking out loud\". The effect, combined with Fuller's dry voice and non-rhotic New England accent, was varyingly considered \"hypnotic\" or \"overwhelming\".\nFuller used the word \"Universe\" without the definite or indefinite article (\"the\" or \"an\") and always capitalized the word. Fuller wrote that \"by Universe I mean: the aggregate of all humanity's consciously apprehended and communicated (to self or others) Experiences\".\nThe words \"down\" and \"up\", according to Fuller, are awkward in that they refer to a planar concept of direction inconsistent with human experience. The words \"in\" and \"out\" should be used instead, he argued, because they better describe an object's relation to a gravitational center, the Earth. \"I suggest to audiences that they say, 'I'm going \"outstairs\" and \"instairs.\"' At first that sounds strange to them; They all laugh about it. But if they try saying in and out for a few days in fun, they find themselves beginning to realize that they are indeed going inward and outward in respect to the center of Earth, which is our Spaceship Earth. And for the first time they begin to feel real 'reality.'\"\n\"World-around\" is a term coined by Fuller to replace \"worldwide\". The general belief in a flat Earth died out in classical antiquity, so using \"wide\" is an anachronism when referring to the surface of the Earth\u2014a spheroidal surface has area and encloses a volume but has no width. Fuller held that unthinking use of obsolete scientific ideas detracts from and misleads intuition. Other neologisms collectively invented by the Fuller family, according to Allegra Fuller Snyder, are the terms \"sunsight\" and \"sunclipse\", replacing \"sunrise\" and \"sunset\" to overturn the geocentric bias of most pre-Copernican celestial mechanics.\nFuller also invented the word \"livingry\", as opposed to weaponry (or \"killingry\"), to mean that which is in support of all human, plant, and Earth life. \"The architectural profession\u2014civil, naval, aeronautical, and astronautical\u2014has always been the place where the most competent thinking is conducted regarding livingry, as opposed to weaponry.\"\nAs well as contributing significantly to the development of tensegrity technology, Fuller invented the term \"tensegrity\", a portmanteau of \"tensional integrity\". \"Tensegrity describes a structural-relationship principle in which structural shape is guaranteed by the finitely closed, comprehensively continuous, tensional behaviors of the system and not by the discontinuous and exclusively local compressional member behaviors. Tensegrity provides the ability to yield increasingly without ultimately breaking or coming asunder.\"\n\"Dymaxion\" is a portmanteau of \"dynamic maximum tension\". It was invented around 1929 by two admen at Marshall Field's department store in Chicago to describe Fuller's concept house, which was shown as part of a house of the future store display. They created the term using three words that Fuller used repeatedly to describe his design \u2013 dynamic, maximum, and tension.\nFuller also helped to popularize the concept of Spaceship Earth: \"The most important fact about Spaceship Earth: an instruction manual didn't come with it.\"\nIn the preface for his \"cosmic fairy tale\" \"Tetrascroll: Goldilocks and the Three Bears\", Fuller stated that his distinctive speaking style grew out of years of embellishing the classic tale for the benefit of his daughter, allowing him to explore both his new theories and how to present them. The \"Tetrascroll\" narrative was eventually transcribed onto a set of tetrahedral lithographs (hence the name), as well as being published as a traditional book.\nFuller's language posed problems for his credibility. John Julius Norwich recalled commissioning a 600-word introduction for a planned history of world architecture from him, and receiving a 3500-word proposal which ended: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We will see the (1) down-at-the-mouth-ends curvature of land civilisation's retrogression from the (2) straight raft line foundation of the Mayans' building foundation lines historically transformed to the (3) smiling, up-end curvature of maritime technology transformed through the climbing angle of wingfoil aeronautics progressing humanity into the verticality of outward-bound rocketry and inward-bound microcosmy, ergo (4) the ultimately invisible and vertically-lined architecture as humans master local environment with invisible electro-magnetic fields while travelling by radio as immortal pattern-integrities.\nNorwich commented: \"On reflection, I asked Dr. Nikolaus Pevsner instead.\"\nConcepts and buildings.\nHis concepts and buildings include:\nInfluence and legacy.\nAmong the many people who were influenced by Buckminster Fuller are:\nConstance Abernathy,\nRuth Asawa,\nJ. Baldwin,\nMichael Ben-Eli, Pierre Cabrol,\nJohn Cage,\nJoseph Clinton,\nPeter Floyd,\nNorman Foster,\nMedard Gabel,\nMichael Hays,\nTed Nelson,\nDavid Johnston,\nPeter Jon Pearce,\nShoji Sadao,\nEdwin Schlossberg,\nKenneth Snelson,\nRobert Anton Wilson, Stewart Brand, and Jason McLennan.\nAn allotrope of carbon, fullerene\u2014and a particular molecule of that allotrope C60 (buckminsterfullerene or buckyball) has been named after him. The Buckminsterfullerene molecule, which consists of 60 carbon atoms, very closely resembles a spherical version of Fuller's geodesic dome. The 1996 Nobel prize in chemistry was given to Kroto, Curl, and Smalley for their discovery of the fullerene.\nOn July 12, 2004, the United States Post Office released a new commemorative stamp honoring R. Buckminster Fuller on the 50th anniversary of his patent for the geodesic dome and by the occasion of his 109th birthday. The stamp's design replicated the January 10, 1964, cover of \"Time\" magazine.\nFuller was the subject of two documentary films: \"The World of Buckminster Fuller\" (1971) and \"\" (1996). Additionally, filmmaker Sam Green and the band Yo La Tengo collaborated on a 2012 \"live documentary\" about Fuller, \"The Love Song of R. Buckminster Fuller\".\nIn June 2008, the Whitney Museum of American Art presented \"Buckminster Fuller: Starting with the Universe\", the most comprehensive retrospective to date of his work and ideas. The exhibition traveled to the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago in 2009. It presented a combination of models, sketches, and other artifacts, representing six decades of the artist's integrated approach to housing, transportation, communication, and cartography. It also featured the extensive connections with Chicago from his years spent living, teaching, and working in the city.\nIn 2009, a number of US companies decided to repackage spherical magnets and sell them as toys. One company, Maxfield &amp; Oberton, told \"The New York Times\" that they saw the product on YouTube and decided to repackage them as \"Buckyballs\", because the magnets could self-form and hold together in shapes reminiscent of the Fuller inspired buckyballs. The buckyball toy launched at New York International Gift Fair in 2009 and sold in the hundreds of thousands, but by 2010 began to experience problems with toy safety issues and the company was forced to recall the packages that were labelled as toys.\nIn 2012, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art hosted \"The Utopian Impulse\" \u2013 a show about Buckminster Fuller's influence in the Bay Area. Featured were concepts, inventions and designs for creating \"free energy\" from natural forces, and for sequestering carbon from the atmosphere. The show ran January through July.\nIn popular culture.\nFuller is quoted in \"The Tower of Babble\" from the musical \"Godspell\": \"Man is a complex of patterns and processes.\"\nBelgian rock band dEUS released the song \"The Architect\", inspired by Fuller, on their 2008 album Vantage Point.\nIndie band Driftless Pony Club titled their 2011 album \"Buckminster\" after Fuller. Each of the album's songs is based upon his life and works.\nThe design podcast \"99% Invisible\" (2010\u2013present) takes its title from a Fuller quote: \"Ninety-nine percent of who you are is invisible and untouchable.\"\nFuller is briefly mentioned in \"\" (2014) when Kitty Pryde is giving a lecture to a group of students regarding utopian architecture.\nRobert Kiyosaki's 2015 book \"Second Chance\" concerns Kiyosaki's interactions with Fuller as well as Fuller's unusual final book, \"Grunch of Giants\".\nIn \"The House of Tomorrow\" (2017), based on Peter Bognanni's 2010 novel of the same name, Ellen Burstyn's character is obsessed with Fuller and provides retro-futurist tours of her geodesic home that include videos of Fuller sailing and talking with Burstyn, who had in real life befriended Fuller.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4032", "revid": "45211311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4032", "title": "Bill Watterson", "text": "American cartoonist (born 1958)\nWilliam Boyd Watterson II (born July 5, 1958) is an American cartoonist and the author of the comic strip \"Calvin and Hobbes\", which was syndicated from 1985 to 1995. Watterson stopped drawing \"Calvin and Hobbes\" at the end of 1995, with a short statement to newspaper editors and his readers that he felt he had achieved all he could in the medium. Watterson is known for his negative views on comic syndication and licensing, his efforts to expand and elevate the newspaper comic as an art form, and his move back into private life after he stopped drawing \"Calvin and Hobbes\". Watterson was born in Washington, D.C., and grew up in Chagrin Falls, Ohio. The suburban Midwestern United States setting of Ohio was part of the inspiration for \"Calvin and Hobbes\".\nEarly life.\nBill Watterson was born on July 5, 1958, in Washington, D.C., to Kathryn Watterson (1933-2022) and James Godfrey Watterson. His father worked as a patent attorney. In 1965, six-year-old Watterson and his family moved to Chagrin Falls, Ohio, a suburb of Cleveland. Watterson has a younger brother, Thomas Watterson.\nWatterson drew his first cartoon at age eight, and spent much time in childhood alone, drawing and cartooning. This continued through his school years, during which time he discovered comic strips such as \"Pogo\", \"Krazy Kat\", and Charles Schulz' \"Peanuts\" which subsequently inspired and influenced his desire to become a professional cartoonist. On one occasion when he was in fourth grade, he wrote a letter to Charles Schulz, who responded, much to Watterson's surprise. This made a big impression on him at the time. His parents encouraged him in his artistic pursuits. Later, they recalled him as a \"conservative child\" \u2014 imaginative, but \"not in a fantasy way\", and certainly nothing like the character of Calvin that he later created. Watterson found avenues for his cartooning talents throughout primary and secondary school, creating high school-themed super hero comics with his friends and contributing cartoons and art to the school newspaper and yearbook.\nAfter high school, Watterson attended Kenyon College, where he majored in political science. He had already decided on a career in cartooning, but he felt studying political science would help him move into editorial cartooning. He continued to develop his art skills, and during his sophomore year he painted Michelangelo's \"Creation of Adam\" on the ceiling of his dormitory room. He also contributed cartoons to the college newspaper, some of which included the original \"Spaceman Spiff\" cartoons. Watterson graduated from Kenyon in 1980 with a Bachelor of Arts degree.\nLater, when Watterson was creating names for the characters in his comic strip, he decided on Calvin (after the Protestant reformer John Calvin) and Hobbes (after the social philosopher Thomas Hobbes), allegedly as a \"tip of the hat\" to Kenyon's political science department. In \"The Complete Calvin and Hobbes\", Watterson stated that Calvin was named for \"a 16th-century theologian who believed in predestination,\" and Hobbes for \"a 17th-century philosopher with a dim view of human nature.\"\nCareer.\nEarly work.\nWatterson was inspired by the work of \"The Cincinnati Enquirer\" political cartoonist Jim Borgman, a 1976 graduate of Kenyon College, and decided to try to follow the same career path as Borgman, who in turn offered support and encouragement to the aspiring artist. Watterson graduated in 1980 and was hired on a trial basis at the \"Cincinnati Post\", a competing paper of the \"Enquirer\". Watterson quickly discovered that the job was full of unexpected challenges which prevented him from performing his duties to the standards set for him. Not the least of these challenges was his unfamiliarity with the Cincinnati political scene, as he had never resided in or near the city, having grown up in the Cleveland area and attending college in central Ohio. The \"Post\" fired Watterson before his contract was up.\nHe then joined a small advertising agency and worked there for four years as a designer, creating grocery advertisements while also working on his own projects, including development of his own cartoon strip and contributions to \"Target: The Political Cartoon Quarterly\".\nAs a freelance artist, Watterson has drawn other works for various merchandise, including album art for his brother's band, calendars, clothing graphics, educational books, magazine covers, posters, and post cards.\n\"Calvin and Hobbes\" and rise to success.\nWatterson has said that he works for personal fulfillment. As he told the graduating class of 1990 at Kenyon College, \"It's surprising how hard we'll work when the work is done just for ourselves.\" \"Calvin and Hobbes\" was first published on November 18, 1985. In \"Calvin and Hobbes Tenth Anniversary Book\", he wrote that his influences included Charles Schulz's \"Peanuts\", Walt Kelly's \"Pogo\", and George Herriman's \"Krazy Kat\". Watterson wrote the introduction to the first volume of \"The Komplete Kolor Krazy Kat\". Watterson's style also reflects the influence of Winsor McCay's \"Little Nemo in Slumberland\".\nLike many artists, Watterson incorporated elements of his life, interests, beliefs, and values into his work\u2014for example, his hobby as a cyclist, memories of his own father's speeches about \"building character\", and his views on merchandising and corporations. Watterson's cat Sprite very much inspired the personality and physical features of Hobbes.\nWatterson spent much of his career trying to change the climate of newspaper comics. He believed that the artistic value of comics was being undermined, and that the space that they occupied in newspapers continually decreased, subject to arbitrary whims of shortsighted publishers. Furthermore, he opined that art should not be judged by the medium for which it is created (i.e., there is no \"high\" art or \"low\" art\u2014just art).\nWatterson wrote forewords for \"FoxTrot\" and \"For Better or For Worse\".\nFight against merchandising his characters.\nFor years, Watterson battled against pressure from publishers to merchandise his work, something that he felt would cheapen his comic through compromising the act of creation or reading.\nHe refused to merchandise his creations on the grounds that displaying \"Calvin and Hobbes\" images on commercially sold mugs, stickers, and T-shirts would devalue the characters and their personalities. Watterson said that Universal kept putting pressure on him and said that he had signed his contract without fully perusing it because, as a new artist, he was happy to find a syndicate willing to give him a chance (two other syndicates had previously turned him down). He added that the contract was so one-sided that, if Universal really wanted to, they could license his characters against his will, and could even fire him and continue \"Calvin and Hobbes\" with a new artist. Watterson's position eventually won out and he was able to renegotiate his contract so that he would receive all rights to his work, but later added that the licensing fight exhausted him and contributed to the need for a nine-month sabbatical in 1991.\nDespite Watterson's efforts, many unofficial knockoffs have been found, including items that depict Calvin and Hobbes consuming alcohol or Calvin urinating on a logo. Watterson has said, \"Only thieves and vandals have made money on \"Calvin and Hobbes\" merchandise.\"\nChanging the format of the Sunday strip.\nWatterson was critical of the prevailing format for the Sunday comic strip that was in place when he began drawing (and remained so, to varying degrees). The typical layout consists of three rows with eight total squares, which take up half a page if published with its normal size. (In this context, half-page is an absolute size\u00a0\u2013 approximately half a nominal page size\u00a0\u2013 and not related to the actual page size on which a cartoon might eventually be printed for distribution.) Some newspapers are restricted with space for their Sunday features and reduce the size of the strip. One of the more common ways is to cut out the top two panels, which Watterson believed forced him to waste the space on throwaway jokes that did not always fit the strip. While he was set to return from his first sabbatical (a second took place during 1994), Watterson discussed with his syndicate a new format for \"Calvin and Hobbes\" that would enable him to use his space more efficiently and would almost require the papers to publish it as a half-page. Universal agreed that they would sell the strip as the half-page and nothing else, which garnered anger from papers and criticism for Watterson from both editors and some of his fellow cartoonists (whom he described as \"unnecessarily hot-tempered\"). Eventually, Universal compromised and agreed to offer papers a choice between the full half-page or a reduced-sized version to alleviate concerns about the size issue. Watterson conceded that this caused him to lose space in many papers, but he said that, in the end, it was a benefit because he felt that he was giving the papers' readers a better strip for their money and editors were free not to run \"Calvin and Hobbes\" at their own risk. He added that he was not going to apologize for drawing a popular feature.\nEnd of \"Calvin and Hobbes\".\nOn November 9, 1995, Watterson announced the end of \"Calvin and Hobbes\" with the following letter to newspaper editors:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dear Reader:\nI will be stopping \"Calvin and Hobbes\" at the end of the year. This was not a recent or an easy decision, and I leave with some sadness. My interests have shifted, however, and I believe I've done what I can do within the constraints of daily deadlines and small panels. I am eager to work at a more thoughtful pace, with fewer artistic compromises. I have not yet decided on future projects, but my relationship with Universal Press Syndicate will continue.\nThat so many newspapers would carry \"Calvin and Hobbes\" is an honor I'll long be proud of, and I've greatly appreciated your support and indulgence over the last decade. Drawing this comic strip has been a privilege and a pleasure, and I thank you for giving me the opportunity.\nSincerely,\nBill Watterson\nThe last strip of \"Calvin and Hobbes\" was published on December 31, 1995.\nAfter \"Calvin and Hobbes\".\nIn the years since \"Calvin and Hobbes\" was ended, many attempts have been made to contact Watterson. Both \"The Plain Dealer\" and the \"Cleveland Scene\" sent reporters, in 1998 and 2003 respectively, but neither were able to make contact with the media-shy Watterson. Since 1995, Watterson has taken up painting, at one point drawing landscapes of the woods with his father. He has kept away from the public eye and shown no interest in resuming the strip, creating new works based on the strip's characters, or embarking on new commercial projects, though he has published several \"Calvin and Hobbes\" \"treasury collection\" anthologies. He does not sign autographs or license his characters, staying true to his stated principles. Watterson was once known to sneak autographed copies of his books onto the shelves of the Fireside Bookshop, a family-owned bookstore in his hometown of Chagrin Falls, Ohio. He ended this practice after discovering that some of the autographed books were being sold online for high prices.\nWatterson rarely gives interviews or makes public appearances. His lengthiest interviews include the cover story in \"The Comics Journal\" No. 127 in February 1989, an interview that appeared in a 1987 issue of \"Honk Magazine\", and one in a 2015 Watterson exhibition catalogue.\nOn December 21, 1999, a short piece was published in the \"Los Angeles Times\", written by Watterson to mark the forthcoming retirement of iconic \"Peanuts\" creator Charles Schulz.\nCirca 2003, Gene Weingarten of \"The Washington Post\" sent Watterson the first edition of the \"Barnaby\" book as an incentive, hoping to land an interview. Weingarten passed the book to Watterson's parents, along with a message, and declared that he would wait in his hotel for as long as it took Watterson to contact him. Watterson's editor Lee Salem called the next day to tell Weingarten that the cartoonist would not be coming.\nIn 2004, Watterson and his wife Melissa bought a home in the Cleveland suburb of Cleveland Heights, Ohio. In 2005, they completed the move from their home in Chagrin Falls to their new residence.\nIn October 2005, Watterson answered 15 questions submitted by readers. In October 2007, he wrote a review of \"Schulz and Peanuts\", a biography of Charles Schulz, in \"The Wall Street Journal\".\nIn 2008, he provided a foreword for the first book collection of Richard Thompson's \"Cul de Sac\" comic strip. In April 2011, a representative for Andrews McMeel received a package from a \"William Watterson in Cleveland Heights, Ohio\" which contained a oil-on-board painting of \"Cul de Sac\" character Petey Otterloop, done by Watterson for the \"Team Cul de Sac\" fundraising project for Parkinson's disease in honor of Richard Thompson, who was diagnosed in 2009. Watterson's syndicate (which ultimately became Universal Uclick) revealed that the painting was the first new artwork of his that the syndicate has seen since \"Calvin and Hobbes\" ended in 1995.\nIn October 2009, Nevil Marttell published a book called \"Looking for Calvin and Hobbes,\" which included a story about the author seeking an interview with Watterson. In his search he interviews friends, co-workers and family but never gets to meet the artist himself.\nIn early 2010, Watterson was interviewed by \"The Plain Dealer\" on the 15th anniversary of the end of \"Calvin and Hobbes\". Explaining his decision to discontinue the strip, he said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This isn't as hard to understand as people try to make it. By the end of ten years, I'd said pretty much everything I had come there to say. It's always better to leave the party early. If I had rolled along with the strip's popularity and repeated myself for another five, ten, or twenty years, the people now \"grieving\" for \"Calvin and Hobbes\" would be wishing me dead and cursing newspapers for running tedious, ancient strips like mine instead of acquiring fresher, livelier talent. And I'd be agreeing with them. I think some of the reason \"Calvin and Hobbes\" still finds an audience today is because I chose not to run the wheels off it. I've never regretted stopping when I did.\nIn October 2013, the magazine \"Mental Floss\" published an interview with Watterson, only the second since the strip ended. Watterson again confirmed that he would not be revisiting \"Calvin and Hobbes\", and that he was satisfied with his decision. He also gave his opinion on the changes in the comic-strip industry and where it would be headed in the future:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Personally, I like paper and ink better than glowing pixels, but to each his own. Obviously the role of comics is changing very fast. On the one hand, I don't think comics have ever been more widely accepted or taken as seriously as they are now. On the other hand, the mass media is disintegrating, and audiences are atomizing. I suspect comics will have less widespread cultural impact and make a lot less money. I'm old enough to find all this unsettling, but the world moves on. All the new media will inevitably change the look, function, and maybe even the purpose of comics, but comics are vibrant and versatile, so I think they'll continue to find relevance one way or another. But they definitely won't be the same as what I grew up with.\nIn 2013 the documentary \"Dear Mr. Watterson\", exploring the cultural impact of \"Calvin and Hobbes\", was released. Watterson himself did not appear in the film.\nOn February 26, 2014, Watterson published his first cartoon since the end of \"Calvin and Hobbes\": a poster for the documentary \"Stripped\".\nIn 2014, Watterson co-authored \"The Art of Richard Thompson\" with \"Washington Post\" cartoonist Nick Galifianakis and David Apatoff.\nIn June 2014, three strips of \"Pearls Before Swine\" (published June 4, June 5, and June 6, 2014) featured guest illustrations by Watterson after mutual friend Nick Galifianakis connected him and cartoonist Stephan Pastis, who communicated via e-mail. Pastis likened this unexpected collaboration to getting \"a glimpse of Bigfoot\". \"I thought maybe Stephan and I could do this goofy collaboration and then use the result to raise some money for Parkinson's research in honor of Richard Thompson. It seemed like a perfect convergence\", Watterson told \"The Washington Post\". The day that Stephan Pastis returned to his own strip, he paid tribute to Watterson by alluding to the final strip of \"Calvin and Hobbes\" from December 31, 1995.\nOn November 5, 2014, a poster was unveiled, drawn by Watterson for the 2015 Angoul\u00eame International Comics Festival where he was awarded the Grand Prix in 2014.\nOn April 1, 2016, for April Fools' Day, Berkeley Breathed posted on Facebook that Watterson had signed \"the franchise over to my 'administration'\". He then posted a comic with Calvin, Hobbes, and Opus all featured. The comic is signed by Watterson, though the degree of his involvement was speculative. Breathed posted another \"Calvin County\" strip featuring Calvin and Hobbes, also \"signed\" by Watterson on April 1, 2017, along with a fake \"New York Times\" story ostensibly detailing the \"merger\" of the two strips. Berkeley Breathed included Hobbes in a November 27, 2017, strip as a stand-in for the character Steve Dallas. Hobbes has also returned in the June 9, 11, and 12, 2021, strips as a stand-in for Bill The Cat.\nCollaborating with American caricaturist John Kascht, Watterson authored \"a fable for grown-ups\" called \"The Mysteries\" set to be released on October 10, 2023 via Andrews McMeel Publishing.\nExhibitions.\nIn 2001, the Billy Ireland Cartoon Library &amp; Museum at Ohio State University mounted an exhibition of Watterson's Sunday strips. He chose thirty-six of his favorites, displaying them with both the original drawing and the colored finished product, with most pieces featuring personal annotations. Watterson also wrote an accompanying essay that served as the foreword for the exhibit, called \"Calvin and Hobbes: Sunday Pages 1985\u20131995\", which opened on September 10, 2001. It was taken down in January 2002. The accompanying published catalog had the same title.\nFrom March 22 to August 3, 2014, Watterson exhibited again at the Billy Ireland Cartoon Library &amp; Museum at Ohio State University. In conjunction with this exhibition, Watterson also participated in an interview with the school. An exhibition catalog named \"Exploring Calvin and Hobbes\" was released with the exhibit. The book contained a lengthy interview with Bill Watterson, conducted by Jenny Robb, the curator of the museum.\nAwards and honors.\nWatterson was awarded the National Cartoonists Society's Reuben Award in both 1986 and 1988. Watterson's second Reuben win made him the youngest cartoonist to be so honored, and only the sixth person to win twice, following Milton Caniff, Charles Schulz, Dik Browne, Chester Gould, and Jeff MacNelly. (Gary Larson is the only cartoonist to win a second Reuben since Watterson.) In 2014, Watterson was awarded the Grand Prix at the Angoul\u00eame International Comics Festival for his body of work, becoming just the fourth non-European cartoonist to be so honored in the first 41 years of the event.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4034", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4034", "title": "Britannica Public Domain", "text": ""}
{"id": "4035", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4035", "title": "Black", "text": "Darkest color due to absence or absorption of light\nBlack is a color which results from the absence or complete absorption of visible light. It is an achromatic color, without hue, like white and grey. It is often used symbolically or figuratively to represent darkness. Black and white have often been used to describe opposites such as good and evil, the Dark Ages versus Age of Enlightenment, and night versus day. Since the Middle Ages, black has been the symbolic color of solemnity and authority, and for this reason it is still commonly worn by judges and magistrates.\nBlack was one of the first colors used by artists in Neolithic cave paintings. It was used in ancient Egypt and Greece as the color of the underworld. In the Roman Empire, it became the color of mourning, and over the centuries it was frequently associated with death, evil, witches, and magic. In the 14th century, it was worn by royalty, clergy, judges, and government officials in much of Europe. It became the color worn by English romantic poets, businessmen and statesmen in the 19th century, and a high fashion color in the 20th century. According to surveys in Europe and North America, it is the color most commonly associated with mourning, the end, secrets, magic, force, violence, fear, evil, and elegance.\nBlack is the most common ink color used for printing books, newspapers and documents, as it provides the highest contrast with white paper and thus is the easiest color to read. Similarly, black text on a white screen is the most common format used on computer screens. As of September 2019, the darkest material is made by MIT engineers from vertically aligned carbon nanotubes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe word \"black\" comes from Old English \"bl\u00e6c\" (\"black, dark\", \"also\", \"ink\"), from Proto-Germanic *\"blakkaz\" (\"burned\"), from Proto-Indo-European *\"bhleg-\" (\"to burn, gleam, shine, flash\"), from base *\"bhel-\" (\"to shine\"), related to Old Saxon \"blak\" (\"ink\"), Old High German \"blach\" (\"black\"), Old Norse \"blakkr\" (\"dark\"), Dutch \"blaken\" (\"to burn\"), and Swedish \"bl\u00e4ck\" (\"ink\"). More distant cognates include Latin \"flagrare\" (\"to blaze, glow, burn\"), and Ancient Greek \"phlegein\" (\"to burn, scorch\"). The Ancient Greeks sometimes used the same word to name different colors, if they had the same intensity. \"Kuanos\"' could mean both dark blue and black. The Ancient Romans had two words for black: \"ater\" was a flat, dull black, while \"niger\" was a brilliant, saturated black. \"Ater\" has vanished from the vocabulary, but \"niger\" was the source of the country name \"Nigeria,\" the English word \"Negro\", and the word for \"black\" in most modern Romance languages (French: \"noir\"; Spanish and Portuguese: \"negro\"; Italian: \"nero\"; Romanian: \"negru\").\nOld High German also had two words for black: \"swartz\" for dull black and \"blach\" for a luminous black. These are parallelled in Middle English by the terms \"swart\" for dull black and \"blaek\" for luminous black. \"Swart\" still survives as the word \"swarthy\", while \"blaek\" became the modern English \"black\". The former is cognate with the words used for black in most modern Germanic languages aside from English (German: \"schwarz\", Dutch: \"zwart\", Swedish: \"svart\", Danish: \"sort\", Icelandic: \"svartr\"). In heraldry, the word used for the black color is sable, named for the black fur of the sable, an animal.\nArt.\nPrehistoric.\nBlack was one of the first colors used in art. The Lascaux Cave in France contains drawings of bulls and other animals drawn by paleolithic artists between 18,000 and 17,000 years ago. They began by using charcoal, and later achieved darker pigments by burning bones or grinding a powder of manganese oxide.\nAncient.\nFor the ancient Egyptians, black had positive associations; being the color of fertility and the rich black soil flooded by the Nile. It was the color of Anubis, the god of the underworld, who took the form of a black jackal, and offered protection against evil to the dead. To ancient Greeks, black represented the underworld, separated from the living by the river Acheron, whose water ran black. Those who had committed the worst sins were sent to Tartarus, the deepest and darkest level. In the center was the palace of Hades, the king of the underworld, where he was seated upon a black ebony throne. Black was one of the most important colors used by ancient Greek artists. In the 6th century BC, they began making black-figure pottery and later red figure pottery, using a highly original technique. In black-figure pottery, the artist would paint figures with a glossy clay slip on a red clay pot. When the pot was fired, the figures painted with the slip would turn black, against a red background. Later they reversed the process, painting the spaces between the figures with slip. This created magnificent red figures against a glossy black background.\nIn the social hierarchy of ancient Rome, purple was the color reserved for the Emperor; red was the color worn by soldiers (red cloaks for the officers, red tunics for the soldiers); white the color worn by the priests, and black was worn by craftsmen and artisans. The black they wore was not deep and rich; the vegetable dyes used to make black were not solid or lasting, so the blacks often faded to gray or brown.\nIn Latin, the word for black, \"ater\" and to darken, \"atere\", were associated with cruelty, brutality and evil. They were the root of the English words \"atrocious\" and \"atrocity\". Black was also the Roman color of death and mourning. In the 2nd century BC Roman magistrates began to wear a dark toga, called a \"toga pulla\", to funeral ceremonies. Later, under the Empire, the family of the deceased also wore dark colors for a long period; then, after a banquet to mark the end of mourning, exchanged the black for a white toga. In Roman poetry, death was called the \"hora nigra\", the black hour.\nThe German and Scandinavian peoples worshipped their own goddess of the night, N\u00f3tt, who crossed the sky in a chariot drawn by a black horse. They also feared Hel, the goddess of the kingdom of the dead, whose skin was black on one side and red on the other. They also held sacred the raven. They believed that Odin, the king of the Nordic pantheon, had two black ravens, Huginn and Muninn, who served as his agents, traveling the world for him, watching and listening.\nPostclassical.\nIn the early Middle Ages, black was commonly associated with darkness and evil. In Medieval paintings, the devil was usually depicted as having human form, but with wings and black skin or hair.\n12th and 13th centuries.\nIn fashion, black did not have the prestige of red, the color of the nobility. It was worn by Benedictine monks as a sign of humility and penitence. In the 12th century a famous theological dispute broke out between the Cistercian monks, who wore white, and the Benedictines, who wore black. A Benedictine abbot, Pierre the Venerable, accused the Cistercians of excessive pride in wearing white instead of black. Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, the founder of the Cistercians responded that black was the color of the devil, hell, \"of death and sin\", while white represented \"purity, innocence and all the virtues\".\nBlack symbolized both power and secrecy in the medieval world. The emblem of the Holy Roman Empire of Germany was a black eagle. The black knight in the poetry of the Middle Ages was an enigmatic figure, hiding his identity, usually wrapped in secrecy.\nBlack ink, invented in China, was traditionally used in the Middle Ages for writing, for the simple reason that black was the darkest color and therefore provided the greatest contrast with white paper or parchment, making it the easiest color to read. It became even more important in the 15th century, with the invention of printing. A new kind of ink, printer's ink, was created out of soot, turpentine and walnut oil. The new ink made it possible to spread ideas to a mass audience through printed books, and to popularize art through black and white engravings and prints. Because of its contrast and clarity, black ink on white paper continued to be the standard for printing books, newspapers and documents; and for the same reason black text on a white background is the most common format used on computer screens.\n14th and 15th centuries.\nIn the early Middle Ages, princes, nobles and the wealthy usually wore bright colors, particularly scarlet cloaks from Italy. Black was rarely part of the wardrobe of a noble family. The one exception was the fur of the sable. This glossy black fur, from an animal of the marten family, was the finest and most expensive fur in Europe. It was imported from Russia and Poland and used to trim the robes and gowns of royalty.\nIn the 14th century, the status of black began to change. First, high-quality black dyes began to arrive on the market, allowing garments of a deep, rich black. Magistrates and government officials began to wear black robes, as a sign of the importance and seriousness of their positions. A third reason was the passage of sumptuary laws in some parts of Europe which prohibited the wearing of costly clothes and certain colors by anyone except members of the nobility. The famous bright scarlet cloaks from Venice and the peacock blue fabrics from Florence were restricted to the nobility. The wealthy bankers and merchants of northern Italy responded by changing to black robes and gowns, made with the most expensive fabrics.\nThe change to the more austere but elegant black was quickly picked up by the kings and nobility. It began in northern Italy, where the Duke of Milan and the Count of Savoy and the rulers of Mantua, Ferrara, Rimini and Urbino began to dress in black. It then spread to France, led by Louis I, Duke of Orleans, younger brother of King Charles VI of France. It moved to England at the end of the reign of King Richard II (1377\u20131399), where all the court began to wear black. In 1419\u201320, black became the color of the powerful Duke of Burgundy, Philip the Good. It moved to Spain, where it became the color of the Spanish Habsburgs, of Charles V and of his son, Philip II of Spain (1527\u20131598). European rulers saw it as the color of power, dignity, humility and temperance. By the end of the 16th century, it was the color worn by almost all the monarchs of Europe and their courts.\nModern.\n16th and 17th centuries.\nWhile black was the color worn by the Catholic rulers of Europe, it was also the emblematic color of the Protestant Reformation in Europe and the Puritans in England and America. John Calvin, Philip Melanchthon and other Protestant theologians denounced the richly colored and decorated interiors of Roman Catholic churches. They saw the color red, worn by the Pope and his Cardinals, as the color of luxury, sin, and human folly. In some northern European cities, mobs attacked churches and cathedrals, smashed the stained glass windows and defaced the statues and decoration. In Protestant doctrine, clothing was required to be sober, simple and discreet. Bright colors were banished and replaced by blacks, browns and grays; women and children were recommended to wear white.\nIn the Protestant Netherlands, Rembrandt used this sober new palette of blacks and browns to create portraits whose faces emerged from the shadows expressing the deepest human emotions. The Catholic painters of the Counter-Reformation, like Rubens, went in the opposite direction; they filled their paintings with bright and rich colors. The new Baroque churches of the Counter-Reformation were usually shining white inside and filled with statues, frescoes, marble, gold and colorful paintings, to appeal to the public. But European Catholics of all classes, like Protestants, eventually adopted a sober wardrobe that was mostly black, brown and gray.\nIn the second part of the 17th century, Europe and America experienced an epidemic of fear of witchcraft. People widely believed that the devil appeared at midnight in a ceremony called a Black Mass or black sabbath, usually in the form of a black animal, often a goat, a dog, a wolf, a bear, a deer or a rooster, accompanied by their familiar spirits, black cats, serpents and other black creatures. This was the origin of the widespread superstition about black cats and other black animals. In medieval Flanders, in a ceremony called \"Kattenstoet,\" black cats were thrown from the belfry of the Cloth Hall of Ypres to ward off witchcraft.\nWitch trials were common in both Europe and America during this period. During the notorious Salem witch trials in New England in 1692\u201393, one of those on trial was accused of being able turn into a \"black thing with a blue cap,\" and others of having familiars in the form of a black dog, a black cat and a black bird. Nineteen women and men were hanged as witches.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nIn the 18th century, during the European Age of Enlightenment, black receded as a fashion color. Paris became the fashion capital, and pastels, blues, greens, yellow and white became the colors of the nobility and upper classes. But after the French Revolution, black again became the dominant color.\nBlack was the color of the industrial revolution, largely fueled by coal, and later by oil. Thanks to coal smoke, the buildings of the large cities of Europe and America gradually turned black. By 1846 the industrial area of the West Midlands of England was \"commonly called 'the Black Country'\u201d. Charles Dickens and other writers described the dark streets and smoky skies of London, and they were vividly illustrated in the engravings of French artist Gustave Dor\u00e9.\nA different kind of black was an important part of the romantic movement in literature. Black was the color of melancholy, the dominant theme of romanticism. The novels of the period were filled with castles, ruins, dungeons, storms, and meetings at midnight. The leading poets of the movement were usually portrayed dressed in black, usually with a white shirt and open collar, and a scarf carelessly over their shoulder, Percy Bysshe Shelley and Lord Byron helped create the enduring stereotype of the romantic poet.\nThe invention of inexpensive synthetic black dyes and the industrialization of the textile industry meant that high-quality black clothes were available for the first time to the general population. In the 19th century black gradually became the most popular color of business dress of the upper and middle classes in England, the Continent, and America.\nBlack dominated literature and fashion in the 19th century, and played a large role in painting. James McNeill Whistler made the color the subject of his most famous painting, \"Arrangement in grey and black number one\" (1871), better known as \"Whistler's Mother\".\nSome 19th-century French painters had a low opinion of black: \"Reject black,\" Paul Gauguin said, \"and that mix of black and white they call gray. Nothing is black, nothing is gray.\" But \u00c9douard Manet used blacks for their strength and dramatic effect. Manet's portrait of painter Berthe Morisot was a study in black which perfectly captured her spirit of independence. The black gave the painting power and immediacy; he even changed her eyes, which were green, to black to strengthen the effect. Henri Matisse quoted the French impressionist Pissarro telling him, \"Manet is stronger than us all \u2013 he made light with black.\"\nPierre-Auguste Renoir used luminous blacks, especially in his portraits. When someone told him that black was not a color, Renoir replied: \"What makes you think that? Black is the queen of colors. I always detested Prussian blue. I tried to replace black with a mixture of red and blue, I tried using cobalt blue or ultramarine, but I always came back to ivory black.\"\nVincent van Gogh used black lines to outline many of the objects in his paintings, such as the bed in the famous painting of his bedroom. making them stand apart. His painting of black crows over a cornfield, painted shortly before he died, was particularly agitated and haunting. In the late 19th century, black also became the color of anarchism. (See the section political movements.)\n20th and 21st centuries.\nIn the 20th century, black was the color of Italian and German fascism. (See the section political movements.)\nIn art, black regained some of the territory that it had lost during the 19th century. The Russian painter Kasimir Malevich, a member of the Suprematist movement, created the \"Black Square\" in 1915, is widely considered the first purely abstract painting. He wrote, \"The painted work is no longer simply the imitation of reality, but is this very reality\u00a0... It is not a demonstration of ability, but the materialization of an idea.\"\nBlack was also appreciated by Henri Matisse. \"When I didn't know what color to put down, I put down black,\" he said in 1945. \"Black is a force: I used black as ballast to simplify the construction\u00a0... Since the impressionists it seems to have made continuous progress, taking a more and more important part in color orchestration, comparable to that of the double bass as a solo instrument.\"\nIn the 1950s, black came to be a symbol of individuality and intellectual and social rebellion, the color of those who didn't accept established norms and values. In Paris, it was worn by Left-Bank intellectuals and performers such as Juliette Gr\u00e9co, and by some members of the Beat Movement in New York and San Francisco. Black leather jackets were worn by motorcycle gangs such as the Hells Angels and street gangs on the fringes of society in the United States. Black as a color of rebellion was celebrated in such films as \"The Wild One\", with Marlon Brando. By the end of the 20th century, black was the emblematic color of the punk subculture punk fashion, and the goth subculture. Goth fashion, which emerged in England in the 1980s, was inspired by Victorian era mourning dress.\nIn men's fashion, black gradually ceded its dominance to navy blue, particularly in business suits. Black evening dress and formal dress in general were worn less and less. In 1960, John F. Kennedy was the last American President to be inaugurated wearing formal dress; President Lyndon Johnson and all his successors were inaugurated wearing business suits.\nWomen's fashion was revolutionized and simplified in 1926 by the French designer Coco Chanel, who published a drawing of a simple black dress in \"Vogue\" magazine. She famously said, \"A woman needs just three things; a black dress, a black sweater, and, on her arm, a man she loves.\" French designer Jean Patou also followed suit by creating a black collection in 1929. Other designers contributed to the trend of the little black dress. The Italian designer Gianni Versace said, \"Black is the quintessence of simplicity and elegance,\" and French designer Yves Saint Laurent said, \"black is the liaison which connects art and fashion. One of the most famous black dresses of the century was designed by Hubert de Givenchy and was worn by Audrey Hepburn in the 1961 film \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\".\nThe American civil rights movement in the 1950s was a struggle for the political equality of African Americans. It developed into the Black Power movement in the early 1960s until the late 1980s, and the Black Lives Matter movement in the 2010s and 2020s. It also popularized the slogan \"Black is Beautiful\".\nScience.\nPhysics.\nIn the visible spectrum, black is the result of the absorption of all colors. Black can be defined as the visual impression experienced when no visible light reaches the eye. Pigments or dyes that absorb light rather than reflect it back to the eye \"look black\". A black pigment can, however, result from a \"combination\" of several pigments that collectively absorb all colors. If appropriate proportions of three primary pigments are mixed, the result reflects so little light as to be called \"black\". This provides two superficially opposite but actually complementary descriptions of black. Black is the absorption of all colors of light, or an exhaustive combination of multiple colors of pigment.\nIn physics, a black body is a perfect absorber of light, but, by a thermodynamic rule, it is also the best emitter. Thus, the best radiative cooling, out of sunlight, is by using black paint, though it is important that it be black (a nearly perfect absorber) in the infrared as well. In elementary science, far ultraviolet light is called \"black light\" because, while itself unseen, it causes many minerals and other substances to fluoresce.\nAbsorption of light is contrasted by transmission, reflection and diffusion, where the light is only redirected, causing objects to appear transparent, reflective or white respectively. A material is said to be black if most incoming light is absorbed equally in the material. Light (electromagnetic radiation in the visible spectrum) interacts with the atoms and molecules, which causes the energy of the light to be converted into other forms of energy, usually heat. This means that black surfaces can act as thermal collectors, absorbing light and generating heat (see Solar thermal collector).\nAs of September 2019, the darkest material is made from vertically aligned carbon nanotubes. The material was grown by MIT engineers and was reported to have a 99.995% absorption rate of any incoming light. This surpasses any former darkest materials including Vantablack, which has a peak absorption rate of 99.965% in the visible spectrum.\nChemistry.\nPigments.\nThe earliest pigments used by Neolithic man were charcoal, red ocher and yellow ocher. The black lines of cave art were drawn with the tips of burnt torches made of a wood with resin. Different charcoal pigments were made by burning different woods and animal products, each of which produced a different tone. The charcoal would be ground and then mixed with animal fat to make the pigment.\nThe 15th-century painter Cennino Cennini described how this pigment was made during the Renaissance in his famous handbook for artists: \"...there is a black which is made from the tendrils of vines. And these tendrils need to be burned. And when they have been burned, throw some water onto them and put them out and then mull them in the same way as the other black. And this is a lean and black pigment and is one of the perfect pigments that we use.\"\nCennini also noted that \"There is another black which is made from burnt almond shells or peaches and this is a perfect, fine black.\" Similar fine blacks were made by burning the pits of the peach, cherry or apricot. The powdered charcoal was then mixed with gum arabic or the yellow of an egg to make a paint.\nDifferent civilizations burned different plants to produce their charcoal pigments. The Inuit of Alaska used wood charcoal mixed with the blood of seals to paint masks and wooden objects. The Polynesians burned coconuts to produce their pigment.\nDyes.\nGood-quality black dyes were not known until the middle of the 14th century. The most common early dyes were made from bark, roots or fruits of different trees; usually walnuts, chestnuts, or certain oak trees. The blacks produced were often more gray, brown or bluish. The cloth had to be dyed several times to darken the color. One solution used by dyers was add to the dye some iron filings, rich in iron oxide, which gave a deeper black. Another was to first dye the fabric dark blue, and then to dye it black.\nA much richer and deeper black dye was eventually found made from the oak apple or \"gall-nut\". The gall-nut is a small round tumor which grows on oak and other varieties of trees. They range in size from 2\u20135\u00a0cm, and are caused by chemicals injected by the larva of certain kinds of gall wasp in the family Cynipidae. The dye was very expensive; a great quantity of gall-nuts were needed for a very small amount of dye. The gall-nuts which made the best dye came from Poland, eastern Europe, the near east and North Africa. Beginning in about the 14th century, dye from gall-nuts was used for clothes of the kings and princes of Europe.\nAnother important source of natural black dyes from the 17th century onwards was the logwood tree, or Haematoxylum campechianum, which also produced reddish and bluish dyes. It is a species of flowering tree in the legume family, Fabaceae, that is native to southern Mexico and northern Central America. The modern nation of Belize grew from 17th century English logwood logging camps.\nSince the mid-19th century, synthetic black dyes have largely replaced natural dyes. One of the important synthetic blacks is Nigrosin, a mixture of synthetic black dyes (CI 50415, Solvent black 5) made by heating a mixture of nitrobenzene, aniline and aniline hydrochloride in the presence of a copper or iron catalyst. Its main industrial uses are as a colorant for lacquers and varnishes and in marker-pen inks.\nInks.\nThe first known inks were made by the Chinese, and date back to the 23rd century B.C. They used natural plant dyes and minerals such as graphite ground with water and applied with an ink brush. Early Chinese inks similar to the modern inkstick have been found dating to about 256 BC at the end of the Warring States period. They were produced from soot, usually produced by burning pine wood, mixed with animal glue. To make ink from an inkstick, the stick is continuously ground against an inkstone with a small quantity of water to produce a dark liquid which is then applied with an ink brush. Artists and calligraphists could vary the thickness of the resulting ink by reducing or increasing the intensity and time of ink grinding. These inks produced the delicate shading and subtle or dramatic effects of Chinese brush painting.\nIndia ink (or \"Indian ink\" in British English) is a black ink once widely used for writing and printing and now more commonly used for drawing, especially when inking comic books and comic strips. The technique of making it probably came from China. India ink has been in use in India since at least the 4th century BC, where it was called \"masi\". In India, the black color of the ink came from bone char, tar, pitch and other substances.\nThe ancient Romans had a black writing ink they called \"atramentum librarium\". Its name came from the Latin word \"atrare\", which meant to make something black. (This was the same root as the English word \"atrocious\".) It was usually made, like India ink, from soot, although one variety, called \"atramentum elephantinum\", was made by burning the ivory of elephants.\nGall-nuts were also used for making fine black writing ink. Iron gall ink (also known as iron gall nut ink or oak gall ink) was a purple-black or brown-black ink made from iron salts and tannic acids from gall nut. It was the standard writing and drawing ink in Europe, from about the 12th century to the 19th century, and remained in use well into the 20th century.\nAstronomy.\nWhy the night sky and space are black \u2013 Olbers' paradox.\nThe fact that outer space is black is sometimes called Olbers' paradox. In theory, because the universe is full of stars, and is believed to be infinitely large, it would be expected that the light of an infinite number of stars would be enough to brilliantly light the whole universe all the time. However, the background color of outer space is black. This contradiction was first noted in 1823 by German astronomer Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers, who posed the question of why the night sky was black.\nThe current accepted answer is that, although the universe may be infinitely large, it is not infinitely old. It is thought to be about 13.8 billion years old, so we can only see objects as far away as the distance light can travel in 13.8 billion years. Light from stars farther away has not reached Earth, and cannot contribute to making the sky bright. Furthermore, as the universe is expanding, many stars are moving away from Earth. As they move, the wavelength of their light becomes longer, through the Doppler effect, and shifts toward red, or even becomes invisible. As a result of these two phenomena, there is not enough starlight to make space anything but black.\nThe daytime sky on Earth is blue because light from the Sun strikes molecules in Earth's atmosphere scattering light in all directions. Blue light is scattered more than other colors, and reaches the eye in greater quantities, making the daytime sky appear blue. This is known as Rayleigh scattering.\nThe nighttime sky on Earth is black because the part of Earth experiencing night is facing away from the Sun, the light of the Sun is blocked by Earth itself, and there is no other bright nighttime source of light in the vicinity. Thus, there is not enough light to undergo Rayleigh scattering and make the sky blue. On the Moon, on the other hand, because there is virtually no atmosphere to scatter the light, the sky is black both day and night. This also holds true for other locations without an atmosphere, such as Mercury.\nCulture.\nIn China, the color black is associated with water, one of the five fundamental elements believed to compose all things; and with winter, cold, and the direction north, usually symbolized by a black tortoise. It is also associated with disorder, including the positive disorder which leads to change and new life. When the first Emperor of China Qin Shi Huang seized power from the Zhou Dynasty, he changed the Imperial color from red to black, saying that black extinguished red. Only when the Han Dynasty appeared in 206 BC was red restored as the imperial color.\nIn Japan, black is associated with mystery, the night, the unknown, the supernatural, the invisible and death. Combined with white, it can symbolize intuition. In 10th and 11th century Japan, it was believed that wearing black could bring misfortune. It was worn at court by those who wanted to set themselves apart from the established powers or who had renounced material possessions.\nIn Japan black can also symbolize experience, as opposed to white, which symbolizes naivet\u00e9. The black belt in martial arts symbolizes experience, while a white belt is worn by novices. Japanese men traditionally wear a black kimono with some white decoration on their wedding day.\nIn Indonesia black is associated with depth, the subterranean world, demons, disaster, and the left hand. When black is combined with white, however, it symbolizes harmony and equilibrium.\nPolitical movements.\nAnarchism is a political philosophy, most popular in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, which holds that governments and capitalism are harmful and undesirable. The symbols of anarchism was usually either a black flag or a black letter A. More recently it is usually represented with a bisected red and black flag, to emphasise the movement's socialist roots in the First International. Anarchism was most popular in Spain, France, Italy, Ukraine and Argentina. There were also small but influential movements in the United States and Russia. In the latter, the movement initially allied itself with the Bolsheviks.\nThe Black Army was a collection of anarchist military units which fought in the Russian Civil War, sometimes on the side of the Bolshevik Red Army, and sometimes for the opposing White Army. It was officially known as the Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine, and it was under the command of the anarchist Nestor Makhno.\nFascism. The Blackshirts () were Fascist paramilitary groups in Italy during the period immediately following World War I and until the end of World War II. The Blackshirts were officially known as the Voluntary Militia for National Security (\"Milizia Volontaria per la Sicurezza Nazionale\", or MVSN).\nInspired by the black uniforms of the Arditi, Italy's elite storm troops of World War I, the Fascist Blackshirts were organized by Benito Mussolini as the military tool of his political movement. They used violence and intimidation against Mussolini's opponents. The emblem of the Italian fascists was a black flag with fasces, an axe in a bundle of sticks, an ancient Roman symbol of authority. Mussolini came to power in 1922 through his March on Rome with the blackshirts.\nBlack was also adopted by Adolf Hitler and the Nazis in Germany. Red, white and black were the colors of the flag of the German Empire from 1870 to 1918. In \"Mein Kampf\", Hitler explained that they were \"revered colors expressive of our homage to the glorious past.\" Hitler also wrote that \"the new flag\u00a0... should prove effective as a large poster\" because \"in hundreds of thousands of cases a really striking emblem may be the first cause of awakening interest in a movement.\" The black swastika was meant to symbolize the Aryan race, which, according to the Nazis, \"was always anti-Semitic and will always be anti-Semitic.\" Several designs by a number of different authors were considered, but the one adopted in the end was Hitler's personal design. Black became the color of the uniform of the SS, the \"Schutzstaffel\" or \"defense corps\", the paramilitary wing of the Nazi Party, and was worn by SS officers from 1932 until the end of World War II.\nThe Nazis used a black triangle to symbolize anti-social elements. The symbol originates from Nazi concentration camps, where every prisoner had to wear one of the Nazi concentration camp badges on their jacket, the color of which categorized them according to \"their kind\". Many Black Triangle prisoners were either mentally disabled or mentally ill. The homeless were also included, as were alcoholics, the Romani people, the habitually \"work-shy\", prostitutes, draft dodgers and pacifists. More recently the black triangle has been adopted as a symbol in lesbian culture and by disabled activists.\nBlack shirts were also worn by the British Union of Fascists before World War II, and members of fascist movements in the Netherlands.\nPatriotic resistance. The L\u00fctzow Free Corps, composed of volunteer German students and academics fighting against Napoleon in 1813, could not afford to make special uniforms and therefore adopted black, as the only color that could be used to dye their civilian clothing without the original color showing. In 1815 the students began to carry a red, black and gold flag, which they believed (incorrectly) had been the colors of the Holy Roman Empire (the imperial flag had actually been gold and black). In 1848, this banner became the flag of the German confederation. In 1866, Prussia unified Germany under its rule, and imposed the red, white and black of its own flag, which remained the colors of the German flag until the end of the Second World War. In 1949 the Federal Republic of Germany returned to the original flag and colors of the students and professors of 1815, which is the flag of Germany today.\nMilitary.\nBlack has been a traditional color of cavalry and armoured or mechanized troops. German armoured troops (Panzerwaffe) traditionally wore black uniforms, and even in others, a black beret is common. In Finland, black is the symbolic color for both armoured troops and combat engineers, and military units of these specialities have black flags and unit insignia.\nThe black beret and the color black is also a symbol of special forces in many countries. Soviet and Russian OMON special police and Russian naval infantry wear a black beret. A black beret is also worn by military police in the Canadian, Czech, Croatian, Portuguese, Spanish and Serbian armies.\nThe silver-on-black skull and crossbones symbol or Totenkopf and a black uniform were used by Hussars and Black Brunswickers, the German Panzerwaffe and the Nazi Schutzstaffel, and U.S. 400th Missile Squadron (crossed missiles), and continues in use with the Estonian Kuperjanov Battalion.\nReligion.\nIn Christian theology, black was the color of the universe before God created light. In many religious cultures, from Mesoamerica to Oceania to India and Japan, the world was created out of a primordial darkness. In the Bible the light of faith and Christianity is often contrasted with the darkness of ignorance and paganism.\nIn Christianity, the devil is often called the \"prince of darkness\". The term was used in John Milton's poem \"Paradise Lost\", published in 1667, referring to Satan, who is viewed as the embodiment of evil. It is an English translation of the Latin phrase \"princeps tenebrarum\", which occurs in the \"Acts of Pilate\", written in the fourth century, in the 11th-century hymn \"Rhythmus de die mortis\" by Pietro Damiani, and in a sermon by Bernard of Clairvaux from the 12th century. The phrase also occurs in \"King Lear\" by William Shakespeare (c.\u20091606), Act III, Scene IV, l. 14:\n'The prince of darkness is a gentleman.\"\nPriests and pastors of the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Protestant churches commonly wear black, as do monks of the Benedictine Order, who consider it the color of humility and penitence.\nAssociations and symbolism.\nMourning.\nIn the West, black is commonly associated with mourning and bereavement, and usually worn at funerals and memorial services. In some traditional societies, for example in Greece and Italy, some widows wear black for the rest of their lives. In contrast, across much of Africa and parts of Asia like Vietnam, white is a color of mourning.\nIn Victorian England, the colors and fabrics of mourning were specified in an unofficial dress code: \"non-reflective black paramatta and crape for the first year of deepest mourning, followed by nine months of dullish black silk, heavily trimmed with crape, and then three months when crape was discarded. Paramatta was a fabric of combined silk and wool or cotton; crape was a harsh black silk fabric with a crimped appearance produced by heat. Widows were allowed to change into the colors of half-mourning, such as gray and lavender, black and white, for the final six months.\"\nA \"black day\" (or week or month) usually refers to tragic date. The Romans marked \"fasti\" days with white stones and \"nefasti\" days with black. The term is often used to remember massacres. Black months include the Black September in Jordan, when large numbers of Palestinians were killed, and Black July in Sri Lanka, the killing of members of the Tamil population by the Sinhalese government.\nIn the financial world, the term often refers to a dramatic drop in the stock market. For example, the Wall Street Crash of 1929, the stock market crash on October 29, 1929, which marked the start of the Great Depression, is nicknamed Black Tuesday, and was preceded by Black Thursday, a downturn on October 24 the previous week.\nDarkness and evil.\nIn western popular culture, black has long been associated with evil and darkness. It is the traditional color of witchcraft and black magic.\nIn the Book of Revelation, the last book in the New Testament of the Bible, the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse are supposed to announce the Apocalypse before the Last Judgment. The horseman representing famine rides a black horse. The vampire of literature and films, such as Count Dracula of the Bram Stoker novel, dressed in black, and could only move at night. The Wicked Witch of the West in the 1939 film \"The Wizard of Oz\" became the archetype of witches for generations of children. Whereas witches and sorcerers inspired real fear in the 17th century, in the 21st century children and adults dressed as witches for Halloween parties and parades.\nPower, authority and solemnity.\nBlack is frequently used as a color of power, law and authority. In many countries judges and magistrates wear black robes. That custom began in Europe in the 13th and 14th centuries. Jurists, magistrates and certain other court officials in France began to wear long black robes during the reign of Philip IV of France (1285\u20131314), and in England from the time of Edward I (1271\u20131307). The custom spread to the cities of Italy at about the same time, between 1300 and 1320. The robes of judges resembled those worn by the clergy, and represented the law and authority of the King, while those of the clergy represented the law of God and authority of the church.\nUntil the 20th century most police uniforms were black, until they were largely replaced by a less menacing blue in France, the U.S. and other countries. In the United States, police cars are frequently Black and white. The riot control units of the Basque Autonomous Police in Spain are known as \"beltzak\" (\"blacks\") after their uniform.\nBlack today is the most common color for limousines and the official cars of government officials.\nBlack formal attire is still worn at many solemn occasions or ceremonies, from graduations to formal balls. Graduation gowns are copied from the gowns worn by university professors in the Middle Ages, which in turn were copied from the robes worn by judges and priests, who often taught at the early universities. The mortarboard hat worn by graduates is adapted from a square cap called a biretta worn by Medieval professors and clerics.\nFunctionality.\nIn the 19th and 20th centuries, many machines and devices, large and small, were painted black, to stress their functionality. These included telephones, sewing machines, steamships, railroad locomotives, and automobiles. The Ford Model T, the first mass-produced car, was available only in black from 1914 to 1926. Of means of transportation, only airplanes were rarely ever painted black.\nBlack house paint is becoming more popular with Sherwin-Williams reporting that the color, Tricorn Black, was the 6th most popular exterior house paint color in Canada and the 12th most popular paint in the United States in 2018.\nEthnography.\nBlack is also commonly used as a racial description in the United Kingdom, since ethnicity was first measured in the 2001 census. The 2011 British census asked residents to describe themselves, and categories offered included Black, African, Caribbean, or Black British. Other possible categories were African British, African Scottish, Caribbean British and Caribbean Scottish. Of the total UK population in 2001, 1.0 percent identified themselves as Black Caribbean, 0.8 percent as Black African, and 0.2 percent as Black (others).\nIn Canada, census respondents can identify themselves as Black. In the 2006 census, 2.5 percent of the population identified themselves as black.\nIn Australia, the term black is not used in the census. In the 2006 census, 2.3 percent of Australians identified themselves as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islanders.\nIn Brazil, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) asks people to identify themselves as \"branco\" (white), \"pardo\" (brown), \"preto\" (black), or \"amarelo\" (yellow). In 2008 6.8 percent of the population identified themselves as \"preto\".\nConspiracy.\nBlack is commonly associated with secrecy.\nElegant fashion.\nBlack is the color most commonly associated with elegance in Europe and the United States, followed by silver, gold, and white.\nBlack first became a fashionable color for men in Europe in the 17th century, in the courts of Italy and Spain. (See history above.) In the 19th century, it was the fashion for men both in business and for evening wear, in the form of a black coat whose tails came down the knees. In the evening it was the custom of the men to leave the women after dinner to go to a special smoking room to enjoy cigars or cigarettes. This meant that their tailcoats eventually smelled of tobacco. According to the legend, in 1865 Edward VII, then the Prince of Wales, had his tailor make a special short smoking jacket. The smoking jacket then evolved into the dinner jacket. Again according to legend, the first Americans to wear the jacket were members of the Tuxedo Club in New York State. Thereafter the jacket became known as a tuxedo in the U.S. The term \"smoking\" is still used today in Russia and other countries.\nThe tuxedo was always black until the 1930s, when the Duke of Windsor began to wear a tuxedo that was a very dark midnight blue. He did so because a black tuxedo looked greenish in artificial light, while a dark blue tuxedo looked blacker than black itself.\nFor women's fashion, the defining moment was the invention of the simple black dress by Coco Chanel in 1926. (See history.) Thereafter, a long black gown was used for formal occasions, while the simple black dress could be used for everything else. The designer Karl Lagerfeld, explaining why black was so popular, said: \"Black is the color that goes with everything. If you're wearing black, you're on sure ground.\" Skirts have gone up and down and fashions have changed, but the black dress has not lost its position as the essential element of a woman's wardrobe. The fashion designer Christian Dior said, \"elegance is a combination of distinction, naturalness, care and simplicity,\" and black exemplified elegance.\nThe expression \"X is the new black\" is a reference to the latest trend or fad that is considered a wardrobe basic for the duration of the trend, on the basis that black is always fashionable. The phrase has taken on a life of its own and has become a clich\u00e9.\nMany performers of both popular and European classical music, including French singers Edith Piaf and Juliette Gr\u00e9co, and violinist Joshua Bell have traditionally worn black on stage during performances. A black costume was usually chosen as part of their image or stage persona, or because it did not distract from the music, or sometimes for a political reason. Country-western singer Johnny Cash always wore black on stage. In 1971, Cash wrote the song \"Man in Black\" to explain why he dressed in that color: \"We're doing mighty fine I do suppose / In our streak of lightning cars and fancy clothes / But just so we're reminded of the ones who are held back / Up front there ought to be a man in black.\"\nReferences.\nNotes and citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4036", "revid": "11613066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4036", "title": "Black Flag", "text": "Black Flag or black flag may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "4037", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4037", "title": "Bletchley Park", "text": "WWII code-breaking site and British country house\nBletchley Park is an English country house and estate in Bletchley, Milton Keynes (Buckinghamshire) that became the principal centre of Allied code-breaking during the Second World War. The mansion was constructed during the years following 1883 for the financier and politician Sir Herbert Leon in the Victorian Gothic, Tudor, and Dutch Baroque styles, on the site of older buildings of the same name.\nDuring World War II, the estate housed the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;CS), which regularly penetrated the secret communications of the Axis Powers\u00a0\u2013 most importantly the German Enigma and Lorenz ciphers. The GC&amp;CS team of codebreakers included Alan Turing, Gordon Welchman, Hugh Alexander, Bill Tutte, and Stuart Milner-Barry. The nature of the work at Bletchley remained secret until many years after the war.\nAccording to the official historian of British Intelligence, the \"Ultra\" intelligence produced at Bletchley shortened the war by two to four years, and without it the outcome of the war would have been uncertain. The team at Bletchley Park devised automatic machinery to help with decryption, culminating in the development of Colossus, the world's first programmable digital electronic computer. Codebreaking operations at Bletchley Park came to an end in 1946 and all information about the wartime operations was classified until the mid-1970s.\nAfter the war it had various uses including as a teacher-training college and local GPO headquarters. By 1990 the huts in which the codebreakers worked were being considered for demolition and redevelopment. The Bletchley Park Trust was formed in February 1992 to save large portions of the site from development.\nMore recently, Bletchley Park has been open to the public, featuring interpretive exhibits and huts that have been rebuilt to appear as they did during their wartime operations. It receives hundreds of thousands of visitors annually. The separate National Museum of Computing, which includes a working replica Bombe machine and a rebuilt Colossus computer, is housed in Block H on the site.\nHistory.\nThe site appears in the Domesday Book of 1086 as part of the Manor of Eaton. Browne Willis built a mansion there in 1711, but after Thomas Harrison purchased the property in 1793 this was pulled down. It was first known as Bletchley Park after its purchase by the architect Samuel Lipscomb Seckham in 1877, who built a house there. The estate of was bought in 1883 by Sir Herbert Samuel Leon, who expanded the then-existing house into what architect Landis Gores called a \"maudlin and monstrous pile\" combining Victorian Gothic, Tudor, and Dutch Baroque styles. At his Christmas family gatherings there was a fox hunting meet on Boxing Day with glasses of sloe gin from the butler, and the house was always \"humming with servants\". With 40 gardeners, a flower bed of yellow daffodils could become a sea of red tulips overnight. After the death of Herbert Leon in 1926, the estate continued to be occupied by his widow Fanny Leon (n\u00e9e Higham) until her death in 1937.\nIn 1938, the mansion and much of the site was bought by a builder for a housing estate, but in May 1938 Admiral Sir Hugh Sinclair, head of the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS or MI6), bought the mansion and of land for \u00a36,000 (\u00a3 today) for use by GC&amp;CS and SIS in the event of war. He used his own money as the Government said they did not have the budget to do so.\nA key advantage seen by Sinclair and his colleagues (inspecting the site under the cover of \"Captain Ridley's shooting party\") was Bletchley's geographical centrality. It was almost immediately adjacent to Bletchley railway station, where the \"Varsity Line\" between Oxford and Cambridge\u00a0\u2013 whose universities were expected to supply many of the code-breakers\u00a0\u2013 met the main West Coast railway line connecting London, Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool, Glasgow and Edinburgh. Watling Street, the main road linking London to the north-west (subsequently the A5) was close by, and high-volume communication links were available at the telegraph and telephone repeater station in nearby Fenny Stratford.\nBletchley Park was known as \"B.P.\" to those who worked there.\n\"Station X\" (X = Roman numeral ten), \"London Signals Intelligence Centre\", and \"Government Communications Headquarters\" were all cover names used during the war.\nThe formal posting of the many \"Wrens\"\u00a0\u2013 members of the Women's Royal Naval Service\u00a0\u2013 working there, was to HMS Pembroke V. Royal Air Force names of Bletchley Park and its outstations included RAF Eastcote, RAF Lime Grove and RAF Church Green. The postal address that staff had to use was \"Room 47, Foreign Office\".\nAfter the war, the Government Code &amp; Cypher School became the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), moving to Eastcote in 1946 and to Cheltenham in the 1950s. The site was used by various government agencies, including the GPO and the Civil Aviation Authority. One large building, block F, was demolished in 1987 by which time the site was being run down with tenants leaving.\nIn 1990 the site was at risk of being sold for housing development. However, Milton Keynes Council made it into a conservation area. Bletchley Park Trust was set up in 1991 by a group of people who recognised the site's importance. The initial trustees included Roger Bristow, Ted Enever, Peter Wescombe, Dr Peter Jarvis of the Bletchley Archaeological &amp; Historical Society, and Tony Sale who in 1994 became the first director of the Bletchley Park Museums.\nPersonnel.\nAdmiral Hugh Sinclair was the founder and head of GC&amp;CS between 1919 and 1938 with Commander Alastair Denniston being operational head of the organization from 1919 to 1942, beginning with its formation from the Admiralty's Room 40 (NID25) and the War Office's MI1b. Key GC&amp;CS cryptanalysts who moved from London to Bletchley Park included John Tiltman, Dillwyn \"Dilly\" Knox, Josh Cooper, Oliver Strachey and Nigel de Grey. These people had a variety of backgrounds\u00a0\u2013 linguists and chess champions were common, and Knox's field was papyrology. The British War Office recruited top solvers of cryptic crossword puzzles, as these individuals had strong lateral thinking skills.\nOn the day Britain declared war on Germany, Denniston wrote to the Foreign Office about recruiting \"men of the professor type\". Personal networking drove early recruitments, particularly of men from the universities of Cambridge and Oxford. Trustworthy women were similarly recruited for administrative and clerical jobs. In one 1941 recruiting stratagem, \"The Daily Telegraph\" was asked to organise a crossword competition, after which promising contestants were discreetly approached about \"a particular type of work as a contribution to the war effort\".\nDenniston recognised, however, that the enemy's use of electromechanical cipher machines meant that formally trained mathematicians would also be needed; Oxford's Peter Twinn joined GC&amp;CS in February 1939; Cambridge's Alan Turing and Gordon Welchman began training in 1938 and reported to Bletchley the day after war was declared, along with John Jeffreys. Later-recruited cryptanalysts included the mathematicians Derek Taunt, Jack Good, Bill Tutte, and Max Newman; historian Harry Hinsley, and chess champions Hugh Alexander and Stuart Milner-Barry. Joan Clarke was one of the few women employed at Bletchley as a full-fledged cryptanalyst.\nWhen seeking to recruit more suitably advanced linguists, John Tiltman turned to Patrick Wilkinson of the Italian section for advice, and he suggested asking Lord Lindsay of Birker, of Balliol College, Oxford, S. W. Grose, and Martin Charlesworth, of St John's College, Cambridge, to recommend classical scholars or applicants to their colleges.\nThis eclectic staff of \"Boffins and Debs\" (scientists and debutantes, young women of high society) caused GC&amp;CS to be whimsically dubbed the \"Golf, Cheese and Chess Society\". \nDuring a morale-boosting visit on 9 September 1941, Winston Churchill reportedly remarked to Denniston or Menzies: \"I told you to leave no stone unturned to get staff, but I had no idea you had taken me so literally.\" Six weeks later, having failed to get sufficient typing and unskilled staff to achieve the productivity that was possible, Turing, Welchman, Alexander and Milner-Barry wrote directly to Churchill. His response was \"Action this day make sure they have all they want on extreme priority and report to me that this has been done.\" The Army CIGS Alan Brooke wrote that on 16 April 1942 \"Took lunch in car and went to see the organization for breaking down ciphers \u2013 a wonderful set of professors and genii! I marvel at the work they succeed in doing.\"\nAfter initial training at the Inter-Service Special Intelligence School set up by John Tiltman (initially at an RAF depot in Buckingham and later in Bedford\u00a0\u2013 where it was known locally as \"the Spy School\") staff worked a six-day week, rotating through three shifts: 4\u00a0p.m. to midnight, midnight to 8\u00a0a.m. (the most disliked shift), and 8\u00a0a.m. to 4\u00a0p.m., each with a half-hour meal break. At the end of the third week, a worker went off at 8\u00a0a.m. and came back at 4\u00a0p.m., thus putting in 16 hours on that last day. The irregular hours affected workers' health and social life, as well as the routines of the nearby homes at which most staff lodged. The work was tedious and demanded intense concentration; staff got one week's leave four times a year, but some \"girls\" collapsed and required extended rest. Recruitment took place to combat a shortage of experts in Morse code and German.\nIn January 1945, at the peak of codebreaking efforts, nearly 10,000 personnel were working at Bletchley and its outstations. About three-quarters of these were women. Many of the women came from middle-class backgrounds and held degrees in the areas of mathematics, physics and engineering; they were given chance due to the lack of men, who had been sent to war. They performed calculations and coding and hence were integral to the computing processes. Among them were Eleanor Ireland who worked on the Colossus computers and Ruth Briggs, a German scholar, who worked within the Naval Section.\nThe female staff in Dilwyn Knox's section were sometimes termed \"Dilly's Fillies\". Knox's methods enabled Mavis Lever (who married mathematician and fellow code-breaker Keith Batey) and Margaret Rock to solve a German code, the Abwehr cipher.\nMany of the women had backgrounds in languages, particularly French, German and Italian. Among them were Rozanne Colchester, a translator who worked mainly for the Italian air forces Section, and Cicely Mayhew, recruited straight from university, who worked in Hut 8, translating decoded German Navy signals.\nFor a long time, the British Government failed to acknowledge the contributions the personnel at Bletchley Park had made. Their work achieved official recognition only in 2009.\nSecrecy.\nProperly used, the German Enigma and Lorenz ciphers should have been virtually unbreakable, but flaws in German cryptographic procedures, and poor discipline among the personnel carrying them out, created vulnerabilities that made Bletchley's attacks just barely feasible. These vulnerabilities, however, could have been remedied by relatively simple improvements in enemy procedures, and such changes would certainly have been implemented had Germany had any hint of Bletchley's success. Thus the intelligence Bletchley produced was considered wartime Britain's \"Ultra secret\"\u00a0\u2013 higher even than the normally highest classification \"Most\u00a0Secret\"\u2009\u00a0\u2013 and security was paramount.\nAll staff signed the Official Secrets Act (1939) and a 1942 security warning emphasised the importance of discretion even within Bletchley itself: \"Do not talk at meals. Do not talk in the transport. Do not talk travelling. Do not talk in the billet. Do not talk by your own fireside. Be careful even in your Hut\u00a0...\"\nNevertheless, there were security leaks. Jock Colville, the Assistant Private Secretary to Winston Churchill, recorded in his diary on 31 July 1941, that the newspaper proprietor Lord Camrose had discovered Ultra and that security leaks \"increase in number and seriousness\". Without doubt, the most serious of these was that Bletchley Park had been infiltrated by John Cairncross, the notorious Soviet mole and member of the Cambridge Spy Ring, who leaked Ultra material to Moscow.\nDespite the high degree of secrecy surrounding Bletchley Park during the Second World War, unique and hitherto unknown amateur film footage of the outstation at nearby Whaddon Hall came to light in 2020, after being anonymously donated to the Bletchley Park Trust. A spokesman for the Trust noted the film's existence was all the more incredible because it was \"very, very rare even to have [still] photographs\" of the park and its associated sites.\nEarly work.\nThe first personnel of the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;CS) moved to Bletchley Park on 15 August 1939. The Naval, Military, and Air Sections were on the ground floor of the mansion, together with a telephone exchange, teleprinter room, kitchen, and dining room; the top floor was allocated to MI6. Construction of the wooden huts began in late 1939, and Elmers School, a neighbouring boys' boarding school in a Victorian Gothic redbrick building by a church, was acquired for the Commercial and Diplomatic Sections.\nAfter the United States joined World War II, a number of American cryptographers were posted to Hut 3, and from May 1943 onwards there was close co-operation between British and American intelligence. (See 1943 BRUSA Agreement.) In contrast, the Soviet Union was never officially told of Bletchley Park and its activities\u00a0\u2013 a reflection of Churchill's distrust of the Soviets even during the US-UK-USSR alliance imposed by the Nazi threat.\nThe only direct enemy damage to the site was done 20\u201321 November 1940 by three bombs probably intended for Bletchley railway station; Hut\u00a04, shifted two feet off its foundation, was winched back into place as\nwork inside continued.\nIntelligence reporting.\nInitially, when only a very limited amount of Enigma traffic was being read, deciphered non-Naval Enigma messages were sent from Hut\u00a06 to Hut 3 which handled their translation and onward transmission. Subsequently, under Group Captain Eric Jones, Hut 3 expanded to become the heart of Bletchley Park's intelligence effort, with input from decrypts of \"Tunny\" (Lorenz SZ42) traffic and many other sources. Early in 1942 it moved into Block D, but its functions were still referred to as Hut 3.\nHut 3 contained a number of sections: Air Section \"3A\", Military Section \"3M\", a small Naval Section \"3N\", a multi-service Research Section \"3G\" and a large liaison section \"3L\". It also housed the Traffic Analysis Section, SIXTA. An important function that allowed the synthesis of raw messages into valuable Military intelligence was the indexing and cross-referencing of information in a number of different filing systems. Intelligence reports were sent out to the Secret Intelligence Service, the intelligence chiefs in the relevant ministries, and later on to high-level commanders in the field.\nNaval Enigma deciphering was in Hut\u00a08, with translation in Hut\u00a04. Verbatim translations were sent to the Naval Intelligence Division (NID) of the Admiralty's Operational Intelligence Centre (OIC), supplemented by information from indexes as to the meaning of technical terms and cross-references from a knowledge store of German naval technology. Where relevant to non-naval matters, they would also be passed to Hut 3. Hut 4 also decoded a manual system known as the dockyard cipher, which sometimes carried messages that were also sent on an Enigma network. Feeding these back to Hut\u00a08 provided excellent \"cribs\" for Known-plaintext attacks on the daily naval Enigma key.\nListening stations.\nInitially, a wireless room was established at Bletchley Park.\nIt was set up in the mansion's water tower under the code name \"Station\u00a0X\", a term now sometimes applied to the codebreaking efforts at Bletchley as a whole. The \"X\" is the Roman numeral \"ten\", this being the Secret Intelligence Service's tenth such station. Due to the long radio aerials stretching from the wireless room, the radio station was moved from Bletchley Park to nearby Whaddon Hall to avoid drawing attention to the site.\nSubsequently, other listening stations\u00a0\u2013 the Y-stations, such as the ones at Chicksands in Bedfordshire, Beaumanor Hall, Leicestershire (where the headquarters of the War Office \"Y\" Group was located) and Beeston Hill Y Station in Norfolk\u00a0\u2013 gathered raw signals for processing at Bletchley. Coded messages were taken down by hand and sent to Bletchley on paper by motorcycle despatch riders or (later) by teleprinter.\nAdditional buildings.\nThe wartime needs required the building of additional accommodation.\nHuts.\nOften a hut's number became so strongly associated with the work performed inside that even when the work was moved to another building it was still referred to by the original \"Hut\" designation.\nBlocks.\nIn addition to the wooden huts, there were a number of brick-built \"blocks\".\nWork on specific countries' signals.\nGerman signals.\nMost German messages decrypted at Bletchley were produced by one or another version of the Enigma cipher machine, but an important minority were produced by the even more complicated twelve-rotor Lorenz SZ42 on-line teleprinter cipher machine used for high command messages, known as Fish.\nFive weeks before the outbreak of war, Warsaw's Cipher Bureau revealed its achievements in breaking Enigma to astonished French and British personnel. The British used the Poles' information and techniques, and the Enigma clone sent to them in August 1939, which greatly increased their (previously very limited) success in decrypting Enigma messages.\nThe bombe was an electromechanical device whose function was to discover some of the daily settings of the Enigma machines on the various German military networks. Its pioneering design was developed by Alan Turing (with an important contribution from Gordon Welchman) and the machine was engineered by Harold 'Doc' Keen of the British Tabulating Machine Company. Each machine was about high and wide, deep and weighed about a ton.\nAt its peak, GC&amp;CS was reading approximately 4,000 messages per day. As a hedge against enemy attack most bombes were dispersed to installations at Adstock and Wavendon (both later supplanted by installations at Stanmore and Eastcote), and Gayhurst.\nLuftwaffe messages were the first to be read in quantity. The German navy had much tighter procedures, and the capture of code books was needed before they could be broken. When, in February 1942, the German navy introduced the four-rotor Enigma for communications with its Atlantic U-boats, this traffic became unreadable for a period of ten months. Britain produced modified bombes, but it was the success of the US Navy Bombe that was the main source of reading messages from this version of Enigma for the rest of the war. Messages were sent to and fro across the Atlantic by enciphered teleprinter links.\nThe Lorenz messages were codenamed \"Tunny\" at Bletchley Park. They were only sent in quantity from mid-1942. The Tunny networks were used for high-level messages between German High Command and field commanders. With the help of German operator errors, the cryptanalysts in the Testery (named after Ralph Tester, its head) worked out the logical structure of the machine despite not knowing its physical form. They devised automatic machinery to help with decryption, which culminated in Colossus, the world's first programmable digital electronic computer. This was designed and built by Tommy Flowers and his team at the Post Office Research Station at Dollis Hill. The prototype first worked in December 1943, was delivered to Bletchley Park in January and first worked operationally on 5 February 1944. Enhancements were developed for the Mark 2 Colossus, the first of which was working at Bletchley Park on the morning of 1 June in time for D-day. Flowers then produced one Colossus a month for the rest of the war, making a total of ten with an eleventh part-built. The machines were operated mainly by Wrens in a section named the Newmanry after its head Max Newman.\nBletchley's work was essential to defeating the U-boats in the Battle of the Atlantic, and to the British naval victories in the Battle of Cape Matapan and the Battle of North Cape. In 1941, Ultra exerted a powerful effect on the North African desert campaign against German forces under General Erwin Rommel. General Sir Claude Auchinleck wrote that were it not for Ultra, \"Rommel would have certainly got through to Cairo\". While not changing the events, \"Ultra\" decrypts featured prominently in the story of Operation SALAM, L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Alm\u00e1sy's mission across the desert behind Allied lines in 1942. Prior to the Normandy landings on D-Day in June 1944, the Allies knew the locations of all but two of Germany's fifty-eight Western-front divisions.\nItalian signals.\nItalian signals had been of interest since Italy's attack on Abyssinia in 1935.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War the Italian Navy used the K model of the commercial Enigma without a plugboard; this was solved by Knox in 1937.\nWhen Italy entered the war in 1940 an improved version of the machine was used, though little traffic was sent by it and there were \"wholesale changes\" in Italian codes and cyphers.\nKnox was given a new section for work on Enigma variations, which he staffed with women (\"Dilly's girls\"), who included Margaret Rock, Jean Perrin, Clare Harding, Rachel Ronald, Elisabeth Granger; and Mavis Lever.\nMavis Lever solved the signals revealing the Italian Navy's operational plans before the Battle of Cape Matapan in 1941, leading to a British victory.\nAlthough most Bletchley staff did not know the results of their work, Admiral Cunningham visited Bletchley in person a few weeks later to congratulate them.\nOn entering World War II in June 1940, the Italians were using book codes for most of their military messages. The exception was the Italian Navy, which after the Battle of Cape Matapan started using the C-38 version of the Boris Hagelin rotor-based cipher machine, particularly to route their navy and merchant marine convoys to the conflict in North Africa. As a consequence, JRM Butler recruited his former student Bernard Willson to join a team with two others in Hut\u00a04. In June 1941, Willson became the first of the team to decode the Hagelin system, thus enabling military commanders to direct the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force to sink enemy ships carrying supplies from Europe to Rommel's Afrika Korps. This led to increased shipping losses and, from reading the intercepted traffic, the team learnt that between May and September 1941 the stock of fuel for the Luftwaffe in North Africa reduced by 90 percent.\nAfter an intensive language course, in March 1944 Willson switched to Japanese language-based codes.\nA Middle East Intelligence Centre (MEIC) was set up in Cairo in 1939. When Italy entered the war in June 1940, delays in forwarding intercepts to Bletchley via congested radio links resulted in cryptanalysts being sent to Cairo. A Combined Bureau Middle East (CBME) was set up in November, though the Middle East authorities made \"increasingly bitter complaints\" that GC&amp;CS was giving too little priority to work on Italian cyphers. However, the principle of concentrating high-grade cryptanalysis at Bletchley was maintained. John Chadwick started cryptanalysis work in 1942 on Italian signals at the naval base 'HMS Nile' in Alexandria. Later, he was with GC&amp;CS; in the Heliopolis Museum, Cairo and then in the Villa Laurens, Alexandria.\nSoviet signals.\nSoviet signals had been studied since the 1920s. In 1939\u201340, John Tiltman (who had worked on Russian Army traffic from 1930) set up two Russian sections at Wavendon (a country house near Bletchley) and at Sarafand in Palestine. Two Russian high-grade army and navy systems were broken early in 1940. Tiltman spent two weeks in Finland, where he obtained Russian traffic from Finland and Estonia in exchange for radio equipment. In June 1941, when the Soviet Union became an ally, Churchill ordered a halt to intelligence operations against it. In December 1941, the Russian section was closed down, but in late summer 1943 or late 1944, a small GC&amp;CS Russian cypher section was set up in London overlooking Park Lane, then in Sloane Square.\nJapanese signals.\nAn outpost of the Government Code and Cypher School had been set up in Hong Kong in 1935, the Far East Combined Bureau (FECB). The FECB naval staff moved in 1940 to Singapore, then Colombo, Ceylon, then Kilindini, Mombasa, Kenya. They succeeded in deciphering Japanese codes with a mixture of skill and good fortune. The Army and Air Force staff went from Singapore to the Wireless Experimental Centre at Delhi, India.\nIn early 1942, a six-month crash course in Japanese, for 20 undergraduates from Oxford and Cambridge, was started by the Inter-Services Special Intelligence School in Bedford, in a building across from the main Post Office. This course was repeated every six months until war's end. Most of those completing these courses worked on decoding Japanese naval messages in Hut\u00a07, under John Tiltman.\nBy mid-1945, well over 100 personnel were involved with this operation, which co-operated closely with the FECB and the US Signal intelligence Service at Arlington Hall, Virginia. In 1999, Michael Smith wrote that: \"Only now are the British codebreakers (like John Tiltman, Hugh Foss, and Eric Nave) beginning to receive the recognition they deserve for breaking Japanese codes and cyphers\".\nPostwar.\nContinued secrecy.\nAfter the War, the secrecy imposed on Bletchley staff remained in force, so that most relatives never knew more than that a child, spouse, or parent had done some kind of secret war work. Churchill referred to the Bletchley staff as \"the geese that laid the golden eggs and never cackled\". That said, occasional mentions of the work performed at Bletchley Park slipped the censor's net and appeared in print.\nWith the publication of F.\u00a0W. Winterbotham's \"The Ultra Secret\" (1974) public discussion of Bletchley Park's work finally became possible, although even today some former staff still consider themselves bound to silence.\nProfessor Brian Randell was researching the history of computer science in Britain in 1975-76 for a conference on the history of computing held at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, New Mexico on 10-15 June 1976, and received permission to present a paper on wartime development of the COLOSSI at the Post Office Research Station, Dollis Hill. (In October 1975 the British Government had released a series of captioned photographs from the Public Record Office.) The interest in the \u201crevelations\u201d in his paper resulted in a special evening meeting when Randell and Cooombs answered further questions. Coombs later wrote that \"no member of our team could ever forget the fellowship, the sense of purpose and, above all, the breathless excitement of those days\". In 1977 Randell published an article \"The First Electronic Computer\" in several journals.\nIn July 2009 the British government announced that Bletchley personnel would be recognised with a commemorative badge.\nSite.\nAfter the war, the site passed through a succession of hands and saw a number of uses, including as a teacher-training college and local GPO headquarters. By 1991, the site was nearly empty and the buildings were at risk of demolition for redevelopment.\nIn February 1992, the Milton Keynes Borough Council declared most of the Park a conservation area, and the Bletchley Park Trust was formed to maintain the site as a museum. The site opened to visitors in 1993, and was formally inaugurated by the Duke of Kent as Chief Patron in July 1994. In 1999 the land owners, the Property Advisors to the Civil Estate and BT, granted a lease to the Trust giving it control over most of the site.\nHeritage attraction.\nJune 2014 saw the completion of an \u00a38 million restoration project by museum design specialist, Event Communications, which was marked by a visit from Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge. The Duchess' paternal grandmother, Valerie, and Valerie's twin sister, Mary (\"n\u00e9e\" Glassborow), both worked at Bletchley Park during the war. The twin sisters worked as Foreign Office Civilians in Hut 6, where they managed the interception of enemy and neutral diplomatic signals for decryption. Valerie married Catherine's grandfather, Captain Peter Middleton. A memorial at Bletchley Park commemorates Mary and Valerie Middleton's work as code-breakers.\nLearning Department.\nThe Bletchley Park Learning Department offers educational group visits with active learning activities for schools and universities. Visits can be booked in advance during term time, where students can engage with the history of Bletchley Park and understand its wider relevance for computer history and national security. Their workshops cover introductions to codebreaking, cyber security and the story of Enigma and Lorenz.\nFunding.\nIn October 2005, American billionaire Sidney Frank donated \u00a3500,000 to Bletchley Park Trust to fund a new Science Centre dedicated to Alan Turing. Simon Greenish joined as Director in 2006 to lead the fund-raising effort in a post he held until 2012 when Iain Standen took over the leadership role. In July 2008, a letter to \"The Times\" from more than a hundred academics condemned the neglect of the site. In September 2008, PGP, IBM, and other technology firms announced a fund-raising campaign to repair the facility. On 6 November 2008 it was announced that English Heritage would donate \u00a3300,000 to help maintain the buildings at Bletchley Park, and that they were in discussions regarding the donation of a further \u00a3600,000.\nIn October 2011, the Bletchley Park Trust received a \u00a34.6m Heritage Lottery Fund grant to be used \"to complete the restoration of the site, and to tell its story to the highest modern standards\" on the condition that \u00a31.7m of 'match funding' is raised by the Bletchley Park Trust. Just weeks later, Google contributed \u00a3550k and by June 2012 the trust had successfully raised \u00a32.4m to unlock the grants to restore Huts 3 and 6, as well as develop its exhibition centre in Block C.\nAdditional income is raised by renting Block H to the National Museum of Computing, and some office space in various parts of the park to private firms.\nDue to the COVID-19 pandemic the Trust expected to lose more than \u00a32m in 2020 and be required to cut a third of its workforce. Former MP John Leech asked tech giants Amazon, Apple, Google, Facebook and Microsoft to donate \u00a3400,000 each to secure the future of the Trust. Leech had led the successful campaign to pardon Alan Turing and implement Turing's Law.\nOther organisations sharing the campus.\nThe National Museum of Computing.\nThe National Museum of Computing is housed in Block H, which is rented from the Bletchley Park Trust. Its Colossus and Tunny galleries tell an important part of allied breaking of German codes during World War II. There is a working reconstruction of a Bombe and a rebuilt Colossus computer which was used on the high-level Lorenz cipher, codenamed \"Tunny\" by the British.\nThe museum, which opened in 2007, is an independent voluntary organisation that is governed by its own board of trustees. Its aim is \"To collect and restore computer systems particularly those developed in Britain and to enable people to explore that collection for inspiration, learning and enjoyment.\" Through its many exhibits, the museum displays the story of computing through the mainframes of the 1960s and 1970s, and the rise of personal computing in the 1980s. It has a policy of having as many of the exhibits as possible in full working order.\nScience and Innovation Centre.\nThis consists of serviced office accommodation housed in Bletchley Park's Blocks A and E, and the upper floors of the Mansion. Its aim is to foster the growth and development of dynamic knowledge-based start-ups and other businesses.\nProposed National College of Cyber Security.\nIn April 2020 Bletchley Park Capital Partners, a private company run by Tim Reynolds, Deputy Chairman of the National Museum of Computing, announced plans to sell off the freehold to part of the site containing former Block G for commercial development. Offers of between \u00a34m and \u00a36m were reportedly being sought for the 3 acre plot, for which planning permission for employment purposes was granted in 2005. Previously, the construction of a National College of Cyber Security for students aged from 16 to 19 years old had been envisaged on the site, to be housed in Block G after renovation with funds supplied by the Bletchley Park Science and Innovation Centre.\nRSGB National Radio Centre.\nThe Radio Society of Great Britain's National Radio Centre (including a library, radio station, museum and bookshop) are in a newly constructed building close to the main Bletchley Park entrance.\nFinal recognition.\nNot until July 2009 did the British government fully acknowledge the contribution of the many people working for the Government Code and Cypher School ('G C &amp; C S') at Bletchley. Only then was a commemorative medal struck to be presented to those involved. The gilded medal bears the inscription \"G C &amp; C S 1939-1945 Bletchley Park and its Outstations\".\nLocation.\nBletchley Park is opposite Bletchley railway station. It is close to junctions 13 and 14 of the M1, about northwest of London.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4038", "revid": "310173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4038", "title": "Banach Tarski Paradoxical Decomposition", "text": ""}
{"id": "4040", "revid": "8029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4040", "title": "B.C", "text": ""}
{"id": "4041", "revid": "29720313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4041", "title": "Bede", "text": "Anglo-Saxon monk, writer and saint (672/3\u2013735)\nBede ( ; 672/3\u00a0\u2013 26 May 735) was an English monk and an author and scholar. He was one of the greatest teachers and writers during the Early Middle Ages, and his most famous work, \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\", gained him the title \"The Father of English History\". He served at the monastery of St Peter and its companion monastery of St Paul in the Kingdom of Northumbria of the Angles. He is also known as Saint Bede, The Venerable Bede, and Bede the Venerable (; other pronunciations: Old English: ], ]).\nBorn on lands belonging to the twin monastery of Monkwearmouth\u2013Jarrow in present-day Tyne and Wear, England, Bede was sent to Monkwearmouth at the age of seven and later joined Abbot Ceolfrith at Jarrow. Both of them survived a plague that struck in 686 and killed a majority of the population there. While Bede spent most of his life in the monastery, he travelled to several abbeys and monasteries across the British Isles, even visiting the archbishop of York and King Ceolwulf of Northumbria.\nHis ecumenical writings were extensive and included a number of Biblical commentaries and other theological works of exegetical erudition. Another important area of study for Bede was the academic discipline of \"computus\", otherwise known to his contemporaries as the science of calculating calendar dates. One of the more important dates Bede tried to compute was Easter, an effort that was mired in controversy. He also helped popularize the practice of dating forward from the birth of Christ (\"Anno Domini\u2014\"in the year of our Lord), a practice which eventually became commonplace in medieval Europe. He is considered by many historians to be the most important scholar of antiquity for the period between the death of Pope Gregory I in 604 and the coronation of Charlemagne in 800.\nIn 1899, Pope Leo XIII declared him a Doctor of the Church. He is the only native of Great Britain to achieve this designation. Bede was moreover a skilled linguist and translator, and his work made the Latin and Greek writings of the early Church Fathers much more accessible to his fellow Anglo-Saxons, which contributed significantly to English Christianity. Bede's monastery had access to an impressive library which included works by Eusebius, Orosius, and many others.\nLife.\nAlmost everything that is known of Bede's life is contained in the last chapter of his \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\", a history of the church in England. It was completed in about 731, and Bede implies that he was then in his fifty-ninth year, which would give a birth date in 672 or 673. A minor source of information is the letter by his disciple Cuthbert (not to be confused with the saint, Cuthbert, who is mentioned in Bede's work) which relates Bede's death. Bede, in the \"Historia\", gives his birthplace as \"on the lands of this monastery\". He is referring to the twinned monasteries of Monkwearmouth and Jarrow, in modern-day Wearside and Tyneside respectively. There is also a tradition that he was born at Monkton, two miles from the site where the monastery at Jarrow was later built. Bede says nothing of his origins, but his connections with men of noble ancestry suggest that his own family was well-to-do. Bede's first abbot was Benedict Biscop, and the names \"Biscop\" and \"Beda\" both appear in a list of the kings of Lindsey from around 800, further suggesting that Bede came from a noble family.\nBede's name reflects West Saxon \"B\u012beda\" (Northumbrian \"B\u01e3da\", Anglian \"B\u0113da\"). It is an Old English short name formed on the root of \"b\u0113odan\" \"to bid, command\".\nThe name also occurs in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", s.a. 501, as \"Bieda\", one of the sons of the Saxon founder of Portsmouth. The \"Liber Vitae\" of Durham Cathedral names two priests with this name, one of whom is presumably Bede himself. Some manuscripts of the \"Life of Cuthbert\", one of Bede's works, mention that Cuthbert's own priest was named Bede; it is possible that this priest is the other name listed in the \"Liber Vitae\".\nAt the age of seven, Bede was sent as a \"puer oblatus\" to the monastery of Monkwearmouth by his family to be educated by Benedict Biscop and later by Ceolfrith. Bede does not say whether it was already intended at that point that he would be a monk. It was fairly common in Ireland at this time for young boys, particularly those of noble birth, to be fostered out as an oblate; the practice was also likely to have been common among the Germanic peoples in England. Monkwearmouth's sister monastery at Jarrow was founded by Ceolfrith in 682, and Bede probably transferred to Jarrow with Ceolfrith that year. \nThe dedication stone for the church has survived as of 1969[ [update]]; it is dated 23 April 685, and as Bede would have been required to assist with menial tasks in his day-to-day life it is possible that he helped in building the original church. In 686, plague broke out at Jarrow. The \"Life of Ceolfrith\", written in about 710, records that only two surviving monks were capable of singing the full offices; one was Ceolfrith and the other a young boy, who according to the anonymous writer had been taught by Ceolfrith. The two managed to do the entire service of the liturgy until others could be trained. The young boy was almost certainly Bede, who would have been about 14.\nWhen Bede was about 17 years old, Adomn\u00e1n, the abbot of Iona Abbey, visited Monkwearmouth and Jarrow. Bede would probably have met the abbot during this visit, and it may be that Adomn\u00e1n sparked Bede's interest in the Easter dating controversy. In about 692, in Bede's nineteenth year, Bede was ordained a deacon by his diocesan bishop, John, who was bishop of Hexham. The canonical age for the ordination of a deacon was 25; Bede's early ordination may mean that his abilities were considered exceptional, but it is also possible that the minimum age requirement was often disregarded. There might have been minor orders ranking below a deacon; but there is no record of whether Bede held any of these offices. In Bede's thirtieth year (about 702), he became a priest, with the ordination again performed by Bishop John.\nIn about 701 Bede wrote his first works, the \"De Arte Metrica\" and \"De Schematibus et Tropis\"; both were intended for use in the classroom. He continued to write for the rest of his life, eventually completing over 60 books, most of which have survived. Not all his output can be easily dated, and Bede may have worked on some texts over a period of many years. His last surviving work is a letter to Ecgbert of York, a former student, written in 734. A 6th-century Greek and Latin manuscript of \"Acts of the Apostles\" that is believed to have been used by Bede survives and is now in the Bodleian Library at University of Oxford. It is known as the Codex Laudianus. \nBede may have worked on some of the Latin Bibles that were copied at Jarrow, one of which, the Codex Amiatinus, is now held by the Laurentian Library in Florence. Bede was a teacher as well as a writer; he enjoyed music and was said to be accomplished as a singer and as a reciter of poetry in the vernacular. It is possible that he suffered a speech impediment, but this depends on a phrase in the introduction to his verse life of St Cuthbert. Translations of this phrase differ, and it is uncertain whether Bede intended to say that he was cured of a speech problem, or merely that he was inspired by the saint's works.\nIn 708, some monks at Hexham accused Bede of having committed heresy in his work \"De Temporibus\". The standard theological view of world history at the time was known as the Six Ages of the World; in his book, Bede calculated the age of the world for himself, rather than accepting the authority of Isidore of Seville, and came to the conclusion that Christ had been born 3,952 years after the creation of the world, rather than the figure of over 5,000 years that was commonly accepted by theologians. The accusation occurred in front of the bishop of Hexham, Wilfrid, who was present at a feast when some drunken monks made the accusation. Wilfrid did not respond to the accusation, but a monk present relayed the episode to Bede, who replied within a few days to the monk, writing a letter setting forth his defence and asking that the letter also be read to Wilfrid. Bede had another brush with Wilfrid, for the historian says that he met Wilfrid sometime between 706 and 709 and discussed \u00c6thelthryth, the abbess of Ely. Wilfrid had been present at the exhumation of her body in 695, and Bede questioned the bishop about the exact circumstances of the body and asked for more details of her life, as Wilfrid had been her advisor.\nIn 733, Bede travelled to York to visit Ecgbert, who was then bishop of York. The See of York was elevated to an archbishopric in 735, and it is likely that Bede and Ecgbert discussed the proposal for the elevation during his visit. Bede hoped to visit Ecgbert again in 734 but was too ill to make the journey. Bede also travelled to the monastery of Lindisfarne and at some point visited the otherwise unknown monastery of a monk named Wicthed, a visit that is mentioned in a letter to that monk. Because of his widespread correspondence with others throughout the British Isles, and because many of the letters imply that Bede had met his correspondents, it is likely that Bede travelled to some other places, although nothing further about timing or locations can be guessed. \nIt seems certain that he did not visit Rome, however, as he did not mention it in the autobiographical chapter of his \"Historia Ecclesiastica\". Nothhelm, a correspondent of Bede's who assisted him by finding documents for him in Rome, is known to have visited Bede, though the date cannot be determined beyond the fact that it was after Nothhelm's visit to Rome. Except for a few visits to other monasteries, his life was spent in a round of prayer, observance of the monastic discipline and study of the Sacred Scriptures. He was considered the most learned man of his time and wrote excellent biblical and historical books.\nBede died on the Feast of the Ascension, Thursday, 26 May 735, on the floor of his cell, singing \"Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit\" and was buried at Jarrow. Cuthbert, a disciple of Bede's, wrote a letter to a Cuthwin (of whom nothing else is known), describing Bede's last days and his death. According to Cuthbert, Bede fell ill, \"with frequent attacks of breathlessness but almost without pain\", before Easter. On the Tuesday, two days before Bede died, his breathing became worse and his feet swelled. He continued to dictate to a scribe, however, and despite spending the night awake in prayer he dictated again the following day.\nAt three o'clock, according to Cuthbert, he asked for a box of his to be brought and distributed among the priests of the monastery \"a few treasures\" of his: \"some pepper, and napkins, and some incense\". That night he dictated a final sentence to the scribe, a boy named Wilberht, and died soon afterwards. The account of Cuthbert does not make entirely clear whether Bede died before midnight or after. However, by the reckoning of Bede's time, passage from the old day to the new occurred at sunset, not midnight, and Cuthbert is clear that he died after sunset. Thus, while his box was brought at three o'clock Wednesday afternoon of 25 May, by the time of the final dictation it might be considered already 26 May in that ecclesiastical sense, although 25 May in the ordinary sense.\nCuthbert's letter also relates a five-line poem in the vernacular that Bede composed on his deathbed, known as \"Bede's Death Song\". It is the most-widely copied Old English poem and appears in 45 manuscripts, but its attribution to Bede is not certain\u2014not all manuscripts name Bede as the author, and the ones that do are of later origin than those that do not. Bede's remains may have been transferred to Durham Cathedral in the 11th century; his tomb there was looted in 1541, but the contents were probably re-interred in the Galilee chapel at the cathedral.\nOne further oddity in his writings is that in one of his works, the \"Commentary on the Seven Catholic Epistles\", he writes in a manner that gives the impression he was married. The section in question is the only one in that work that is written in first-person view. Bede says: \"Prayers are hindered by the conjugal duty because as often as I perform what is due to my wife I am not able to pray.\" Another passage, in the \"Commentary on Luke\", also mentions a wife in the first person: \"Formerly I possessed a wife in the lustful passion of desire and now I possess her in honourable sanctification and true love of Christ.\" The historian Benedicta Ward argues that these passages are Bede employing a rhetorical device.\nWorks.\nBede wrote scientific, historical and theological works, reflecting the range of his writings from music and metrics to exegetical Scripture commentaries. He knew patristic literature, as well as Pliny the Elder, Virgil, Lucretius, Ovid, Horace and other classical writers. He knew some Greek. Bede's scriptural commentaries employed the allegorical method of interpretation, and his history includes accounts of miracles, which to modern historians has seemed at odds with his critical approach to the materials in his history. Modern studies have shown the important role such concepts played in the world-view of Early Medieval scholars. Although Bede is mainly studied as an historian now, in his time his works on grammar, chronology, and biblical studies were as important as his historical and hagiographical works. The non-historical works contributed greatly to the Carolingian renaissance. He has been credited with writing a penitential, though his authorship of this work is disputed.\n\"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\".\nBede's best-known work is the , or \"An Ecclesiastical History of the English People\", completed in about 731. Bede was aided in writing this book by Albinus, abbot of St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury. The first of the five books begins with some geographical background and then sketches the history of England, beginning with Caesar's invasion in 55 BC. A brief account of Christianity in Roman Britain, including the martyrdom of St Alban, is followed by the story of Augustine's mission to England in 597, which brought Christianity to the Anglo-Saxons. \nThe second book begins with the death of Gregory the Great in 604 and follows the further progress of Christianity in Kent and the first attempts to evangelise Northumbria. These ended in disaster when Penda, the pagan king of Mercia, killed the newly Christian Edwin of Northumbria at the Battle of Hatfield Chase in about 632. The setback was temporary, and the third book recounts the growth of Christianity in Northumbria under kings Oswald of Northumbria and Oswy. The climax of the third book is the account of the Council of Whitby, traditionally seen as a major turning point in English history. The fourth book begins with the consecration of Theodore as Archbishop of Canterbury and recounts Wilfrid's efforts to bring Christianity to the Kingdom of Sussex. \nThe fifth book brings the story up to Bede's day and includes an account of missionary work in Frisia and of the conflict with the British church over the correct dating of Easter. Bede wrote a preface for the work, in which he dedicates it to Ceolwulf, king of Northumbria. The preface mentions that Ceolwulf received an earlier draft of the book; presumably Ceolwulf knew enough Latin to understand it, and he may even have been able to read it. The preface makes it clear that Ceolwulf had requested the earlier copy, and Bede had asked for Ceolwulf's approval; this correspondence with the king indicates that Bede's monastery had connections among the Northumbrian nobility.\nSources.\nThe monastery at Wearmouth-Jarrow had an excellent library. Both Benedict Biscop and Ceolfrith had acquired books from the Continent, and in Bede's day the monastery was a renowned centre of learning. It has been estimated that there were about 200 books in the monastic library.\nFor the period prior to Augustine's arrival in 597, Bede drew on earlier writers, including Solinus. He had access to two works of Eusebius: the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\", and also the \"Chronicon\", though he had neither in the original Greek; instead he had a Latin translation of the \"Historia\", by Rufinus, and Jerome's translation of the \"Chronicon\". He also knew Orosius's \"Adversus Paganus\", and Gregory of Tours' \"Historia Francorum\", both Christian histories, as well as the work of Eutropius, a pagan historian. He used Constantius's \"Life of Germanus\" as a source for Germanus's visits to Britain. \nBede's account of the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain is drawn largely from Gildas's \"De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae\". Bede would also have been familiar with more recent accounts such as Stephen of Ripon's \"Life of Wilfrid\", and anonymous \"Life\" \"of Gregory the Great\" and \"Life of Cuthbert\". He also drew on Josephus's \"Antiquities\", and the works of Cassiodorus, and there was a copy of the \"Liber Pontificalis\" in Bede's monastery. Bede quotes from several classical authors, including Cicero, Plautus, and Terence, but he may have had access to their work via a Latin grammar rather than directly. However, it is clear he was familiar with the works of Virgil and with Pliny the Elder's \"Natural History\", and his monastery also owned copies of the works of Dionysius Exiguus. \nHe probably drew his account of Alban from a life of that saint which has not survived. He acknowledges two other lives of saints directly; one is a life of Fursa, and the other of \u00c6thelburh; the latter no longer survives. He also had access to a life of Ceolfrith. Some of Bede's material came from oral traditions, including a description of the physical appearance of Paulinus of York, who had died nearly 90 years before Bede's \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" was written.\nBede had correspondents who supplied him with material. Albinus, the abbot of the monastery in Canterbury, provided much information about the church in Kent, and with the assistance of Nothhelm, at that time a priest in London, obtained copies of Gregory the Great's correspondence from Rome relating to Augustine's mission. Almost all of Bede's information regarding Augustine is taken from these letters. Bede acknowledged his correspondents in the preface to the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\"; he was in contact with Bishop Daniel of Winchester, for information about the history of the church in Wessex and also wrote to the monastery at Lastingham for information about Cedd and Chad. Bede also mentions an Abbot Esi as a source for the affairs of the East Anglian church, and Bishop Cynibert for information about Lindsey.\nThe historian Walter Goffart argues that Bede based the structure of the \"Historia\" on three works, using them as the framework around which the three main sections of the work were structured. For the early part of the work, up until the Gregorian mission, Goffart feels that Bede used \"De excidio\". The second section, detailing the Gregorian mission of Augustine of Canterbury was framed on \"Life of Gregory the Great\" written at Whitby. The last section, detailing events after the Gregorian mission, Goffart feels was modelled on \"Life of Wilfrid\". Most of Bede's informants for information after Augustine's mission came from the eastern part of Britain, leaving significant gaps in the knowledge of the western areas, which were those areas likely to have a native Briton presence.\nModels and style.\nBede's stylistic models included some of the same authors from whom he drew the material for the earlier parts of his history. His introduction imitates the work of Orosius, and his title is an echo of Eusebius's \"Historia Ecclesiastica\". Bede also followed Eusebius in taking the \"Acts of the Apostles\" as the model for the overall work: where Eusebius used the \"Acts\" as the theme for his description of the development of the church, Bede made it the model for his history of the Anglo-Saxon church. Bede quoted his sources at length in his narrative, as Eusebius had done. Bede also appears to have taken quotes directly from his correspondents at times. For example, he almost always uses the terms \"Australes\" and \"Occidentales\" for the South and West Saxons respectively, but in a passage in the first book he uses \"Meridiani\" and \"Occidui\" instead, as perhaps his informant had done. At the end of the work, Bede adds a brief autobiographical note; this was an idea taken from Gregory of Tours' earlier \"History of the Franks\".\nBede's work as a hagiographer and his detailed attention to dating were both useful preparations for the task of writing the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\". His interest in computus, the science of calculating the date of Easter, was also useful in the account he gives of the controversy between the British and Anglo-Saxon church over the correct method of obtaining the Easter date.\nBede is described by Michael Lapidge as \"without question the most accomplished Latinist produced in these islands in the Anglo-Saxon period\". His Latin has been praised for its clarity, but his style in the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" is not simple. He knew rhetoric and often used figures of speech and rhetorical forms which cannot easily be reproduced in translation, depending as they often do on the connotations of the Latin words. However, unlike contemporaries such as Aldhelm, whose Latin is full of difficulties, Bede's own text is easy to read. In the words of Charles Plummer, one of the best-known editors of the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\", Bede's Latin is \"clear and limpid\u00a0... it is very seldom that we have to pause to think of the meaning of a sentence\u00a0... Alcuin rightly praises Bede for his unpretending style.\"\nIntent.\nBede's primary intention in writing the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" was to show the growth of the united church throughout England. The native Britons, whose Christian church survived the departure of the Romans, earn Bede's ire for refusing to help convert the Anglo-Saxons; by the end of the \"Historia\" the English, and their church, are dominant over the Britons. This goal, of showing the movement towards unity, explains Bede's animosity towards the British method of calculating Easter: much of the \"Historia\" is devoted to a history of the dispute, including the final resolution at the Synod of Whitby in 664. Bede is also concerned to show the unity of the English, despite the disparate kingdoms that still existed when he was writing. He also wants to instruct the reader by spiritual example and to entertain, and to the latter end he adds stories about many of the places and people about which he wrote.\nN. J. Higham argues that Bede designed his work to promote his reform agenda to Ceolwulf, the Northumbrian king. Bede painted a highly optimistic picture of the current situation in the Church, as opposed to the more pessimistic picture found in his private letters.\nBede's extensive use of miracles can prove difficult for readers who consider him a more or less reliable historian but do not accept the possibility of miracles. Yet both reflect an inseparable integrity and regard for accuracy and truth, expressed in terms both of historical events and of a tradition of Christian faith that continues. Bede, like Gregory the Great whom Bede quotes on the subject in the \"Historia\", felt that faith brought about by miracles was a stepping stone to a higher, truer faith, and that as a result miracles had their place in a work designed to instruct.\nOmissions and biases.\nBede is somewhat reticent about the career of Wilfrid, a contemporary and one of the most prominent clerics of his day. This may be because Wilfrid's opulent lifestyle was uncongenial to Bede's monastic mind; it may also be that the events of Wilfrid's life, divisive and controversial as they were, simply did not fit with Bede's theme of the progression to a unified and harmonious church.\nBede's account of the early migrations of the Angles and Saxons to England omits any mention of a movement of those peoples across the English Channel from Britain to Brittany described by Procopius, who was writing in the sixth century. Frank Stenton describes this omission as \"a scholar's dislike of the indefinite\"; traditional material that could not be dated or used for Bede's didactic purposes had no interest for him.\nBede was a Northumbrian, and this tinged his work with a local bias. The sources to which he had access gave him less information about the west of England than for other areas. He says relatively little about the achievements of Mercia and Wessex, omitting, for example, any mention of Boniface, a West Saxon missionary to the continent of some renown and of whom Bede had almost certainly heard, though Bede does discuss Northumbrian missionaries to the continent. He is also parsimonious in his praise for Aldhelm, a West Saxon who had done much to convert the native Britons to the Roman form of Christianity. He lists seven kings of the Anglo-Saxons whom he regards as having held \"imperium\", or overlordship; only one king of Wessex, Ceawlin, is listed as Bretwalda, and none from Mercia, though elsewhere he acknowledges the secular power several of the Mercians held. Historian Robin Fleming states that he was so hostile to Mercia because Northumbria had been diminished by Mercian power that he consulted no Mercian informants and included no stories about its saints.\nBede relates the story of Augustine's mission from Rome, and tells how the British clergy refused to assist Augustine in the conversion of the Anglo-Saxons. This, combined with Gildas's negative assessment of the British church at the time of the Anglo-Saxon invasions, led Bede to a very critical view of the native church. However, Bede ignores the fact that at the time of Augustine's mission, the history between the two was one of warfare and conquest, which, in the words of Barbara Yorke, would have naturally \"curbed any missionary impulses towards the Anglo-Saxons from the British clergy.\"\nUse of \"Anno Domini\".\nAt the time Bede wrote the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\", there were two common ways of referring to dates. One was to use indictions, which were 15-year cycles, counting from 312 AD. There were three different varieties of indiction, each starting on a different day of the year. The other approach was to use regnal years\u2014the reigning Roman emperor, for example, or the ruler of whichever kingdom was under discussion. This meant that in discussing conflicts between kingdoms, the date would have to be given in the regnal years of all the kings involved. Bede used both these approaches on occasion but adopted a third method as his main approach to dating: the \"Anno Domini\" method invented by Dionysius Exiguus. Although Bede did not invent this method, his adoption of it and his promulgation of it in \"De Temporum Ratione\", his work on chronology, is the main reason it is now so widely used. Bede's Easter table, contained in \"De Temporum Ratione\", was developed from Dionysius Exiguus' Easter table.\nAssessment.\nThe \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" was copied often in the Middle Ages, and about 160 manuscripts containing it survive. About half of those are located on the European continent, rather than in the British Isles. Most of the 8th- and 9th-century texts of Bede's \"Historia\" come from the northern parts of the Carolingian Empire. This total does not include manuscripts with only a part of the work, of which another 100 or so survive. It was printed for the first time between 1474 and 1482, probably at Strasbourg. \nModern historians have studied the \"Historia\" extensively, and several editions have been produced. For many years, early Anglo-Saxon history was essentially a retelling of the \"Historia\", but recent scholarship has focused as much on what Bede did not write as what he did. The belief that the \"Historia\" was the culmination of Bede's works, the aim of all his scholarship, was a belief common among historians in the past but is no longer accepted by most scholars.\nModern historians and editors of Bede have been lavish in their praise of his achievement in the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\". Stenton regards it as one of the \"small class of books which transcend all but the most fundamental conditions of time and place\", and regards its quality as dependent on Bede's \"astonishing power of co-ordinating the fragments of information which came to him through tradition, the relation of friends, or documentary evidence\u00a0... In an age where little was attempted beyond the registration of fact, he had reached the conception of history.\" Patrick Wormald describes him as \"the first and greatest of England's historians\".\nThe \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" has given Bede a high reputation, but his concerns were different from those of a modern writer of history. His focus on the history of the organisation of the English church, and on heresies and the efforts made to root them out, led him to exclude the secular history of kings and kingdoms except where a moral lesson could be drawn or where they illuminated events in the church. Besides the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", the medieval writers William of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntingdon, and Geoffrey of Monmouth used his works as sources and inspirations. Early modern writers, such as Polydore Vergil and Matthew Parker, the Elizabethan Archbishop of Canterbury, also utilised the \"Historia\", and his works were used by both Protestant and Catholic sides in the wars of religion.\nSome historians have questioned the reliability of some of Bede's accounts. One historian, Charlotte Behr, thinks that the \"Historia's\" account of the arrival of the Germanic invaders in Kent should not be considered to relate what actually happened, but rather relates myths that were current in Kent during Bede's time.\nIt is likely that Bede's work, because it was so widely copied, discouraged others from writing histories and may even have led to the disappearance of manuscripts containing older historical works.\nOther historical works.\nChronicles.\nAs Chapter 66 of his \"On the Reckoning of Time\", in 725 Bede wrote the \"Greater Chronicle\" (\"chronica maiora\"), which sometimes circulated as a separate work. For recent events the \"Chronicle\", like his \"Ecclesiastical History\", relied upon Gildas, upon a version of the \"Liber Pontificalis\" current at least to the papacy of Pope Sergius I (687\u2013701), and other sources. For earlier events he drew on Eusebius's \"Chronikoi Kanones.\" The dating of events in the \"Chronicle\" is inconsistent with his other works, using the era of creation, the \"Anno Mundi\".\nHagiography.\nHis other historical works included lives of the abbots of Wearmouth and Jarrow, as well as verse and prose lives of St Cuthbert, an adaptation of Paulinus of Nola's \"Life of St Felix\", and a translation of the Greek \"Passion\" of St Anastasius. He also created a listing of saints, the \"Martyrology\".\nTheological works.\nIn his own time, Bede was as well known for his biblical commentaries, and for his exegetical and other theological works. The majority of his writings were of this type and covered the Old Testament and the New Testament. Most survived the Middle Ages, but a few were lost. It was for his theological writings that he earned the title of \"Doctor Anglorum\" and why he was declared a saint.\nBede synthesised and transmitted the learning from his predecessors, as well as made careful, judicious innovation in knowledge (such as recalculating the age of the earth\u2014for which he was censured before surviving the heresy accusations and eventually having his views championed by Archbishop Ussher in the sixteenth century\u2014see below) that had theological implications. In order to do this, he learned Greek and attempted to learn Hebrew. He spent time reading and rereading both the Old and the New Testaments. He mentions that he studied from a text of Jerome's Vulgate, which itself was from the Hebrew text.\nHe also studied both the Latin and the Greek Fathers of the Church. In the monastic library at Jarrow were numerous books by theologians, including works by Basil, Cassian, John Chrysostom, Isidore of Seville, Origen, Gregory of Nazianzus, Augustine of Hippo, Jerome, Pope Gregory I, Ambrose of Milan, Cassiodorus, and Cyprian. He used these, in conjunction with the Biblical texts themselves, to write his commentaries and other theological works. \nHe had a Latin translation by Evagrius of Athanasius's \"Life of Antony\" and a copy of Sulpicius Severus' \"Life of St Martin\". He also used lesser known writers, such as Fulgentius, Julian of Eclanum, Tyconius, and Prosper of Aquitaine. Bede was the first to refer to Jerome, Augustine, Pope Gregory and Ambrose as the four Latin Fathers of the Church. It is clear from Bede's own comments that he felt his calling was to explain to his students and readers the theology and thoughts of the Church Fathers.\nBede also wrote homilies, works written to explain theology used in worship services. He wrote homilies on the major Christian seasons such as Advent, Lent, or Easter, as well as on other subjects such as anniversaries of significant events.\nBoth types of Bede's theological works circulated widely in the Middle Ages. Several of his biblical commentaries were incorporated into the \"Glossa Ordinaria\", an 11th-century collection of biblical commentaries. Some of Bede's homilies were collected by Paul the Deacon, and they were used in that form in the Monastic Office. Boniface used Bede's homilies in his missionary efforts on the continent.\nBede sometimes included in his theological books an acknowledgement of the predecessors on whose works he drew. In two cases he left instructions that his marginal notes, which gave the details of his sources, should be preserved by the copyist, and he may have originally added marginal comments about his sources to others of his works. Where he does not specify, it is still possible to identify books to which he must have had access by quotations that he uses. A full catalogue of the library available to Bede in the monastery cannot be reconstructed, but it is possible to tell, for example, that Bede was very familiar with the works of Virgil.\nThere is little evidence that he had access to any other of the pagan Latin writers\u2014he quotes many of these writers, but the quotes are almost found in the Latin grammars that were common in his day, one or more of which would certainly have been at the monastery. Another difficulty is that manuscripts of early writers were often incomplete: it is apparent that Bede had access to Pliny's \"Encyclopaedia\", for example, but it seems that the version he had was missing book xviii, since he did not quote from it in his \"De temporum ratione\".\nBede's works included \"Commentary on Revelation\", \"Commentary on the Catholic Epistles\", \"Commentary on Acts\", \"Reconsideration on the Books of Acts\", \"On the Gospel of Mark\", \"On the Gospel of Luke\", and \"Homilies on the Gospels\". At the time of his death he was working on a translation of the Gospel of John into English. He did this for the last 40 days of his life. When the last passage had been translated he said: \"All is finished.\" The works dealing with the Old Testament included \"Commentary on Samuel\", \"Commentary on Genesis\", \"Commentaries on Ezra and Nehemiah\", \"On the Temple\", \"On the Tabernacle\", \"Commentaries on Tobit\", \"Commentaries on Proverbs\", \"Commentaries on the Song of Songs\", \"Commentaries on the Canticle of Habakkuk\", The works on Ezra, the tabernacle and the temple were especially influenced by Gregory the Great's writings.\nHistorical and astronomical chronology.\n\"De temporibus\", or \"On Time\", written in about 703, provides an introduction to the principles of Easter computus. This was based on parts of Isidore of Seville's \"Etymologies\", and Bede also included a chronology of the world which was derived from Eusebius, with some revisions based on Jerome's translation of the Bible. In about 723, Bede wrote a longer work on the same subject, \"On the Reckoning of Time\", which was influential throughout the Middle Ages. He also wrote several shorter letters and essays discussing specific aspects of computus.\n\"On the Reckoning of Time\" (\"De temporum ratione\") included an introduction to the traditional ancient and medieval view of the cosmos, including an explanation of how the spherical Earth influenced the changing length of daylight, of how the seasonal motion of the Sun and Moon influenced the changing appearance of the new moon at evening twilight. Bede also records the effect of the moon on tides. He shows that the twice-daily timing of tides is related to the Moon and that the lunar monthly cycle of spring and neap tides is also related to the Moon's position. He goes on to note that the times of tides vary along the same coast and that the water movements cause low tide at one place when there is high tide elsewhere. Since the focus of his book was the computus, Bede gave instructions for computing the date of Easter from the date of the Paschal full moon, for calculating the motion of the Sun and Moon through the zodiac, and for many other calculations related to the calendar. He gives some information about the months of the Anglo-Saxon calendar.\nAny codex of Bede's Easter table is normally found together with a codex of his \"De temporum ratione\". His Easter table, being an exact extension of Dionysius Exiguus' Paschal table and covering the time interval AD 532\u20131063, contains a 532-year Paschal cycle based on the so-called classical Alexandrian 19-year lunar cycle, being the close variant of bishop Theophilus' 19-year lunar cycle proposed by Annianus and adopted by bishop Cyril of Alexandria around AD 425. The ultimate similar (but rather different) predecessor of this Metonic 19-year lunar cycle is the one invented by Anatolius around AD 260.\nFor calendric purposes, Bede made a new calculation of the age of the world since the creation, which he dated as 3952 BC. Because of his innovations in computing the age of the world, he was accused of heresy at the table of Bishop Wilfrid, his chronology being contrary to accepted calculations. Once informed of the accusations of these \"lewd rustics,\" Bede refuted them in his Letter to Plegwin.\nIn addition to these works on astronomical timekeeping, he also wrote \"De natura rerum\", or \"On the Nature of Things\", modelled in part after the work of the same title by Isidore of Seville. His works were so influential that late in the ninth century Notker the Stammerer, a monk of the Monastery of St Gall in Switzerland, wrote that \"God, the orderer of natures, who raised the Sun from the East on the fourth day of Creation, in the sixth day of the world has made Bede rise from the West as a new Sun to illuminate the whole Earth\".\nEducational works.\nBede wrote some works designed to help teach grammar in the abbey school. One of these was \"De arte metrica\", a discussion of the composition of Latin verse, drawing on previous grammarians' work. It was based on Donatus's \"De pedibus\" and Servius's \"De finalibus\" and used examples from Christian poets as well as Virgil. It became a standard text for the teaching of Latin verse during the next few centuries. Bede dedicated this work to Cuthbert, apparently a student, for he is named \"beloved son\" in the dedication, and Bede says \"I have laboured to educate you in divine letters and ecclesiastical statutes.\" \"De orthographia\" is a work on orthography, designed to help a medieval reader of Latin with unfamiliar abbreviations and words from classical Latin works. Although it could serve as a textbook, it appears to have been mainly intended as a reference work. The date of composition for both of these works is unknown.\n\"De schematibus et tropis sacrae scripturae\" discusses the Bible's use of rhetoric. Bede was familiar with pagan authors such as Virgil, but it was not considered appropriate to teach biblical grammar from such texts, and Bede argues for the superiority of Christian texts in understanding Christian literature. Similarly, his text on poetic metre uses only Christian poetry for examples.\nLatin poetry.\nA number of poems have been attributed to Bede. His poetic output has been systematically surveyed and edited by Michael Lapidge, who concluded that the following works belong to Bede: the \"Versus de die iudicii\" (\"verses on the day of Judgement\", found complete in 33 manuscripts and fragmentarily in 10); the metrical \"Vita Sancti Cudbercti\" (\"Life of St Cuthbert\"); and two collections of verse mentioned in the \"Historia ecclesiastica\" V.24.2. Bede names the first of these collections as \"librum epigrammatum heroico metro siue elegiaco\" (\"a book of epigrams in the heroic or elegiac metre\"), and much of its content has been reconstructed by Lapidge from scattered attestations under the title \"Liber epigrammatum\". The second is named as \"liber hymnorum diuerso metro siue rythmo\" (\"a book of hymns, diverse in metre or rhythm\"); this has been reconstructed by Lapidge as containing ten liturgical hymns, one paraliturgical hymn (for the Feast of St \u00c6thelthryth), and four other hymn-like compositions.\nVernacular poetry.\nAccording to his disciple Cuthbert, Bede was \"doctus in nostris carminibus\" (\"learned in our songs\"). Cuthbert's letter on Bede's death, the \"Epistola Cuthberti de obitu Bedae\", moreover, commonly is understood to indicate that Bede composed a five-line vernacular poem known to modern scholars as \"Bede's Death Song\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnd he used to repeat that sentence from St Paul \"It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God,\" and many other verses of Scripture, urging us thereby to awake from the slumber of the soul by thinking in good time of our last hour. And in our own language\u2014for he was familiar with English poetry\u2014speaking of the soul's dread departure from the body:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs Opland notes, however, it is not entirely clear that Cuthbert is attributing this text to Bede: most manuscripts of the latter do not use a finite verb to describe Bede's presentation of the song, and the theme was relatively common in Old English and Anglo-Latin literature. The fact that Cuthbert's description places the performance of the Old English poem in the context of a series of quoted passages from Sacred Scripture might be taken as evidence simply that Bede also cited analogous vernacular texts. \nOn the other hand, the inclusion of the Old English text of the poem in Cuthbert's Latin letter, the observation that Bede \"was learned in our song,\" and the fact that Bede composed a Latin poem on the same subject all point to the possibility of his having written it. By citing the poem directly, Cuthbert seems to imply that its particular wording was somehow important, either since it was a vernacular poem endorsed by a scholar who evidently frowned upon secular entertainment or because it is a direct quotation of Bede's last original composition.\nVeneration.\nThere is no evidence for cult being paid to Bede in England in the 8th century. One reason for this may be that he died on the feast day of Augustine of Canterbury. Later, when he was venerated in England, he was either commemorated after Augustine on 26 May, or his feast was moved to 27 May. However, he was venerated outside England, mainly through the efforts of Boniface and Alcuin, both of whom promoted the cult on the continent. Boniface wrote repeatedly back to England during his missionary efforts, requesting copies of Bede's theological works.\nAlcuin, who was taught at the school set up in York by Bede's pupil Ecgbert, praised Bede as an example for monks to follow and was instrumental in disseminating Bede's works to all of Alcuin's friends. Bede's cult became prominent in England during the 10th-century revival of monasticism and by the 14th century had spread to many of the cathedrals of England. Wulfstan, Bishop of Worcester was a particular devotee of Bede's, dedicating a church to him in 1062, which was Wulfstan's first undertaking after his consecration as bishop.\nHis body was 'translated' (the ecclesiastical term for relocation of relics) from Jarrow to Durham Cathedral around 1020, where it was placed in the same tomb with St Cuthbert. Later Bede's remains were moved to a shrine in the Galilee Chapel at Durham Cathedral in 1370. The shrine was destroyed during the English Reformation, but the bones were reburied in the chapel. In 1831 the bones were dug up and then reburied in a new tomb, which is still there. Other relics were claimed by York, Glastonbury and Fulda.\nHis scholarship and importance to Catholicism were recognised in 1899 when the Vatican declared him a Doctor of the Church. He is the only Englishman named a Doctor of the Church. He is also the only Englishman in Dante's \"Paradise\" (\"Paradiso\" X.130), mentioned among theologians and doctors of the church in the same canto as Isidore of Seville and the Scot Richard of St Victor.\nHis feast day was included in the General Roman Calendar in 1899, for celebration on 27 May rather than on his date of death, 26 May, which was then the feast day of St Augustine of Canterbury. He is venerated in the Catholic Church, in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church (United States) on 25 May, and in the Eastern Orthodox Church, with a feast day on 27 May (\u0392\u03b5\u03b4\u03ad\u03b1 \u03c4\u03bf\u03c5 \u039f\u03bc\u03bf\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03cd).\nBede became known as \"Venerable Bede\" (Latin: ) by the 9th century because of his holiness, but this was not linked to consideration for sainthood by the Catholic Church. According to a legend, the epithet was miraculously supplied by angels, thus completing his unfinished epitaph. It is first utilised in connection with Bede in the 9th century, where Bede was grouped with others who were called \"venerable\" at two ecclesiastical councils held at Aachen in 816 and 836. Paul the Deacon then referred to him as venerable consistently. By the 11th and 12th century, it had become commonplace.\nModern legacy.\nBede's reputation as a historian, based mostly on the \"Historia Ecclesiastica\", remains strong. Thomas Carlyle called him \"the greatest historical writer since Herodotus\". Walter Goffart says of Bede that he \"holds a privileged and unrivalled place among first historians of Christian Europe\". He is patron of Beda College in Rome which prepares older men for the Roman Catholic priesthood. His life and work have been celebrated with the annual Jarrow Lecture, held at St Paul's Church, Jarrow, since 1958. \nBede has been described as a progressive scholar, who made Latin and Greek teachings accessible to his fellow Anglo-Saxons.\nJarrow Hall (formerly Bede\u2019s World), in Jarrow, is a museum that celebrates the history of Bede and other parts of English heritage, on the site where he lived.\nBede Metro station, part of the Tyne and Wear Metro light rail network, is named after him.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4045", "revid": "44933079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4045", "title": "Bubble tea", "text": "Tea-based drink with chewy bubbles\nBubble tea (also known as pearl milk tea, bubble milk tea, tapioca milk tea, boba tea, or boba; , ) is a tea-based drink that originated in Taiwan in the early 1980s. Taiwanese immigrants brought it to the United States in the 1990s, initially in California through regions like Los Angeles County, but the drink has also spread to other countries where there is a large East Asian diaspora population.\nBubble tea most commonly consists of tea accompanied by chewy tapioca balls (\"boba\" or \"pearls\"), but it can be made with other toppings as well, such as grass jelly, aloe vera, red bean, and popping boba. It has many varieties and flavors, but the two most popular varieties are pearl black milk tea and pearl green milk tea (\"pearl\" signifies the tapioca balls at the bottom).\nDescription.\nBubble teas fall under two categories: teas without milk and milk teas. Both varieties come with a choice of black, green, or oolong tea as the base. Milk teas usually include powdered milk or fresh milk, but may also use condensed milk, almond milk, soy milk, or coconut milk.\nThe oldest known bubble tea drink consisted of a mixture of hot Taiwanese black tea, tapioca pearls (), condensed milk, and syrup (Chinese: \u7cd6\u6f3f; pinyin: t\u00e1ng ji\u0101ng) or honey. Nowadays, bubble tea is most commonly served cold. The tapioca pearls that give bubble tea its name were originally made from the starch of the cassava, a tropical shrub known for its starchy roots which was introduced to Taiwan from South America during Japanese colonial rule. Larger pearls (Chinese: \u6ce2\u9738/\u9ed1\u73cd\u73e0; pinyin: b\u014d b\u00e0/h\u0113i zh\u0113n zh\u016b) quickly replaced these.\nToday, there are some caf\u00e9s that specialize in bubble tea production. While some caf\u00e9s may serve bubble tea in a glass, most Taiwanese bubble tea shops serve the drink in a plastic cup and use a machine to seal the top of the cup with heated plastic cellophane. The method allows the tea to be shaken in the serving cup and makes it spill-free until a person is ready to drink it. The cellophane is then pierced with an oversized straw, now referred to as a boba straw, which is larger than a typical drinking straw to allow the toppings to pass through.\nDue to its popularity, bubble tea has inspired a variety of bubble tea flavored snacks, such as bubble tea ice cream and bubble tea candy. The market size of bubble tea was valued at $2.4 billion in 2022 and is projected to reach $4.3 billion by the end of 2027. Some of the largest global bubble tea chains include Chatime, CoCo Fresh Tea &amp; Juice and Gong Cha.\nVariants.\nDrink.\nBubble tea comes in many variations which usually consist of black tea, green tea, oolong tea, and sometimes white tea. Another variation, yuenyeung, (Chinese: \u9d1b\u9d26, named after the Mandarin duck) originated in Hong Kong and consists of black tea, coffee, and milk.\nOther varieties of the drink include blended tea drinks. These variations are often either blended using ice cream, or are smoothies that contain both tea and fruit. Boba ice cream bars have also been produced.\nToppings.\nTapioca pearls (boba) are the most common ingredient, although there are other ways to make the chewy spheres found in bubble tea. The pearls vary in color according to the ingredients mixed in with the tapioca. Most pearls are black from brown sugar.\nJelly comes in different shapes: small cubes, stars, or rectangular strips, and flavors such as coconut jelly, konjac, lychee, grass jelly, mango, coffee and green tea. Azuki bean or mung bean paste, typical toppings for Taiwanese shaved ice desserts, give bubble tea an added subtle flavor as well as texture. Aloe, egg pudding (custard), and sago also can be found in many bubble tea shops. Popping boba, or spheres that have fruit juices or syrups inside them, are another popular bubble tea topping. Flavors include mango, strawberry, coconut, kiwi and honey melon.\nSome shops offer milk or cheese foam on top of the drink, giving the drink a consistency similar to that of whipped cream, and a saltier flavor profile. One shop described the effect of the cheese foam as \"neutraliz[ing] the bitterness of the tea...and as you drink it you taste the returning sweetness of the tea\".\nIce and sugar level.\nBubble tea shops often give customers the option of choosing the amount of ice or sugar in their drink. Sugar and ice levels are usually specified ordinally (e.g. no ice, less ice, normal ice, more ice), corresponding to quarterly intervals (0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, 100%).\nPackaging.\nIn Southeast Asia, bubble tea is traditionally packaged in a plastic takeaway cup, sealed with plastic or a rounded cap. New entrants into the market have attempted to distinguish their products by packaging it in bottles and other interesting shapes. Some have even done away with the bottle and used plastic sealed bags. Nevertheless, the traditional plastic takeaway cup with a sealed cap is still the most common packaging method.\nPreparation method.\nThe traditional way of bubble tea preparation is to mix the ingredients (sugar, powders and other flavorings) together using a bubble tea shaker cup, by hand.\nMany present-day bubble tea shops use a bubble tea shaker machine. This eliminates the need for humans to shake the bubble tea by hand. It also reduces staffing needs as multiple cups of bubble tea may be prepared by a single barista.\nOne bubble tea shop in Taiwan, named Jhu Dong Auto Tea, makes bubble tea entirely without manual work. All stages of the bubble tea sales process, from ordering, to making, to collection, are fully automated.\nHistory.\nMilk and sugar have been added to tea in Taiwan since the Dutch colonization of Taiwan in 1624\u20131662.\nThere are two competing stories for the discovery of bubble tea. One is associated with the Chun Shui Tang tea room () in Taichung. Its founder, Liu Han-Chieh, began serving Chinese tea cold after he observed coffee was served cold in Japan while on a visit in the 1980s. The new style of serving tea propelled his business, and multiple chains serving this tea were established. The company's product development manager, Lin Hsiu Hui, said she created the first bubble tea in 1988 when she poured tapioca balls into her tea during a staff meeting and encouraged others to drink it. The beverage was well received by everyone at the meeting, leading to its inclusion on the menu. It ultimately became the franchise's top-selling product.\nAnother claim for the invention of bubble tea comes from the Hanlin Tea Room () in Tainan. It claims that bubble tea was invented in 1986 when teahouse owner Tu Tsong-he was inspired by white tapioca balls he saw in the local market of Ah-b\u00f3-li\u00e2u (, or \"Yamuliao\" in Mandarin). He later made tea using these traditional Taiwanese snacks. This resulted in what is known as \"pearl tea\".\nOn 29 January 2023, Google celebrated Bubble Tea with a doodle.\nPopularity.\nIn the 1990s, bubble tea spread all over East and Southeast Asia with its ever-growing popularity. In regions like Hong Kong, Mainland China, Japan, Vietnam, and Singapore, the bubble tea trend expanded rapidly among young people. In some popular shops, people would line up for more than thirty minutes to get a cup of the drink. In recent years, the popularity of bubble tea has gone beyond the beverage itself, with boba lovers inventing various bubble tea flavored-foods, including ice cream, pizza, toast, sushi, and ramen.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan, bubble tea has become not just a beverage, but an enduring icon of the culture and food history for the nation. In 2020, the date April 30 was officially declared as National Bubble Tea Day in Taiwan. That same year, the image of bubble tea was proposed as an alternative cover design for Taiwan's passport. According to Al Jazeera, bubble tea has become synonymous with Taiwan and is an important symbol of Taiwanese identity both domestically and internationally. Bubble tea is used to represent Taiwan in the context of the Milk Tea Alliance.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong is famous for its traditional Hong Kong-style milk tea, which is made with brewed black tea and evaporated milk. While milk tea has long become integrated into people's daily life, the expansion of Taiwanese bubble tea chains, including Tiger Sugar, Youiccha, and Xing Fu Tang, into Hong Kong created a new wave for \u201cboba tea\u201d.\nChina.\nSince the idea of adding tapioca pearls into milk tea was introduced into China in the 1990s, bubble tea has increased in popularity. In 2020 it was estimated that the consumption of bubble tea was 5 times that of coffee in recent years. According to data from QianZhen Industry Research Institute, the value of the tea-related beverage market in China reached 53.7 billion yuan (about $7.63 billion) in 2018. In 2019, annual sales from bubble tea shops reached as high as 140.5 billion RMB (roughly $20 billion USD). While bubble tea chains from Taiwan (e.g., Gong Cha and Coco) are still popular, more local brands, like Yi Dian Dian, Nayuki, Hey Tea, etc., are now dominating the market.\nIn China, young people's growing obsession with bubble tea shaped their way of social interaction. Buying someone a cup of bubble tea has become a new way of informally thanking someone. It is also a favored topic among friends and on social media.\nJapan.\nBubble tea first entered Japan by the late 1990s, but it failed to leave a lasting impression on the public markets. It was not until the 2010s when the bubble tea trend finally swept Japan. Shops from Taiwan, Korea, and China, as well as local brands, began to pop up in cities, and bubble tea has remained one of the hottest trends since then. Bubble tea has become so commonplace among teenagers that teenage girls in Japan invented slang for it: \"tapiru\" (\u30bf\u30d4\u308b). The word is short for drinking tapioca tea in Japanese, and it won first place in a survey of \"Japanese slang for middle school girls\" in 2018. A bubble tea theme park was open for a limited time in 2019 in Harajuku, Tokyo.\nSingapore.\nKnown locally in Chinese as \u6ce1\u6ce1\u8336 (Pinyin: p\u00e0o p\u00e0o ch\u00e1), bubble tea is loved by many in Singapore. The drink was sold in Singapore as early as 1992 and became phenomenally popular among young people in 2001. This soon ended because of the intense competition and price wars among shops. As a result, most bubble tea shops closed and bubble tea lost its popularity by 2003. When Taiwanese chains like Koi and Gong Cha came to Singapore in 2007 and 2009, the beverage experienced only short resurgences in popularity. In 2018, the interest in bubble tea rose again at an unprecedented speed in Singapore, as new brands like The Alley and Tiger Sugar entered the market; social media also played an important role in driving this renaissance of bubble tea.\nUnited States.\nIn the 1990s, Taiwanese immigrants began to introduce bubble tea in Taiwanese restaurants in California. Some of the first stand-alone bubble tea shops can be traced to a food court in Arcadia, in Southern California, and Fantasia Coffee &amp; Tea in Cupertino, in Northern California. Chains like Tapioca Express, Quickly, Lollicup and Q-Cup emerged in the late 1990s and early 2000s, bringing the Taiwanese bubble tea trend to the US. Within the Asian American community, bubble tea is commonly known under its colloquial term \"boba\".\nAs the beverage gained popularity in the US, it gradually became more than a drink, but a cultural identity for Asian Americans. This phenomenon was referred to as \u201cboba life\u201d by Chinese-American brothers Andrew and David Fung in their music video, \u201cBobalife,\u201d released in 2013. Boba symbolizes a subculture that Asian Americans as social minorities could define themselves as, and \u201cboba life\u201d is a reflection of their desire for both cultural and political recognition. It is also used disparagingly in the term boba liberal.\nOther regions with large concentrations of bubble tea restaurants in the United States are the Northeast and Southwest. This is reflected in the coffeehouse-style teahouse chains that originate from the regions, such as Boba Tea Company from Albuquerque, New Mexico, No. 1 Boba Tea in Las Vegas, Nevada, and Kung Fu Tea from New York City. Albuquerque and Las Vegas have a large concentrations of boba tea restaurants, as the drink is popular especially among the Hispano, Navajo, Pueblo, and other Native American, Hispanic and Latino American communities in the Southwest.\nA massive shipping and supply chain crisis on the U.S. West coast, coupled with the obstruction of the Suez Canal in March 2021, caused a shortage of tapioca pearls for bubble tea shops in the U.S. and Canada. Most of the tapioca consumed in the U.S. is imported from Asia, since the critical ingredient, tapioca starch, is mostly grown in Asia.\nTikTok trends and the Korean Wave also fueled the popularity of bubble tea in the United States.\nAustralia.\nIndividual bubble tea shops began to appear in Australia in the 1990s, along with other regional drinks like Eis Cendol. Chains of stores were established as early as 2002, when the Bubble Cup franchise opened its first store in Melbourne. Although originally associated with the rapid growth of immigration from Asia and the vast tertiary student cohort from Asia, in Melbourne and Sydney bubble tea has become popular across many communities. Many suburban shopping centres have a branch of a bubble tea franchise.\nMauritius.\nThe first bubble tea shop in Mauritius opened in late 2012, and since then there have been bubble tea shops in most shopping malls on the island. Bubble tea shops have become a popular place for teenagers to hang out.\nPotential health concerns.\nIn July 2019, Singapore's Mount Alvernia Hospital warned against the high sugar content of bubble tea since the drink had become extremely popular in Singapore. While it acknowledged the benefits of drinking green tea and black tea in reducing risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, arthritis and cancer, respectively, the hospital cautions that the addition of other ingredients like non-dairy creamer and toppings in the tea could raise the fat and sugar content of the tea and increase the risk of chronic diseases. Non-dairy creamer is a milk substitute that contains trans fat in the form of hydrogenated palm oil. The hospital warned that this oil has been strongly correlated with an increased risk of heart disease and stroke.\nThe other concern about bubble tea is its high calorie content, partially attributed to the high-carbohydrate tapioca pearls (or \u73cd\u73e0), which can make up to half the calorie-count in a 500ml serving of bubble tea.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4049", "revid": "38795418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4049", "title": "Battle of Blenheim", "text": "Major battle of the War of the Spanish Succession, fought in 1704\nThe Battle of Blenheim (; ; ) fought on 13 August\u00a0[O.S. 2 August]\u00a01704, was a major battle of the War of the Spanish Succession. The overwhelming Allied victory ensured the safety of Vienna from the Franco-Bavarian army, thus preventing the collapse of the reconstituted Grand Alliance.\nLouis XIV of France sought to knock the Holy Roman Emperor, Leopold, out of the war by seizing Vienna, the Habsburg capital, and gain a favourable peace settlement. The dangers to Vienna were considerable: Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria, and Marshal Ferdinand de Marsin's forces in Bavaria threatened from the west, and Marshal Louis Joseph de Bourbon, duc de Vend\u00f4me's large army in northern Italy posed a serious danger with a potential offensive through the Brenner Pass. Vienna was also under pressure from R\u00e1k\u00f3czi's Hungarian revolt from its eastern approaches. Realising the danger, the Duke of Marlborough resolved to alleviate the peril to Vienna by marching his forces south from Bedburg to help maintain Emperor Leopold within the Grand Alliance.\nA combination of deception and skilled administration \u2013 designed to conceal his true destination from friend and foe alike \u2013 enabled Marlborough to march unhindered from the Low Countries to the River Danube in five weeks. After securing Donauw\u00f6rth on the Danube, Marlborough sought to engage Maximilian's and Marsin's army before Marshal Camille d'Hostun, duc de Tallard, could bring reinforcements through the Black Forest. The Franco-Bavarian commanders proved reluctant to fight until their numbers were deemed sufficient, and Marlborough failed in his attempts to force an engagement. When Tallard arrived to bolster Maximilian's army, and Prince Eugene of Savoy arrived with reinforcements for the Allies, the two armies finally met on the banks of the Danube in and around the small village of Blindheim, from which the English \"Blenheim\" is derived.\nBlenheim was one of the battles that altered the course of the war, which until then was favouring the French and Spanish Bourbons. Although the battle did not win the war, it prevented a potentially devastating loss for the Grand Alliance and shifted the war's momentum, ending French plans of knocking Emperor Leopold out of the war. The French suffered catastrophic casualties in the battle, including their commander-in-chief, Tallard, who was taken captive to England. Before the 1704 campaign ended, the Allies had taken Landau, and the towns of Trier and Trarbach on the Moselle in preparation for the following year's campaign into France itself. This offensive never materialised, for the Grand Alliance's army had to depart the Moselle to defend Li\u00e8ge from a French counter-offensive. The war continued for another decade before ending in 1714.\nBackground.\nBy 1704, the War of the Spanish Succession was in its fourth year. The previous year had been one of successes for France and her allies, most particularly on the Danube, where Marshal Claude-Louis-Hector de Villars and Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria, had created a direct threat to Vienna, the Habsburg capital. Vienna had been saved by dissension between the two commanders, leading to Villars being replaced by the less dynamic Marshal Ferdinand de Marsin. Nevertheless, the threat was still real: R\u00e1k\u00f3czi's Hungarian revolt was threatening the Empire's eastern approaches, and Marshal Louis Joseph, Duke of Vend\u00f4me's forces threatened an invasion from northern Italy. In the courts of Versailles and Madrid, Vienna's fall was confidently anticipated, an event which would almost certainly have led to the collapse of the reconstituted Grand Alliance.\nTo isolate the Danube from any Allied intervention, Marshal Fran\u00e7ois de Neufville, duc de Villeroi's 46,000 troops were expected to pin the 70,000 Dutch and British troops around Maastricht in the Low Countries, while General Robert Jean Antoine de Franquetot de Coigny protected Alsace against surprise with a further corps. The only forces immediately available for Vienna's defence were Prince Louis of Baden's 36,000 men stationed in the Lines of Stollhofen to watch Marshal Camille d'Hostun, duc de Tallard, at Strasbourg; and 10,000 men under Prince Eugene of Savoy south of Ulm.\nBoth the Imperial Austrian Ambassador in London, Count Wratislaw, and the Duke of Marlborough realised the implications of the situation on the Danube. The Dutch were against any adventurous military operation as far south as the Danube and would not permit any major weakening of the forces in the Spanish Netherlands. Marlborough, realising the only way to reinforce the Austrians was by the use of secrecy and guile, set out to deceive his Dutch allies by pretending to move his troops to the Moselle \u2013 a plan approved of by The Hague \u2013 but once there, he would slip the Dutch leash and link up with Austrian forces in southern Germany. \nThis does not mean that he proceeded entirely without consultation with the Dutch. Without them, the army's logistics system would have simply collapsed. Intensive consultations preceded the campaign and Anthonie Heinsius, the Dutch Grand Pensionary, was likely informed by Marlborough of his secret plan to link up with Austrian forces. Many other important Dutchmen, like Major-General Johan Wijnand van Goor, were in favour of helping the Emperor and participated in the campaign. The Dutch diplomat and field deputy Van Rechteren-Almelo also played an important role. He made sure that on their 450-kilometer-long march, the Allies would nowhere be denied passage by local rulers, nor would they need to look for provisions, horsefeed or new boots. He also saw to it that sufficient stopovers were arranged along the way to ensure that the Allies arrived at their destination in good condition. This was of paramount importance, for the success of the operation depended on a quick elimination of the Bavarian elector. However, it was not possible to make the logistical arrangements in advance that would have been indispensable to supply the Allied army south of the Danube. For this, the Allies should have had access to Ulm and Augsburg, but the Bavarian elector had taken these two cities. This could have become a problem for Marlborough had the Elector avoided a battle and instead entrenched himself south of the Danube. Had Villeroy then managed to take advantage of the weakening of Allied forces in the Netherlands by recapturing Li\u00e8ge and besieging Maastricht, it would have validated the concerns of his Dutch adversaries.\nPrelude.\nProtagonists march to the Danube.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A scarlet caterpillar, upon which all eyes were at once fixed, began to crawl steadfastly day by day across the map of Europe, dragging the whole war with it. \u2013 Winston Churchill\nMarlborough's march started on 19 May from Bedburg, northwest of Cologne. The army assembled by Marlborough's brother, General Charles Churchill, consisted of 66 squadrons of cavalry, 31 battalions of infantry and 38 guns and mortars, totalling 21,000 men, 16,000 of whom were British. This force was augmented en route, and by the time it reached the Danube it numbered 40,000\u00a0\u2013 47 battalions and 88 squadrons. While Marlborough led this army south, the Dutch general, Henry Overkirk, Count of Nassau, maintained a defensive position in the Dutch Republic against the possibility of Villeroi mounting an attack. Marlborough had assured the Dutch that if the French were to launch an offensive he would return in good time, but he calculated that as he marched south, the French army would be drawn after him. In this assumption Marlborough proved correct: Villeroi shadowed Marlborough with 30,000 men in 60 squadrons and 42 battalions. Marlborough wrote to Godolphin \"I am very sensible that I take a great deal upon me, but should I act otherwise, the Empire would be undone ...\"\nIn the meantime, the appointment of Henry Overkirk as Field Marshal caused significant controversy in the Dutch Republic. After the Earl of Athlone's death, the Dutch States General had put Overkirk in charge of the Dutch States Army, which led to much discontent among the other high-ranking Dutch generals. Ernst Wilhelm von Salisch, Dani\u00ebl van Dopff and Menno van Coehoorn threatened to resign or go into the service of other countries, although all were eventually convinced to stay. The new infantry generals were also disgruntled \u2014 the Lord of Slangenburg because he had to serve the less experienced Overkirk; and the Count of Noyelles because he had to serve the orders of the 'insupportable' Slangenburg. Then there was the major problem of the position of the Prince of Orange. The provinces of Friesland and Groningen demanded that their 17-year-old stadtholder be appointed supreme infantry general. This divided the parties so much that a second Grand Assembly, as had existed in 1651, was considered. However, after pressure from the other provinces, Friesland and Groningen adjusted their demands and a compromise was found. The Prince of Orange would nominally be appointed infantry general, behind Slangenburg and Noyelles, but he would not really be in command until he was 20.\nWhile the Allies were making their preparations, the French were striving to maintain and re-supply Marsin. He had been operating with Maximilian II against Prince Louis, and was somewhat isolated from France: his only lines of communication lay through the rocky passes of the Black Forest. On 14 May, Tallard brought 8,000 reinforcements and vast supplies and munitions through the difficult terrain, whilst outmanoeuvring Johann Karl von Th\u00fcngen, the Imperial general who sought to block his path. Tallard then returned with his own force to the Rhine, once again side-stepping Th\u00fcngen's efforts to intercept him.\nOn 26 May, Marlborough reached Coblenz, where the Moselle meets the Rhine. If he intended an attack along the Moselle his army would now have to turn west; instead it crossed to the right bank of the Rhine, and was reinforced by 5,000 waiting Hanoverians and Prussians. The French realised that there would be no campaign on the Moselle. A second possible objective now occurred to them\u00a0\u2013 an Allied incursion into Alsace and an attack on Strasbourg. Marlborough furthered this apprehension by constructing bridges across the Rhine at Philippsburg, a ruse that not only encouraged Villeroi to come to Tallard's aid in the defence of Alsace, but one that ensured the French plan to march on Vienna was delayed while they waited to see what Marlborough's army would do.\nEncouraged by Marlborough's promise to return to the Netherlands if a French attack developed there, transferring his troops up the Rhine on barges at a rate of a day, the Dutch States General agreed to release the Danish contingent of seven battalions and 22 squadrons as reinforcements. Marlborough reached Ladenburg, in the plain of the Neckar and the Rhine, and there halted for three days to rest his cavalry and allow the guns and infantry to close up. On 6 June he arrived at Wiesloch, south of Heidelberg. The following day, the Allied army swung away from the Rhine towards the hills of the Swabian Jura and the Danube beyond. At last Marlborough's destination was established without doubt.\nStrategy.\nOn 10 June, Marlborough met for the first time the President of the Imperial War Council, Prince Eugene \u2013 accompanied by Count Wratislaw \u2013 at the village of Mundelsheim, halfway between the Danube and the Rhine. By 13 June, the Imperial Field Commander, Prince Louis, had joined them in Gro\u00dfheppach. The three generals commanded a force of nearly 110,000 men. At this conference, it was decided that Prince Eugene would return with 28,000 men to the Lines of Stollhofen on the Rhine to watch Villeroi and Tallard and prevent them going to the aid of the Franco-Bavarian army on the Danube. Meanwhile, Marlborough's and Prince Louis's forces would combine, totalling 80,000 men, and march on the Danube to seek out Maximilian II and Marsin before they could be reinforced.\nKnowing Marlborough's destination, Tallard and Villeroi met at Landau in the Palatinate on 13 June to construct a plan to save Bavaria. The rigidity of the French command system was such that any variations from the original plan had to be sanctioned by Versailles. The Count of M\u00e9rode-Westerloo, commander of the Flemish troops in Tallard's army, wrote \"One thing is certain: we delayed our march from Alsace for far too long and quite inexplicably.\" Approval from King Louis arrived on 27 June: Tallard was to reinforce Marsin and Maximilian II on the Danube via the Black Forest, with 40 battalions and 50 squadrons; Villeroi was to pin down the Allies defending the Lines of Stollhofen, or, if the Allies should move all their forces to the Danube, he was to join with Tallard; Coigny with 8,000 men would protect Alsace. On 1 July Tallard's army of 35,000 re-crossed the Rhine at Kehl and began its march.\nOn 22 June, Marlborough's forces linked up with Prince Louis' Imperial forces at Launsheim, having covered in five weeks. Thanks to a carefully planned timetable, the effects of wear and tear had been kept to a minimum. Captain Parker described the march discipline: \"As we marched through the country of our Allies, commissars were appointed to furnish us with all manner of necessaries for man and horse ... the soldiers had nothing to do but pitch their tents, boil kettles and lie down to rest.\" In response to Marlborough's manoeuvres, Maximilian and Marsin, conscious of their numerical disadvantage with only 40,000 men, moved their forces to the entrenched camp at Dillingen on the north bank of the Danube. Marlborough could not attack Dillingen because of a lack of siege guns \u2013 he had been unable to bring any from the Low Countries, and Prince Louis had failed to supply any, despite prior assurances that he would.\nThe Allies needed a base for provisions and a good river crossing. Consequently, on 2 July Marlborough stormed the fortress of Schellenberg on the heights above the town of Donauw\u00f6rth. Count Jean d'Arco had been sent with 12,000 men from the Franco-Bavarian camp to hold the town and grassy hill, but after a fierce battle, with heavy casualties on both sides, Schellenberg fell. This forced Donauw\u00f6rth to surrender shortly afterward. Maximilian, knowing his position at Dillingen was now not tenable, took up a position behind the strong fortifications of Augsburg.\nTallard's march presented a dilemma for Prince Eugene. If the Allies were not to be outnumbered on the Danube, he realised that he had to either try to cut Tallard off before he could get there, or to reinforce Marlborough. If he withdrew from the Rhine to the Danube, Villeroi might also make a move south to link up with Maximilian and Marsin. Prince Eugene compromised\u00a0\u2013 leaving 12,000 troops behind guarding the Lines of Stollhofen\u00a0\u2013 he marched off with the rest of his army to forestall Tallard.\nLacking in numbers, Prince Eugene could not seriously disrupt Tallard's march but the French marshal's progress was proving slow. Tallard's force had suffered considerably more than Marlborough's troops on their march \u2013 many of his cavalry horses were suffering from glanders and the mountain passes were proving tough for the 2,000 wagonloads of provisions. Local German peasants, angry at French plundering, compounded Tallard's problems, leading M\u00e9rode-Westerloo to bemoan \u2013 \"the enraged peasantry killed several thousand of our men before the army was clear of the Black Forest.\"\nAt Augsburg, Maximilian was informed on 14 July that Tallard was on his way through the Black Forest. This good news bolstered his policy of inaction, further encouraging him to wait for the reinforcements. This reticence to fight induced Marlborough to undertake a controversial policy of spoliation in Bavaria, burning buildings and crops throughout the rich lands south of the Danube. This had two aims: firstly to put pressure on Maximilian to fight or come to terms before Tallard arrived with reinforcements; and secondly, to ruin Bavaria as a base from which the French and Bavarian armies could attack Vienna, or pursue Marlborough into Franconia if, at some stage, he had to withdraw northwards. But this destruction, coupled with a protracted siege of the town of Rain over 9 to 16 July, caused Prince Eugene to lament \"...\u00a0since the Donauw\u00f6rth action I cannot admire their performances\", and later to conclude \"If he has to go home without having achieved his objective, he will certainly be ruined.\"\nFinal positioning.\nTallard, with 34,000 men, reached Ulm, joining with Maximilian and Marsin at Augsburg on 5 August, although Maximilian had dispersed his army in response to Marlborough's campaign of ravaging the region. Also on 5 August, Prince Eugene reached H\u00f6chst\u00e4dt, riding that same night to meet with Marlborough at Schrobenhausen. Marlborough knew that another crossing point over the Danube was required in case Donauw\u00f6rth fell to the enemy; so on 7 August, the first of Prince Louis' 15,000 Imperial troops left Marlborough's main force to besiege the heavily defended city of Ingolstadt, farther down the Danube, with the remainder following two days later.\nWith Prince Eugene's forces at H\u00f6chst\u00e4dt on the north bank of the Danube, and Marlborough's at Rain on the south bank, Tallard and Maximilian debated their next move. Tallard preferred to bide his time, replenish supplies and allow Marlborough's Danube campaign to flounder in the colder autumn weather; Maximilian and Marsin, newly reinforced, were keen to push ahead. The French and Bavarian commanders eventually agreed to attack Prince Eugene's smaller force. On 9 August, the Franco-Bavarian forces began to cross to the north bank of the Danube. On 10 August, Prince Eugene sent an urgent dispatch reporting that he was falling back to Donauw\u00f6rth. By a series of swift marches Marlborough concentrated his forces on Donauw\u00f6rth and, by noon 11 August, the link-up was complete.\nDuring 11 August, Tallard pushed forward from the river crossings at Dillingen. By 12 August, the Franco-Bavarian forces were encamped behind the small River Nebel near the village of Blenheim on the plain of H\u00f6chst\u00e4dt. On the same day, Marlborough and Prince Eugene carried out a reconnaissance of the French position from the church spire at Tapfheim, and moved their combined forces to M\u00fcnster \u2013 from the French camp. A French reconnaissance under Jacques Joseph Vipart, Marquis de Silly went forward to probe the enemy, but were driven off by Allied troops who had deployed to cover the pioneers of the advancing army, labouring to bridge the numerous streams in the area and improve the passage leading westwards to H\u00f6chst\u00e4dt. Marlborough quickly moved forward two brigades under the command of Lieutenant General John Wilkes and Brigadier Archibald Rowe to secure the narrow strip of land between the Danube and the wooded Fuchsberg hill, at the Schwenningen defile. Tallard's army numbered 56,000 men and 90 guns; the army of the Grand Alliance, 52,000 men and 66 guns. Some Allied officers who were acquainted with the superior numbers of the enemy, and aware of their strong defensive position, remonstrated with Marlborough about the hazards of attacking; but he was resolute \u2013 partly because the Dutch officer Willem Vleertman had scouted the marshy ground before them and reported that the land was perfectly suitable for the troops. \nBattle.\nThe battlefield.\nThe battlefield stretched for nearly . The extreme right flank of the Franco-Bavarian army rested on the Danube, the undulating pine-covered hills of the Swabian Jura lay to their left. A small stream, the Nebel, fronted the French line; the ground either side of this was marshy and only fordable intermittently. The French right rested on the village of Blenheim near where the Nebel flows into the Danube; the village itself was surrounded by hedges, fences, enclosed gardens, and meadows. Between Blenheim and the village of Oberglauheim to the north west the fields of wheat had been cut to stubble and were now ideal for the deployment of troops. From Oberglauheim to the next hamlet of Lutzingen the terrain of ditches, thickets and brambles was potentially difficult ground for the attackers.\nInitial manoeuvres.\nAt 02:00 on 13 August, 40 Allied cavalry squadrons were sent forward, followed at 03:00, in eight columns, by the main Allied force pushing over the River Kessel. At about 06:00 they reached Schwenningen, from Blenheim. The British and German troops who had held Schwenningen through the night joined the march, making a ninth column on the left of the army. Marlborough and Prince Eugene made their final plans. The Allied commanders agreed that Marlborough would command 36,000 troops and attack Tallard's force of 33,000 on the left, including capturing the village of Blenheim, while Prince Eugene's 16,000 men would attack Maximilian and Marsin's combined forces of 23,000 troops on the right. If this attack was pressed hard, it was anticipated that Maximilian and Marsin would feel unable to send troops to aid Tallard on their right. Lieutenant-General John Cutts would attack Blenheim in concert with Prince Eugene's attack. With the French flanks busy, Marlborough could cross the Nebel and deliver the fatal blow to the French at their centre. The Allies would have to wait until Prince Eugene was in position before the general engagement could begin.\nTallard was not anticipating an Allied attack; he had been deceived by intelligence gathered from prisoners taken by de Silly the previous day, and his army's strong position. Tallard and his colleagues believed that Marlborough and Prince Eugene were about to retreat north-westwards towards N\u00f6rdlingen. Tallard wrote a report to this effect to King Louis that morning. Signal guns were fired to bring in the foraging parties and pickets as the French and Bavarian troops drew into battle-order to face the unexpected threat.\nAt about 08:00 the French artillery on their right wing opened fire, answered by Colonel Holcroft Blood's batteries. The guns were heard by Prince Louis in his camp before Ingolstadt. An hour later Tallard, Maximilian, and Marsin climbed Blenheim's church tower to finalise their plans. It was settled that Maximilian and Marsin would hold the front from the hills to Oberglauheim, whilst Tallard would defend the ground between Oberglauheim and the Danube. The French commanders were divided as to how to utilise the Nebel. Tallard's preferred tactic was to lure the Allies across before unleashing his cavalry upon them. This was opposed by Marsin and Maximilian who felt it better to close their infantry right up to the stream itself, so that while the enemy was struggling in the marshes, they would be caught in crossfire from Blenheim and Oberglauheim. Tallard's approach was sound if all its parts were implemented, but in the event it allowed Marlborough to cross the Nebel without serious interference and fight the battle he had planned.\nDeployment.\nThe Franco-Bavarian commanders deployed their forces. In the village of Lutzingen, Count Alessandro de Maffei positioned five Bavarian battalions with a great battery of 16 guns at the village's edge. In the woods to the left of Lutzingen, seven French battalions under C\u00e9sar Armand, Marquis de Rozel moved into place. Between Lutzingen and Oberglauheim Maximilian placed 27 squadrons of cavalry and 14 Bavarian squadrons commanded by d'Arco with 13 more in support nearby under Baron Veit Heinrich Moritz Freiherr von Wolframsdorf. To their right stood Marsin's 40 French squadrons and 12 battalions. The village of Oberglauheim was packed with 14 battalions commanded by Jean-Jules-Armand Colbert, Marquis de Blainville, including the effective Irish Brigade known as the \"Wild Geese\". Six batteries of guns were ranged alongside the village. On the right of these French and Bavarian positions, between Oberglauheim and Blenheim, Tallard deployed 64 French and Walloon squadrons, 16 of which were from Marsin, supported by nine French battalions standing near the H\u00f6chst\u00e4dt road. In the cornfield next to Blenheim stood three battalions from the Regiment de Roi. Nine battalions occupied the village itself, commanded by Philippe, Marquis de Cl\u00e9rambault. Four battalions stood to the rear and a further eleven were in reserve. These battalions were supported by Count Gabriel d'Hautefeuille's twelve squadrons of dismounted dragoons. By 11:00 Tallard, Maximilian, and Marsin were in place. Many of the Allied generals were hesitant to attack such a strong position. The Earl of Orkney later said that, \"had I been asked to give my opinion, I had been against it.\"\nPrince Eugene was expected to be in position by 11:00, but due to the difficult terrain and enemy fire, progress was slow. Cutts' column \u2013 which by 10:00 had expelled the enemy from two water mills on the Nebel \u2013 had already deployed by the river against Blenheim, enduring over the next three hours severe fire from a six-gun heavy battery posted near the village. The rest of Marlborough's army, waiting in their ranks on the forward slope, were also forced to bear the cannonade from the French artillery, suffering 2,000 casualties before the attack could even start. Meanwhile, engineers repaired a stone bridge across the Nebel, and constructed five additional bridges or causeways across the marsh between Blenheim and Oberglauheim. Marlborough's anxiety was finally allayed when, just past noon, Colonel William Cadogan reported that Prince Eugene's Prussian and Danish infantry were in place \u2013 the order for the general advance was given. At 13:00, Cutts was ordered to attack the village of Blenheim whilst Prince Eugene was requested to assault Lutzingen on the Allied right flank.\nBlenheim.\nCutts ordered Rowe's brigade to attack. The English infantry rose from the edge of the Nebel, and silently marched towards Blenheim, a distance of some . James Ferguson's Scottish brigade supported Rowe's left, and moved towards the barricades between the village and the river, defended by Hautefeuille's dragoons. As the range closed to within , the French fired a deadly volley. Rowe had ordered that there should be no firing from his men until he struck his sword upon the palisades, but as he stepped forward to give the signal, he fell mortally wounded. The survivors of the leading companies closed up the gaps in their ranks and rushed forward. Small parties penetrated the defences, but repeated French volleys forced the English back and inflicted heavy casualties. As the attack faltered, eight squadrons of elite Gens d'Armes, commanded by the veteran Swiss officer, B\u00e9at Jacques II de Zurlauben, fell on the English troops, cutting at the exposed flank of Rowe's own regiment. Wilkes' Hessian brigade, nearby in the marshy grass at the water's edge, stood firm and repulsed the Gens d'Armes with steady fire, enabling the English and Hessians to re-order and launch another attack.\nAlthough the Allies were again repulsed, these persistent attacks on Blenheim eventually bore fruit, panicking Cl\u00e9rambault into making the worst French error of the day. Without consulting Tallard, Cl\u00e9rambault ordered his reserve battalions into the village, upsetting the balance of the French position and nullifying the French numerical superiority. \"The men were so crowded in upon one another\", wrote M\u00e9rode-Westerloo, \"that they couldn't even fire \u2013 let alone receive or carry out any orders\". Marlborough, spotting this error, now countermanded Cutts' intention to launch a third attack, and ordered him simply to contain the enemy within Blenheim; no more than 5,000 Allied soldiers were able to pen in twice the number of French infantry and dragoons.\nLutzingen.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... Prince Eugene and the Imperial troops had been repulsed three times \u2013 driven right back to the woods \u2013 and had taken a real drubbing. \u2013 M\u00e9rode-Westerloo.\nOn the Allied right, Prince Eugene's Prussian and Danish forces were desperately fighting the numerically superior forces of Maximilian and Marsin. Leopold I, Prince of Anhalt-Dessau led forward four brigades across the Nebel to assault the well-fortified position of Lutzingen. Here, the Nebel was less of an obstacle, but the great battery positioned on the edge of the village enjoyed a good field of fire across the open ground stretching to the hamlet of Schwennenbach. As soon as the infantry crossed the stream, they were struck by Maffei's infantry, and salvoes from the Bavarian guns positioned both in front of the village and in enfilade on the wood-line to the right. Despite heavy casualties the Prussians attempted to storm the great battery, whilst the Danes, under Count Jobst von Scholten, attempted to drive the French infantry out of the copses beyond the village.\nWith the infantry heavily engaged, Prince Eugene's cavalry picked its way across the Nebel. After an initial success, his first line of cavalry, under the Imperial General of Horse, Prince Maximilian of Hanover, were pressed by the second line of Marsin's cavalry and forced back across the Nebel in confusion. The exhausted French were unable to follow up their advantage, and both cavalry forces tried to regroup and reorder their ranks. Without cavalry support, and threatened with envelopment, the Prussian and Danish infantry were in turn forced to pull back across the Nebel. Panic gripped some of Prince Eugene's troops as they crossed the stream. Ten infantry colours were lost to the Bavarians, and hundreds of prisoners taken; it was only through the leadership of Prince Eugene and the Prince Maximilian of Hanover that the Imperial infantry was prevented from abandoning the field.\nAfter rallying his troops near Schwennenbach \u2013 well beyond their starting point \u2013 Prince Eugene prepared to launch a second attack, led by the second-line squadrons under the Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg-Teck. Yet again they were caught in the murderous crossfire from the artillery in Lutzingen and Oberglauheim, and were once again thrown back in disarray. The French and Bavarians were almost as disordered as their opponents, and they too were in need of inspiration from their commander, Maximilian, who was seen \" ... riding up and down, and inspiring his men with fresh courage.\" Anhalt-Dessau's Danish and Prussian infantry attacked a second time but could not sustain the advance without proper support. Once again they fell back across the stream.\nCentre and Oberglauheim.\nWhilst these events around Blenheim and Lutzingen were taking place, Marlborough was preparing to cross the Nebel. Hulsen's brigade of Hessians and Hanoverians and the earl of Orkney's British brigade advanced across the stream and were supported by dismounted British dragoons and ten British cavalry squadrons. This covering force allowed Charles Churchill's Dutch, British and German infantry and further cavalry units to advance and form up on the plain beyond. Marlborough arranged his infantry battalions in a novel manner with gaps sufficient to allow the cavalry to move freely between them. Marlborough ordered the formation forward. Once again Zurlauben's Gens d'Armes charged, looking to rout Henry Lumley's English cavalry who linked Cutts' column facing Blenheim with Churchill's infantry. As the elite French cavalry attacked, they were faced by five English squadrons under Colonel Francis Palmes. To the consternation of the French, the Gens d'Armes were pushed back in confusion and pursued well beyond the Maulweyer stream that flows through Blenheim. \"What? Is it possible?\" exclaimed Maximilian, \"the gentlemen of France fleeing?\" Palmes attempted to follow up his success but was repulsed by other French cavalry and musket fire from the edge of Blenheim.\nNevertheless, Tallard was alarmed by the repulse of the Gens d'Armes and urgently rode across the field to ask Marsin for reinforcements; but on the basis of being hard pressed by Prince Eugene \u2013 whose second attack was in full flood \u2013 Marsin refused. As Tallard consulted with Marsin, more of his infantry were taken into Blenheim by Cl\u00e9rambault. Fatally, Tallard, although aware of the situation, did nothing to rectify it, leaving him with just the nine battalions of infantry near the H\u00f6chst\u00e4dt road to oppose the massed enemy ranks in the centre. Zurlauben tried several more times to disrupt the Allies forming on Tallard's side of the stream. His front-line cavalry darted forward down the gentle slope towards the Nebel, but the attacks lacked co-ordination, and the Allied infantry's steady volleys disconcerted the French horsemen. During these skirmishes Zurlauben fell mortally wounded; he died two days later. At this stage the time was just after 15:00.\nThe Danish cavalry, under Carl Rudolf, Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg-Neuenstadt, had made slow work of crossing the Nebel near Oberglauheim. Harassed by Marsin's infantry near the village, the Danes were driven back across the stream. Count Horn's Dutch infantry managed to push the French back from the water's edge, but it was apparent that before Marlborough could launch his main effort against Tallard, Oberglauheim would have to be secured.\nCount Horn directed Anton G\u00fcnther, F\u00fcrst von Holstein-Beck to take the village, but his two Dutch brigades were cut down by the French and Irish troops, capturing and badly wounding Holstein-Beck during the action. The battle was now in the balance. If Holstein-Beck's Dutch column were destroyed, the Allied army would be split in two: Prince Eugene's wing would be isolated from Marlborough's, passing the initiative to the Franco-Bavarian forces. Seeing the opportunity, Marsin ordered his cavalry to change from facing Prince Eugene, and turn towards their right and the open flank of Churchill's infantry drawn up in front of Unterglau. Marlborough, who had crossed the Nebel on a makeshift bridge to take personal control, ordered Hulsen's Hanoverian battalions to support the Dutch infantry. A nine-gun artillery battery and a Dutch cavalry brigade under Averock were also called forward, but the cavalry soon came under pressure from Marsin's more numerous squadrons.\nMarlborough now requested Prince Eugene to release Count Hendrick Fugger and his Imperial Cuirassier brigade to help repel the French cavalry thrust. Despite his own difficulties, Prince Eugene at once complied. Although the Nebel stream lay between Fugger's and Marsin's squadrons, the French were forced to change front to meet this new threat, thus preventing Marsin from striking at Marlborough's infantry. Fugger's cuirassiers charged and, striking at a favourable angle, threw back Marsin's squadrons in disorder. With support from Blood's batteries, the Hessian, Hanoverian and Dutch infantry \u2013 now commanded by Count Berensdorf \u2013 succeeded in pushing the French and Irish infantry back into Oberglauheim so that they could not again threaten Churchill's flank as he moved against Tallard. The French commander in the village, de Blainville, was numbered among the heavy casualties.\nBreakthrough.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The [French] foot remained in the best order I ever saw, till they were cut to pieces almost in rank and file. \u2013 Lord Orkney.\nBy 16:00, with large parts of the Franco-Bavarian army besieged in Blenheim and Oberglau, the Allied centre of 81 squadrons (nine squadrons had been transferred from Cutts' column) supported by 18 battalions was firmly planted amidst the French line of 64 squadrons and nine battalions of raw recruits. There was now a pause in the battle: Marlborough wanted to attack simultaneously along the whole front, and Prince Eugene, after his second repulse, needed time to reorganise.\nBy just after 17:00 all was ready along the Allied front. Marlborough's two lines of cavalry had now moved to the front of his line of battle, with the two supporting lines of infantry behind them. M\u00e9rode-Westerloo attempted to extricate some French infantry crowded into Blenheim, but Cl\u00e9rambault ordered the troops back into the village. The French cavalry exerted themselves once more against the Allied first line \u2013 Lumley's English and Scots on the Allied left, and Reinhard Vincent Graf von Hompesch's Dutch and German squadrons on the Allied right. Tallard's squadrons, which lacked infantry support and were tired, managed to push the Allied first line back to their infantry support. With the battle still not won, Marlborough had to rebuke one of his cavalry officers who was attempting to leave the field \u2013 \"Sir, you are under a mistake, the enemy lies that way ...\" Marlborough commanded the second Allied line, under Cuno Josua von B\u00fclow and Friedrich Johann von Bothmer, to move forward, and, driving through the centre, the Allies finally routed Tallard's tired cavalry. The Prussian Life Dragoons' Colonel, Ludwig von Blumenthal, and his second in command, Lieutenant Colonel von Hacke, fell next to each other, but the charge succeeded. With their cavalry in headlong flight, the remaining nine French infantry battalions fought with desperate valour, trying to form a square, but they were overwhelmed by Blood's close-range artillery and platoon fire. M\u00e9rode-Westerloo later wrote \u2013 \"[They] died to a man where they stood, stationed right out in the open plain \u2013 supported by nobody.\"\nThe majority of Tallard's retreating troops headed for H\u00f6chst\u00e4dt but most did not make the safety of the town, plunging instead into the Danube where over 3,000 French horsemen drowned; others were cut down by the pursuing Allied cavalry. The Marquis de Gruignan attempted a counter-attack, but he was brushed aside by the triumphant Allies. After a final rally behind his camp's tents, shouting entreaties to stand and fight, Tallard was caught up in the rout and swept towards Sonderheim. Surrounded by a squadron of Hessian troops, Tallard surrendered to Lieutenant Colonel de Boinenburg, the Prince of Hesse-Kassel's \"aide-de-camp\", and was sent under escort to Marlborough. Marlborough welcomed the French commander \u2013 \"I am very sorry that such a cruel misfortune should have fallen upon a soldier for whom I have the highest regard.\"\nMeanwhile, the Allies had once again attacked the Bavarian stronghold at Lutzingen. Prince Eugene became exasperated with the performance of his Imperial cavalry whose third attack had failed: he had already shot two of his troopers to prevent a general flight. Then, declaring in disgust that he wished to \"fight among brave men and not among cowards\", Prince Eugene went into the attack with the Prussian and Danish infantry, as did Leopold I, waving a regimental colour to inspire his troops. This time the Prussians were able to storm the great Bavarian battery, and overwhelm the guns' crews. Beyond the village, Scholten's Danes defeated the French infantry in a desperate hand-to-hand bayonet struggle. When they saw that the centre had broken, Maximilian and Marsin decided the battle was lost; like the remnants of Tallard's army, they fled the battlefield, albeit in better order than Tallard's men. Attempts to organise an Allied force to prevent Marsin's withdrawal failed owing to the exhaustion of the cavalry, and the growing confusion in the field.\nFall of Blenheim.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... our men fought in and through the fire ... until many on both sides were burned to death. \u2013 Private Deane, 1st Regiment Foot Guards.\nMarlborough now turned his attention from the fleeing enemy to direct Churchill to detach more infantry to storm Blenheim. Orkney's infantry, Hamilton's English brigade and St Paul's Hanoverians moved across the trampled wheat to the cottages. Fierce hand-to-hand fighting gradually forced the French towards the village centre, in and around the walled churchyard which had been prepared for defence. Lord John Hay and Charles Ross's dismounted dragoons were also sent, but suffered under a counter-charge delivered by the regiments of Artois and Provence under command of Colonel de la Silvi\u00e8re. Colonel Belville's Hanoverians were fed into the battle to steady the resolve of the dragoons, who attacked again. The Allied progress was slow and hard, and like the defenders, they suffered many casualties.\nMany of the cottages were now burning, obscuring the field of fire and driving the defenders out of their positions. Hearing the din of battle in Blenheim, Tallard sent a message to Marlborough offering to order the garrison to withdraw from the field. \"Inform Monsieur Tallard\", replied Marlborough, \"that, in the position in which he is now, he has no command.\" Nevertheless, as dusk came the Allied commander was anxious for a quick conclusion. The French infantry fought tenaciously to hold on to their position in Blenheim, but their commander was nowhere to be found. By now Blenheim was under assault from every side by three British generals: Cutts, Churchill, and Orkney. The French had repulsed every attack, but many had seen what had happened on the plain: their army was routed and they were cut off. Orkney, attacking from the rear, now tried a different tactic \u2013 \"...\u00a0it came into my head to beat parley\", he later wrote, \"which they accepted of and immediately their Brigadier de Nouville capitulated with me to be prisoner at discretion and lay down their arms.\" Threatened by Allied guns, other units followed their example. It was not until 21:00 that the Marquis de Blanzac, who had taken charge in Cl\u00e9rambault's absence, reluctantly accepted the inevitability of defeat, and some 10,000 of France's best infantry had laid down their arms.\nDuring these events Marlborough was still in the saddle organising the pursuit of the broken enemy. Pausing for a moment, he scribbled on the back of an old tavern bill a note addressed to his wife, Sarah: \"I have no time to say more but to beg you will give my duty to the Queen, and let her know her army has had a glorious victory.\"\nAftermath.\nFrench losses were immense, with over 27,000 killed, wounded and captured. Moreover the myth of French invincibility had been destroyed, and King Louis's hopes of a victorious early peace were over. M\u00e9rode-Westerloo summarised the case against Tallard's army: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The French lost this battle for a wide variety of reasons. For one thing they had too good an opinion of their own ability ... Another point was their faulty field dispositions, and in addition there was rampant indiscipline and inexperience displayed ... It took all these faults to lose so celebrated a battle. It was a hard-fought contest: Prince Eugene observed that \"I have not a squadron or battalion which did not charge four times at least.\"\nAlthough the war dragged on for years, the Battle of Blenheim was probably its most decisive victory; Marlborough and Prince Eugene had saved the Habsburg Empire and thereby preserved the Grand Alliance from collapse. Munich, Augsburg, Ingolstadt, Ulm and the remaining territory of Bavaria soon fell to the Allies. By the Treaty of Ilbersheim, signed on 7 November, Bavaria was placed under Austrian military rule, allowing the Habsburgs to use its resources for the rest of the conflict.\nThe remnants of Maximilian and Marsin's wing limped back to Strasbourg, losing another 7,000 men through desertion. Despite being offered the chance to remain as ruler of Bavaria, under the strict terms of an alliance with Austria, Maximilian left his country and family in order to continue the war against the Allies from the Spanish Netherlands where he still held the post of governor-general. Tallard \u2013 who, unlike his subordinates, was not ransomed or exchanged \u2013 was taken to England and imprisoned in Nottingham until his release in 1711.\nThe 1704 campaign lasted longer than usual, for the Allies sought to extract the maximum advantage. Realising that France was too powerful to be forced to make peace by a single victory, Prince Eugene, Marlborough and Prince Louis met to plan their next moves. For the following year Marlborough proposed a campaign along the valley of the Moselle to carry the war deep into France. This required the capture of the major fortress of Landau which guarded the Rhine, and the towns of Trier and Trarbach on the Moselle itself. Trier was taken on 27 October and Landau fell on 23 November to Prince Louis and Prince Eugene; with the fall of Trarbach on 20 December, the campaign season for 1704 came to an end. The planned offensive never materialised as the Grand Alliance's army had to depart the Moselle to defend Li\u00e8ge from a French counteroffensive. The war raged on for another decade.\nMarlborough returned to England on 14 December (O.S) to the acclamation of Queen Anne and the country. In the first days of January, the 110 cavalry standards and 128 infantry colours that had been captured during the battle were borne in procession to Westminster Hall. In February 1705, Queen Anne, who had made Marlborough a duke in 1702, granted him the Park of Woodstock and promised a sum of \u00a3240,000 to build a suitable house as a gift from a grateful Crown in recognition of his victory; this resulted in the construction of Blenheim Palace. The British historian Sir Edward Shepherd Creasy considered Blenheim one of the pivotal battles in history, writing: \"Had it not been for Blenheim, all Europe might at this day suffer under the effect of French conquests resembling those of Alexander in extent and those of the Romans in durability.\" The military historian John A. Lynn considers this claim unjustified, for King Louis never had such an objective; the campaign in Bavaria was intended only to bring a favourable peace settlement and not domination over Europe.\nLake poet Robert Southey criticised the Battle of Blenheim in his anti-war poem \"After Blenheim\", but later praised the victory as \"the greatest victory which had ever done honour to British arms\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4050", "revid": "38795418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4050", "title": "Battle of Ramillies", "text": "1706 battle in the War of the Spanish Succession\nThe Battle of Ramillies (), fought on 23 May 1706, was a battle of the War of the Spanish Succession. For the Grand Alliance\u00a0\u2013 Austria, England, and the Dutch Republic\u00a0\u2013 the battle had followed an indecisive campaign against the Bourbon armies of King Louis\u00a0XIV of France in 1705. Although the Allies had captured Barcelona that year, they had been forced to abandon their campaign on the Moselle, had stalled in the Spanish Netherlands and suffered defeat in northern Italy. Yet despite his opponents' setbacks LouisXIV wanted peace, but on reasonable terms. Because of this, as well as to maintain their momentum, the French and their allies took the offensive in 1706.\nThe campaign began well for Louis XIV's generals: in Italy Marshal Vend\u00f4me defeated the Austrians at the Battle of Calcinato in April, while in Alsace Marshal Villars forced the Margrave of Baden back across the Rhine. Encouraged by these early gains LouisXIV urged Marshal Villeroi to go over to the offensive in the Spanish Netherlands and, with victory, gain a 'fair' peace. Accordingly, the French Marshal set off from Leuven (\"Louvain\") at the head of 60,000 men and marched towards Tienen (\"Tirlemont\"), as if to threaten Zoutleeuw (\"L\u00e9au\"). Also determined to fight a major engagement, the Duke of Marlborough, commander-in-chief of Anglo-Dutch forces, assembled his army\u00a0\u2013 some 62,000 men\u00a0\u2013 near Maastricht, and marched past Zoutleeuw. With both sides seeking battle, they soon encountered each other on the dry ground between the rivers Mehaigne and Petite Gette, close to the small village of Ramillies.\nIn less than four hours Marlborough's Dutch, English, and Danish forces overwhelmed Villeroi's and Max Emanuel's Franco-Spanish-Bavarian army. The Duke's subtle moves and changes in emphasis during the battle\u00a0\u2013 something his opponents failed to realise until it was too late\u00a0\u2013 caught the French in a tactical vice. With their foe broken and routed, the Allies were able to fully exploit their victory. Town after town fell, including Brussels, Bruges and Antwerp; by the end of the campaign Villeroi's army had been driven from most of the Spanish Netherlands. With Prince Eugene's subsequent success at the Battle of Turin in northern Italy, the Allies had imposed the greatest loss of territory and resources that LouisXIV would suffer during the war. Thus, the year 1706 proved, for the Allies, to be an \"annus mirabilis\".\nBackground.\nAfter their disastrous defeat at Blenheim in 1704, the next year brought the French some respite. The Duke of Marlborough had intended the 1705 campaign\u00a0\u2013 an invasion of France through the Moselle valley\u00a0\u2013 to complete the work of Blenheim and persuade King LouisXIV to make peace but the plan had been thwarted by friend and foe alike. The reluctance of his Dutch allies to see their frontiers denuded of troops for another gamble in Germany had denied Marlborough the initiative but of far greater importance was the Margrave of Baden's pronouncement that he could not join the Duke in strength for the coming offensive. This was in part due to the sudden switching of troops from the Rhine to reinforce Prince Eugene in Italy and part due to the deterioration of Baden's health brought on by the re-opening of a severe foot wound he had received at the storming of the Schellenberg the previous year. Marlborough had to cope with the death of Emperor LeopoldI in May and the accession of JosephI, which unavoidably complicated matters for the Grand Alliance.\nThe resilience of the French King and the efforts of his generals, also added to Marlborough's problems. Marshal Villeroi, exerting considerable pressure on the Dutch commander, Count Overkirk, along the Meuse, took Huy on 10 June before pressing on towards Li\u00e8ge. With Marshal Villars sitting strong on the Moselle, the Allied commander\u00a0\u2013 whose supplies had by now become very short\u00a0\u2013 was forced to call off his campaign on 16 June. \"What a disgrace for Marlborough,\" exulted Villeroi, \"to have made false movements without any result!\" With Marlborough's departure north, the French transferred troops from the Moselle valley to reinforce Villeroi in Flanders, while Villars marched off to the Rhine.\nThe Anglo-Dutch forces gained minor compensation for the failed Moselle campaign with the success at Elixheim and the crossing of the Lines of Brabant in the Spanish Netherlands (Huy was also retaken on 11 July) but a chance to bring the French to a decisive engagement eluded Marlborough. The year 1705 proved almost entirely barren for the Duke, whose military disappointments were only partly compensated by efforts on the diplomatic front where, at the courts of D\u00fcsseldorf, Frankfurt, Vienna, Berlin and Hanover, Marlborough sought to bolster support for the Grand Alliance and extract promises of prompt assistance for the following year's campaign.\nPrelude.\nOn 11 January 1706 Marlborough finally reached London at the end of his diplomatic tour but he had already been planning his strategy for the coming season. The first option (although it is debatable to what extent the Duke was committed to such an enterprise) was a plan to transfer his forces from the Spanish Netherlands to northern Italy; once there, he intended linking up with Prince Eugene in order to defeat the French and safeguard Savoy from being overrun. Savoy would then serve as a gateway into France by way of the mountain passes or an invasion with naval support along the Mediterranean coast via Nice and Toulon, in connexion with redoubled Allied efforts in Spain. It seems that the Duke's favoured scheme was to return to the Moselle valley (where Marshal Marsin had recently taken command of French forces) and once more attempt an advance into the heart of France. But these decisions soon became academic. Shortly after Marlborough landed in the Dutch Republic on 14 April, news arrived of big Allied setbacks in the wider war.\nDetermined to show the Grand Alliance that France was still resolute, LouisXIV prepared to launch a double surprise in Alsace and northern Italy. On the latter front Marshal Vend\u00f4me defeated the Imperial army at Calcinato on 19 April, pushing the Imperialists back in confusion (French forces were now in a position to prepare for the long-anticipated siege of Turin). In Alsace, Marshal Villars took Baden by surprise and captured Haguenau, driving him back across the Rhine in some disorder, thus creating a threat on Landau. With these reverses, the Dutch refused to contemplate Marlborough's ambitious march to Italy or any plan that denuded their borders of the Duke and their army. In the interest of coalition harmony, Marlborough prepared to campaign in the Low Countries.\nOn the move.\nThe Duke left The Hague on 9 May. \"God knows I go with a heavy heart,\" he wrote six days later to his friend and political ally in England, Lord Godolphin, \"for I have no hope of doing anything considerable, unless the French do what I am very confident they will not...\"\u00a0\u2013 in other words, court battle. On 17 May the Duke concentrated his Dutch and English troops at Tongeren, near Maastricht. The Hanoverians, Hessians and Danes, despite earlier undertakings, found, or invented, pressing reasons for withholding their support. Marlborough wrote an appeal to the Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg, the commander of the Danish contingent: \"I send you this express to request your Highness to bring forward by a double march your cavalry so as to join us at the earliest moment...\" Additionally, the King \"in\" Prussia, Frederick I, had kept his troops in quarters behind the Rhine while his personal disputes with Vienna and the States General at The Hague remained unresolved. Nevertheless, the Duke could think of no circumstances why the French would leave their strong positions and attack his army, even if Villeroi was first reinforced by substantial transfers from Marsin's command. But in this he had miscalculated. Although LouisXIV wanted peace he wanted it on reasonable terms; for that, he needed victory in the field and to convince the Allies that his resources were by no means exhausted.\nFollowing the successes in Italy and along the Rhine, LouisXIV was now hopeful of similar results in Flanders. Far from standing on the defensive therefore\u00a0\u2013 and unbeknown to Marlborough\u00a0\u2013 LouisXIV was persistently goading his marshal into action. \"[Villeroi] began to imagine,\" wrote St Simon, \"that the King doubted his courage, and resolved to stake all at once in an effort to vindicate himself.\" Accordingly, on 18 May, Villeroi set off from Leuven at the head of 70 battalions, 132 squadrons and 62 cannon\u00a0\u2013 comprising an overall force of some 60,000 troops\u00a0\u2013 and crossed the river Dyle to seek battle with the enemy. Spurred on by his growing confidence in his ability to out-general his opponent, and by Versailles\u2019 determination to avenge Blenheim, Villeroi and his generals anticipated success.\nNeither opponent expected the clash at the exact moment or place where it occurred. The French moved first to Tienen, (as if to threaten Zoutleeuw, abandoned by the French in October 1705), before turning southwards, heading for Jodoigne\u00a0\u2013 this line of march took Villeroi's army towards the narrow aperture of dry ground between the rivers Mehaigne and Petite Gette close to the small villages of Ramillies and Taviers; but neither commander quite appreciated how far his opponent had travelled. Villeroi still believed (on 22 May) the Allies were a full day's march away when in fact they had camped near Corswaren waiting for the Danish squadrons to catch up; for his part, Marlborough deemed Villeroi still at Jodoigne when in reality he was now approaching the plateau of Mont St. Andr\u00e9 with the intention of pitching camp near Ramillies (see map at right). However, the Prussian infantry was not there. Marlborough wrote to Lord Raby, the English resident at Berlin: \"If it should please God to give us victory over the enemy, the Allies will be little obliged to the King [Frederick] for the success.\"\nThe following day, at 01:00, Marlborough dispatched Cadogan, his Quartermaster-General, with an advanced guard to reconnoitre the same dry ground that Villeroi's army was now heading toward, country that was well known to the Duke from previous campaigns. Two hours later the Duke followed with the main body: 74 battalions, 123 squadrons, 90 pieces of artillery and 20 mortars, totalling 62,000 troops. About 08:00, after Cadogan had just passed Merdorp, his force made brief contact with a party of French hussars gathering forage on the edge of the plateau of Jandrenouille. After a brief exchange of shots the French retired and Cadogan's dragoons pressed forward. With a short lift in the mist, Cadogan soon discovered the smartly ordered lines of Villeroi's advance guard some off; a galloper hastened back to warn Marlborough. Two hours later the Duke, accompanied by the Dutch field commander Field Marshal Overkirk, General Dani\u00ebl van Dopff, and the Allied staff, rode up to Cadogan where on the horizon to the westward he could discern the massed ranks of the French army deploying for battle along the front. Marlborough later told Bishop Burnet: \"The French army looked the best of any he had ever seen.\"\nBattle.\nBattlefield.\nThe battlefield of Ramillies is very similar to that of Blenheim, for here too there is an immense area of arable land unimpeded by woods or hedges. Villeroi's right rested on the villages of Franquen\u00e9e and Taviers, with the river Mehaigne protecting his flank. A large open plain, about wide, lay between Taviers and Ramillies, but unlike Blenheim, there was no stream to hinder the cavalry. His centre was secured by Ramillies itself, lying on a slight eminence which gave distant views to the north and east. The French left flank was protected by broken country, and by a stream, the Petite Gheete, which runs deep between steep and slippery slopes. On the French side of the stream the ground rises to Offus, the village which, together with Autre-Eglise farther north, anchored Villeroi's left flank. To the west of the Petite Gheete rises the plateau of Mont St. Andr\u00e9; a second plain, the plateau of Jandrenouille\u00a0\u2013 upon which the Anglo-Dutch army amassed\u00a0\u2013 rises to the east.\nInitial dispositions.\nAt 11:00 the Duke ordered the army to take standard battle formation. On the far right, towards Foulz, the British battalions and squadrons took up their posts in a double line near the Jeuche stream. The centre was formed by the mass of Dutch, German, Protestant Swiss and Scottish infantry\u00a0\u2013 perhaps 30,000 men\u00a0\u2013 facing Offus and Ramillies. Also facing Ramillies Marlborough placed a powerful battery of thirty 24-pounders, dragged into position by a team of oxen; further batteries were positioned overlooking the Petite Gheete. On their left, on the broad plain between Taviers and Ramillies\u00a0\u2013 and where Marlborough thought the decisive encounter must take place\u00a0\u2013 Overkirk drew the 69 squadrons of the Dutch and Danish horse, supported by 19 battalions of Dutch infantry and two artillery pieces.\nMeanwhile, Villeroi deployed his forces. In Taviers on his right, he placed two battalions of the Greder Suisse R\u00e9giment, with a smaller force forward in Franquen\u00e9e; the whole position was protected by the boggy ground of the river Mehaigne, thus preventing an Allied flanking movement. In the open country between Taviers and Ramillies, he placed 82 squadrons under General de Guiscard supported by several interleaved brigades of French, Swiss and Bavarian infantry. Along the Ramillies\u2013Offus\u2013Autre Eglise ridge-line, Villeroi positioned Walloon and Bavarian infantry, supported by the Elector of Bavaria's 50 squadrons of Bavarian and Walloon cavalry placed behind on the plateau of Mont St. Andr\u00e9. Ramillies, Offus and Autre-Eglise were all packed with troops and put in a state of defence, with alleys barricaded and walls loop-holed for muskets. Villeroi also positioned powerful batteries near Ramillies. These guns (some of which were of the three barrelled kind first seen at Elixheim the previous year) enjoyed good arcs of fire, able to fully cover the approaches of the plateau of Jandrenouille over which the Allied infantry would have to pass.\nMarlborough, however, noticed several important weaknesses in the French dispositions. Tactically, it was imperative for Villeroi to occupy Taviers on his right and Autre-Eglise on his left, but by adopting this posture he had been forced to over-extend his forces. Moreover, this disposition\u00a0\u2013 concave in relation to the Allied army\u00a0\u2013 gave Marlborough the opportunity to form a more compact line, drawn up in a shorter front between the 'horns' of the French crescent; when the Allied blow came it would be more concentrated and carry more weight. Additionally, the Duke's disposition facilitated the transfer of troops across his front far more easily than his foe, a tactical advantage that would grow in importance as the events of the afternoon unfolded. Although Villeroi had the option of enveloping the flanks of the Allied army as they deployed on the plateau of Jandrenouille\u00a0\u2013 threatening to encircle their army\u00a0\u2013 the Duke correctly gauged that the characteristically cautious French commander was intent on a defensive battle along the ridge-line.\nTaviers.\nAt 13:00 the batteries went into action; a little later two Allied columns set out from the extremities of their line and attacked the flanks of the Franco-Bavarian army. To the south the Dutch Guards, under the command of Colonel Wertm\u00fcller, came forward with their two field guns to seize the hamlet of Franquen\u00e9e. The small Swiss garrison in the village, shaken by the sudden onslaught and unsupported by the battalions to their rear, were soon compelled back towards the village of Taviers. Taviers was of particular importance to the Franco-Bavarian position: it protected the otherwise unsupported flank of General de Guiscard's cavalry on the open plain, while at the same time, it allowed the French infantry to pose a threat to the flanks of the Dutch and Danish squadrons as they came forward into position. But hardly had the retreating Swiss rejoined their comrades in that village when the Dutch Guards renewed their attack. The fighting amongst the alleys and cottages soon deteriorated into a fierce bayonet and clubbing \"m\u00eal\u00e9e\", but the superiority in Dutch firepower soon told. The accomplished French officer, Colonel de la Colonie, standing on the plain nearby remembered: \"This village was the opening of the engagement, and the fighting there was almost as murderous as the rest of the battle put together.\" By about 15:00 the Swiss had been pushed out of the village into the marshes beyond.\nVilleroi's right flank fell into chaos and was now open and vulnerable. Alerted to the situation de Guiscard ordered an immediate attack with 14 squadrons of French dragoons currently stationed in the rear. Two other battalions of the Greder Suisse R\u00e9giment were also sent, but the attack was poorly co-ordinated and consequently went in piecemeal. The Anglo-Dutch commanders now sent dismounted Dutch dragoons into Taviers, which, together with the Guards and their field guns, poured concentrated musketry- and canister-fire into the advancing French troops. Colonel d\u2019Aubigni, leading his regiment, fell mortally wounded.\nAs the French ranks wavered, the leading squadrons of W\u00fcrttemberg's Danish horse\u00a0\u2013 now unhampered by enemy fire from either village\u00a0\u2013 were also sent into the attack and fell upon the exposed flank of the Franco-Swiss infantry and dragoons. De la Colonie, with his Grenadiers Rouge regiment, together with the Cologne Guards who were brigaded with them, was now ordered forward from his post south of Ramillies to support the faltering counter-attack on the village. But on his arrival, all was chaos: \"Scarcely had my troops got over when the dragoons and Swiss who had preceded us, came tumbling down upon my battalions in full flight... My own fellows turned about and fled along with them.\" De La Colonie managed to rally some of his grenadiers, together with the remnants of the French dragoons and Greder Suisse battalions, but it was an entirely peripheral operation, offering only fragile support for Villeroi's right flank.\nOffus and Autre-Eglise.\nWhile the attack on Taviers went on the Earl of Orkney launched his first line of English across the Petite Gheete in a determined attack against the barricaded villages of Offus and Autre-Eglise on the Allied right. Villeroi, posting himself near Offus, watched anxiously the redcoats' advance, mindful of the counsel he had received on 6 May from LouisXIV: \"Have particular care to that part of the line which will endure the first shock of the English troops.\" Heeding this advice the French commander began to transfer battalions from his centre to reinforce the left, drawing more foot from the already weakened right to replace them.\nAs the English battalions descended the gentle slope of the Petite Gheete valley, struggling through the boggy stream, they were met by Major General de la Guiche's disciplined Walloon infantry sent forward from around Offus. After concentrated volleys, exacting heavy casualties on the redcoats, the Walloons reformed back to the ridgeline in good order. The English took some time to reform their ranks on the dry ground beyond the stream and press on up the slope towards the cottages and barricades on the ridge. The vigour of the English assault, however, was such that they threatened to break through the line of the villages and out onto the open plateau of Mont St Andr\u00e9 beyond. This was potentially dangerous for the Allied infantry who would then be at the mercy of the Elector's Bavarian and Walloon squadrons patiently waiting on the plateau for the order to move.\nAlthough Henry Lumley's English cavalry had managed to cross the marshy ground around the Petite Gheete, it was soon evident to Marlborough that sufficient cavalry support would not be practicable and that the battle could not be won on the Allied right. The Duke, therefore, called off the attack against Offus and Autre-Eglise. To make sure that Orkney obeyed his order to withdraw, Marlborough sent his Quartermaster-General in person with the command. Despite Orkney's protestations, Cadogan insisted on compliance and, reluctantly, Orkney gave the word for his troops to fall back to their original positions on the edge of the plateau of Jandrenouille. It is still not clear how far Orkney's advance was planned only as a feint; according to historian David Chandler it is probably more accurate to surmise that Marlborough launched Orkney in a serious probe with a view to sounding out the possibilities of the sector. Nevertheless, the attack had served its purpose. Villeroi had given his personal attention to that wing and strengthened it with large bodies of horse and foot that ought to have been taking part in the decisive struggle south of Ramillies.\nRamillies.\nMeanwhile, the Dutch assault on Ramillies was gaining pace. Marlborough's younger brother, General of Infantry, Charles Churchill, ordered four brigades of foot to attack the village. The assault consisted of 12 battalions of Dutch infantry commanded by Major Generals Schultz and Spaar; two brigades of Saxons under Count Schulenburg; a Scottish brigade in Dutch service led by the 2nd Duke of Argyle; and a small brigade of Protestant Swiss. The 20 French and Bavarian battalions in Ramillies, supported by the Irish who had left Ireland in the Flight of the Wild Geese to join Clare's Dragoons who fought as infantry and captured a colour from the British 3rd Regiment of Foot and a small brigade of Cologne and Bavarian Guards under the Marquis de Maffei, put up a determined defence, initially driving back the attackers with severe losses as commemorated in the song \"Clare's Dragoons\".\nSeeing that Schultz and Spaar were faltering, Marlborough now ordered Orkney's second-line British and Danish battalions (who had not been used in the assault on Offus and Autre-Eglise) to move south towards Ramillies. Shielded as they were from observation by a slight fold in the land, their commander, Brigadier-General Van Pallandt, ordered the regimental colours to be left in place on the edge of the plateau to convince their opponents they were still in their initial position. Therefore, unbeknown to the French who remained oblivious to the Allies' real strength and intentions on the opposite side of the Petite Gheete, Marlborough was throwing his full weight against Ramillies and the open plain to the south. Villeroi meanwhile, was still moving more reserves of infantry in the opposite direction towards his left flank; crucially, it would be some time before the French commander noticed the subtle change in emphasis of the Allied dispositions.\nAround 15:30 Overkirk advanced his massed squadrons on the open plain in support of the infantry attack on Ramillies. 48 Dutch squadrons, supported on their left by 21 Danish squadrons, led by Count Tilly and Lieutenants Generals Hompesch, d'Auvergne, Ostfriesland and Dopff\u00a0\u2013 steadily advanced towards the enemy (taking care not to prematurely tire the horses), before breaking into a trot to gain the impetus for their charge. The Marquis de Feuqui\u00e8res writing after the battle described the scene: \"They advanced in four lines... As they approached they advanced their second and fourth lines into the intervals of their first and third lines; so that when they made their advance upon us, they formed only one front, without any intermediate spaces.\" This made it nearly impossible for the French cavalry to perform flanking manoeuvres.\nThe initial clash favoured the Dutch and Danish squadrons. The disparity of numbers\u00a0\u2013 exacerbated by Villeroi stripping their ranks of infantry to reinforce his left flank\u00a0\u2013 enabled Overkirk's cavalry to throw the first line of French horse back in some disorder towards their second-line squadrons. This line also came under severe pressure and, in turn, was forced back to their third-line of cavalry and the few battalions still remaining on the plain. But these French horsemen were amongst the best in LouisXIV's army\u00a0\u2013 the \"Maison du Roi\", supported by four elite squadrons of Bavarian Cuirassiers. Ably led by de Guiscard, the French cavalry rallied, thrusting back the Allied squadrons in successful local counterattacks. On Overkirk's right flank, close to Ramillies, ten of his squadrons suddenly broke ranks and were scattered, riding headlong to the rear to recover their order, leaving the left flank of the Allied assault on Ramillies dangerously exposed. Notwithstanding the lack of infantry support, de Guiscard threw his cavalry forward in an attempt to split the Allied army in two.\nA crisis threatened the centre, but from his vantage point Marlborough was at once aware of the situation. The Allied commander now summoned the cavalry on the right wing to reinforce his centre, leaving only the English squadrons in support of Orkney. Thanks to a combination of battle-smoke and favourable terrain, his redeployment went unnoticed by Villeroi who made no attempt to transfer any of his own 50 unused squadrons. While he waited for the fresh reinforcements to arrive, Marlborough flung himself into the \"m\u00eal\u00e9e\", rallying some of the Dutch cavalry who were in confusion. But his personal involvement nearly led to his undoing. A number of French horsemen, recognising the Duke, came surging towards his party. Marlborough's horse tumbled and the Duke was thrown\u00a0\u2013 \"Milord Marlborough was rid over,\" wrote Orkney some time later. It was a critical moment of the battle. \"Major-General Murray,\" recalled one eyewitness: \"...seeing him fall, marched up in all haste with two Swiss battalions to save him and stop the enemy who were hewing all down in their way.\" Fortunately Marlborough's newly appointed aide-de-camp, Richard Molesworth, galloped to the rescue, mounted the Duke on his horse and made good their escape, before Murray's disciplined ranks threw back the pursuing French troopers.\nAfter a brief pause, Marlborough's equerry, Colonel Bringfield (or Bingfield), led up another of the Duke's spare horses; but while assisting him onto his mount, the unfortunate Bringfield was hit by an errant cannonball that sheared off his head. One account has it that the cannonball flew between the Captain-General's legs before hitting the unfortunate colonel, whose torso fell at Marlborough's feet\u00a0\u2013 a moment subsequently depicted in a lurid set of contemporary playing cards. Nevertheless, the danger passed and Overkirk and Tilly restored order among the confused squadrons and ordered them to attack again, enabling the Duke to attend to the positioning of the cavalry reinforcements feeding down from his right flank\u00a0\u2013 a change of which Villeroi remained blissfully unaware.\nBreakthrough.\nThe time was about 16:30, and the two armies were in close contact across the whole front, from the skirmishing in the marshes in the south, through the vast cavalry battle on the open plain; to the fierce struggle for Ramillies at the centre, and to the north, where, around the cottages of Offus and Autre-Eglise, Orkney and de la Guiche faced each other across the Petite Gheete ready to renew hostilities.\nThe arrival of the transferring squadrons now began to tip the balance in favour of the Allies. Tired, and suffering a growing list of casualties, the numerical inferiority of Guiscard's squadrons battling on the plain at last began to tell. After earlier failing to hold or retake Franquen\u00e9e and Taviers, Guiscard's right flank had become dangerously exposed and a fatal gap had opened on the right of their line. Taking advantage of this breach, W\u00fcrttemberg's Danish cavalry now swept forward, wheeling to penetrate the flank of the Maison du Roi whose attention was almost entirely fixed on holding back the Dutch. Sweeping forwards, virtually without resistance, the 21 Danish squadrons reformed behind the French around the area of the Tomb of Ottomond, facing north across the plateau of Mont St Andr\u00e9 towards the exposed flank of Villeroi's army.\nThe final Allied reinforcements for the cavalry contest to the south were at last in position; Marlborough's superiority on the left could no longer be denied, and his fast-moving plan took hold of the battlefield. Now, far too late, Villeroi tried to redeploy his 50 unused squadrons, but a desperate attempt to form line facing south, stretching from Offus to Mont St Andr\u00e9, floundered amongst the baggage and tents of the French camp carelessly left there after the initial deployment. The Allied commander ordered his cavalry forward against the now heavily outnumbered French and Bavarian horsemen. De Guiscard's right flank, without proper infantry support, could no longer resist the onslaught and, turning their horses northwards, they broke and fled in complete disorder. Even the squadrons currently being scrambled together by Villeroi behind Ramillies could not withstand the onslaught. \"We had not got forty yards on our retreat,\" remembered Captain Peter Drake, an Irishman serving with the French\u00a0\u2013 \"when the words \"sauve qui peut\" went through the great part, if not the whole army, and put all to confusion\"\nIn Ramillies the Allied infantry, now reinforced by the English troops brought down from the north, at last broke through. The R\u00e9giment de Picardie stood their ground but were caught between Colonel Borthwick's Scots-Dutch regiment and the English reinforcements. Borthwick was killed, as was Charles O\u2019Brien, the Irish Viscount Clare in French service, fighting at the head of his regiment. The Marquis de Maffei attempted one last stand with his Bavarian and Cologne Guards, but it proved in vain. Noticing a rush of horsemen fast approaching from the south, he later recalled: \"...I went towards the nearest of these squadrons to instruct their officer, but instead of being listened to [I] was immediately surrounded and called upon to ask for quarter.\"\nPursuit.\nThe roads leading north and west were choked with fugitives. Orkney now sent his English troops back across the Petite Gheete stream to once again storm Offus where de la Guiche's infantry had begun to drift away in the confusion. To the right of the infantry Lord John Hay's 'Scots Greys' also picked their way across the stream and charged the R\u00e9giment du Roi within Autre-Eglise. \"Our dragoons,\" wrote John Deane, \"pushing into the village... made terrible slaughter of the enemy.\" The Bavarian Horse Grenadiers and the Electoral Guards withdrew and formed a shield about Villeroi and the Elector but were scattered by Lumley's cavalry. Stuck in the mass of fugitives fleeing the battlefield, the French and Bavarian commanders narrowly escaped capture by General Cornelius Wood who, unaware of their identity, had to content himself with the seizure of two Bavarian Lieutenant-Generals. Far to the south, the remnants of de la Colonie's brigade headed in the opposite direction towards the French held fortress of Namur.\nThe retreat became a rout. Individual Allied commanders drove their troops forward in pursuit, allowing their beaten enemy no chance to recover. Soon the Allied infantry could no longer keep up, but their cavalry were off the leash, heading through the gathering night for the crossings on the river Dyle. At last, however, Marlborough called a halt to the pursuit shortly after midnight near Meldert, from the field. \"It was indeed a truly shocking sight to see the miserable remains of this mighty army,\" wrote Captain Drake, \"...reduced to a handful.\"\nAftermath.\nWhat was left of Villeroi's army was now broken in spirit; the imbalance of the casualty figures amply demonstrates the extent of the disaster for LouisXIV's army: (\"see below\"). In addition, hundreds of French soldiers were fugitives, many of whom would never remuster to the colours. Villeroi also lost 52 artillery pieces and his entire engineer pontoon train. In the words of Marshal Villars, the French defeat at Ramillies was \"the most shameful, humiliating and disastrous of routs\".\nTown after town now succumbed to the Allies. Leuven fell on 25 May 1706; three days later, the Allies entered Brussels, the capital of the Spanish Netherlands. Marlborough realised the great opportunity created by the early victory of Ramillies: \"We now have the whole summer before us,\" wrote the Duke from Brussels to Robert Harley: \"...and with the blessing of God I shall make the best use of it.\" Malines, Lierre, Ghent, Alost, Damme, Oudenaarde, Bruges, and on 6 June Antwerp, all subsequently fell to Marlborough's victorious army and, like Brussels, proclaimed the Austrian candidate for the Spanish throne, the Archduke Charles, as their sovereign. Villeroi was helpless to arrest the process of collapse. When LouisXIV learnt of the disaster he recalled Marshal Vend\u00f4me from northern Italy to take command in Flanders; but it would be weeks before the command changed hands.\nAs news spread of the Allies' triumph, the Prussians, Hessians and Hanoverian contingents, long delayed by their respective rulers, eagerly joined the pursuit of the broken French and Bavarian forces. \"This,\" wrote Marlborough wearily, \"I take to be owing to our late success.\" Meanwhile, Overkirk took the port of Ostend on 4 July thus opening a direct route to the English Channel for communication and supply, but the Allies were making scant progress against Dendermonde whose governor, the Marquis de Val\u00e9e, was stubbornly resisting. Only later when Cadogan and Churchill went to take charge did the town's defences begin to fail.\nVend\u00f4me formally took over command in Flanders on 4 August; Villeroi would never again receive a major command: \"I cannot foresee a happy day in my life save only that of my death.\" LouisXIV was more forgiving to his old friend: \"At our age, Marshal, we must no longer expect good fortune.\" In the meantime, Marlborough invested the elaborate fortress of Menin which, after a costly siege, capitulated on 22 August. Dendermonde finally succumbed on 6 September followed by Ath\u00a0\u2013 the last conquest of 1706\u00a0\u2013 on 2 October. By the time Marlborough had closed down the Ramillies campaign he had denied the French most of the Spanish Netherlands west of the Meuse and north of the Sambre\u00a0\u2013 it was an unsurpassed operational triumph for the English Duke but once again it was not decisive as these gains did not defeat France.\nThe immediate question for the Allies was how to deal with the Spanish Netherlands, a subject on which the Austrians and the Dutch were diametrically opposed. Emperor JosephI, acting on behalf of his younger brother King CharlesIII, absent in Spain, claimed that reconquered Brabant and Flanders should be put under immediate possession of a governor named by himself. The Dutch, however, who had supplied the major share of the troops and money to secure the victory (the Austrians had produced nothing of either) claimed the government of the region till the war was over, and that after the peace they should continue to garrison Barrier Fortresses stronger than those which had fallen so easily to LouisXIV's forces in 1701. Marlborough mediated between the two parties but favoured the Dutch position. To sway the Duke's opinion, the Emperor offered Marlborough the governorship of the Spanish Netherlands. It was a tempting offer, but in the name of Allied unity, it was one he refused. In the end England and the Dutch Republic took control of the newly won territory for the duration of the war; after which it was to be handed over to the direct rule of CharlesIII, subject to the reservation of a Dutch Barrier, the extent and nature of which had yet to be settled.\nMeanwhile, on the Upper Rhine, Villars had been forced onto the defensive as battalion after battalion had been sent north to bolster collapsing French forces in Flanders; there was now no possibility of his undertaking the re-capture of Landau. Further good news for the Allies arrived from northern Italy where, on 7 September, Prince Eugene had routed a French army before the Piedmontese capital, Turin, driving the Franco-Spanish forces from northern Italy. Only from Spain did LouisXIV receive any good news where Das Minas and Galway had been forced to retreat from Madrid towards Valencia, allowing PhilipV to re-enter his capital on 4 October. All in all though, the situation had changed considerably and LouisXIV began to look for ways to end what was fast becoming a ruinous war for France. For Queen Anne also, the Ramillies campaign had one overriding significance: \"Now we have God be thanked so hopeful a prospect of peace.\" Instead of continuing the momentum of victory, however, cracks in Allied unity would enable LouisXIV to reverse some of the major setbacks suffered at Turin and Ramillies.\nCasualties.\nThe total number of French casualties cannot be calculated precisely, so complete was the collapse of the Franco-Bavarian army that day. David G. Chandler's \"Marlborough as Military Commander\" and \"A Guide to the Battlefields of Europe\" are consistent with regards to French casualty figures, i.e. 12,000 dead and wounded plus some 7,000 taken prisoner. James Falkner, in \"Ramillies 1706: Year of Miracles\", also notes 12,000 dead and wounded and \"up to 10,000\" taken prisoner. In \"Notes on the history of military medicine\", Garrison puts French casualties at 13,000, including 2,000 killed, 3,000 wounded and 6,000 missing. In \"The Collins Encyclopaedia of Military History\", Dupuy puts Villeroi's dead and wounded at 8,000, with a further 7,000 captured. Neil Litten, using French archives, suggests 7,000 killed and wounded and 6,000 captured, with a further 2,000 choosing to desert. John Millner's memoirs\u00a0\u2013 \"Compendious Journal\" (1733)\u00a0\u2013 is more specific, recording 12,087 of Villeroi's army were killed or wounded, with another 9,729 taken prisoner. In \"Marlborough\", however, Correlli Barnett puts the total casualty figure as high as 30,000\u201315,000 dead and wounded with an additional 15,000 taken captive. Trevelyan estimates Villeroi's casualties at 13,000 but adds \"his losses by desertion may have doubled that number\". La Colonie omits a casualty figure in his \"Chronicles of an old Campaigner\" but Saint-Simon in his \"Memoirs\" states 4,000 killed adding \"many others were wounded and many important persons were taken prisoner\". Voltaire, however, in \"Histoire du si\u00e8cle du LouisXIV\" records \"the French lost there twenty thousand men\". Gaston Bodart states 2,000 killed or wounded, 6,000 captured and 7,000 scattered for a total of 13,000 casualties. P\u00e9rini writes that both sides lost 2 to 3,000 killed or wounded (the Dutch losing precisely 716 killed and 1,712 wounded), and that 5,600 French were captured.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4051", "revid": "1157765368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4051", "title": "Brian Kernighan", "text": "Canadian computer scientist, co-creator of the Unix operating system\nBrian Wilson Kernighan (; born January 30, 1942) is a Canadian computer scientist.\nHe worked at Bell Labs and contributed to the development of Unix alongside Unix creators Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie. Kernighan's name became widely known through co-authorship of the first book on the C programming language (\"The C Programming Language\") with Dennis Ritchie. Kernighan affirmed that he had no part in the design of the C language (\"it's entirely Dennis Ritchie's work\"). He authored many Unix programs, including ditroff. Kernighan is coauthor of the AWK and AMPL programming languages. The \"K\" of K&amp;R C and of AWK both stand for \"Kernighan\".\nIn collaboration with Shen Lin he devised well-known heuristics for two NP-complete optimization problems: graph partitioning and the travelling salesman problem. In a display of authorial equity, the former is usually called the Kernighan\u2013Lin algorithm, while the latter is known as the Lin\u2013Kernighan heuristic.\nKernighan has been a Professor of Computer Science at Princeton University since 2000 and is the Director of Undergraduate Studies in the Department of Computer Science. In 2015, he co-authored the book \"The Go Programming Language\".\nEarly life and education.\nKernighan was born in Toronto. He attended the University of Toronto between 1960 and 1964, earning his bachelor's degree in engineering physics. He received his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Princeton University in 1969, completing a doctoral dissertation titled \"Some graph partitioning problems related to program segmentation\" under the supervision of Peter G. Weiner.\nCareer and research.\nKernighan has held a professorship in the Department of Computer Science at Princeton since 2000. Each fall he teaches a course called \"Computers in Our World\", which introduces the fundamentals of computing to non-majors.\nKernighan was the software editor for Prentice Hall International. His \"Software Tools\" series spread the essence of \"C/Unix thinking\" with makeovers for BASIC, FORTRAN, and Pascal, and most notably his \"Ratfor\" (rational FORTRAN) was put in the public domain.\nHe has said that if stranded on an island with only one programming language it would have to be C.\nKernighan coined the term \"Unix\" and helped popularize Thompson's Unix philosophy. Kernighan is also known as a coiner of the expression \"What You See Is All You Get\" (WYSIAYG), which is a sarcastic variant of the original \"What You See Is What You Get\" (WYSIWYG). Kernighan's term is used to indicate that WYSIWYG systems might throw away information in a document that could be useful in other contexts.\nIn 1972, Kernighan described memory management in strings using \"hello\" and \"world\", in the B programming language, which became the iconic example we know today. Kernighan's original 1978 implementation of Hello, World! was sold at The Algorithm Auction, the world's first auction of computer algorithms.\nIn 1996, Kernighan taught CS50 which is the Harvard University introductory course in Computer Science. Kernighan was an influence on David J. Malan who subsequently taught the course and scaled it up to run at multiple universities and in multiple digital formats.\nKernighan was elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering in 2002 for contributions to software and to programming languages. He was also elected a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2019.\nIn 2022 Kernighan stated that he was actively working on improvements to the AWK programming language, which he took part in creating in 1977.\nPublications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProgramming Setup.\nKernighan uses a 13-inch MacBook Air as his primary device. Along with this, from time to time, he uses an iMac in his office. He, most of the time, uses Sam as his text editor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4052", "revid": "35296831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4052", "title": "BCPL", "text": "Multi-paradigm computer programming language\nBCPL (\"Basic Combined Programming Language\") is a procedural, imperative, and structured programming language. Originally intended for writing compilers for other languages, BCPL is no longer in common use. However, its influence is still felt because a stripped down and syntactically changed version of BCPL, called B, was the language on which the C programming language was based. BCPL introduced several features of many modern programming languages, including using curly braces to delimit code blocks. BCPL was first implemented by Martin Richards of the University of Cambridge in 1967.\nDesign.\nBCPL was designed so that small and simple compilers could be written for it; reputedly some compilers could be run in 16 kilobytes. Furthermore, the original compiler, itself written in BCPL, was easily portable. BCPL was thus a popular choice for bootstrapping a system. A major reason for the compiler's portability lay in its structure. It was split into two parts: the front end parsed the source and generated O-code, an intermediate language. The back end took the O-code and translated it into the machine code for the target machine. Only &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20445 of the compiler's code needed to be rewritten to support a new machine, a task that usually took between 2 and 5 person-months. This approach became common practice later (e.g. Pascal, Java).\nThe language is unusual in having only one data type: a word, a fixed number of bits, usually chosen to align with the architecture's machine word and of adequate capacity to represent any valid storage address. For many machines of the time, this data type was a 16-bit word. This choice later proved to be a significant problem when BCPL was used on machines in which the smallest addressable item was not a word but a byte or on machines with larger word sizes such as 32-bit or 64-bit.\nThe interpretation of any value was determined by the operators used to process the values. (For example, codice_1 added two values together, treating them as integers; codice_2 indirected through a value, effectively treating it as a pointer.) In order for this to work, the implementation provided no type checking.\nThe mismatch between BCPL's word orientation and byte-oriented hardware was addressed in several ways. One was by providing standard library routines for packing and unpacking words into byte strings. Later, two language features were added: the bit-field selection operator and the infix byte indirection operator (denoted by codice_3).\nBCPL handles bindings spanning separate compilation units in a unique way. There are no user-declarable global variables; instead, there is a global vector, similar to \"blank common\" in Fortran. All data shared between different compilation units comprises scalars and pointers to vectors stored in a pre-arranged place in the global vector. Thus, the header files (files included during compilation using the \"GET\" directive) become the primary means of synchronizing global data between compilation units, containing \"GLOBAL\" directives that present lists of symbolic names, each paired with a number that associates the name with the corresponding numerically addressed word in the global vector. As well as variables, the global vector contains bindings for external procedures. This makes dynamic loading of compilation units very simple to achieve. Instead of relying on the link loader of the underlying implementation, effectively, BCPL gives the programmer control of the linking process.\nThe global vector also made it very simple to replace or augment standard library routines. A program could save the pointer from the global vector to the original routine and replace it with a pointer to an alternative version. The alternative might call the original as part of its processing. This could be used as a quick \"ad hoc\" debugging aid.\nBCPL was the first brace programming language and the braces survived the syntactical changes and have become a common means of denoting program source code statements. In practice, on limited keyboards of the day, source programs often used the sequences codice_4 and codice_5 in place of the symbols codice_6 and codice_7. The single-line codice_8 comments of BCPL, which were not adopted by C, reappeared in C++ and later in C99.\nThe book \"BCPL: The language and its compiler\" describes the philosophy of BCPL as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The philosophy of BCPL is not one of the tyrant who thinks he knows best and lays down the law on what is and what is not allowed; rather, BCPL acts more as a servant offering his services to the best of his ability without complaint, even when confronted with apparent nonsense. The programmer is always assumed to know what he is doing and is not hemmed in by petty restrictions.\nHistory.\nBCPL was first implemented by Martin Richards of the University of Cambridge in 1967. BCPL was a response to difficulties with its predecessor, Cambridge Programming Language, later renamed Combined Programming Language (CPL), which was designed during the early 1960s. Richards created BCPL by \"removing those features of the full language which make compilation difficult\". The first compiler implementation, for the IBM 7094 under Compatible Time-Sharing System, was written while Richards was visiting Project MAC at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the spring of 1967. The language was first described in a paper presented to the 1969 Spring Joint Computer Conference.\nBCPL has been rumored to have originally stood for \"Bootstrap Cambridge Programming Language\", but CPL was never created since development stopped at BCPL, and the acronym was later reinterpreted for the BCPL book.\nBCPL is the language in which the original \"Hello, World!\" program was written. The first MUD was also written in BCPL (\"MUD1\").\nSeveral operating systems were written partially or wholly in BCPL (for example, TRIPOS and the earliest versions of AmigaDOS). BCPL was also the initial language used in the Xerox PARC Alto project, the first modern personal computer; among other projects, the Bravo document preparation system was written in BCPL.\nAn early compiler, bootstrapped in 1969, by starting with a paper tape of the O-code of Richards's Atlas 2 compiler, targeted the ICT 1900 series. The two machines had different word-lengths (48 vs 24 bits), different character encodings, and different packed string representations\u2014and the successful bootstrapping increased confidence in the practicality of the method.\nBy late 1970, implementations existed for the Honeywell 635 and Honeywell 645, IBM 360, PDP-10, TX-2, CDC 6400, UNIVAC 1108, PDP-9, KDF 9 and Atlas 2. In 1974 a dialect of BCPL was implemented at BBN without using the intermediate O-code. The initial implementation was a cross-compiler hosted on BBN's TENEX PDP-10s, and directly targeted the PDP-11s used in BBN's implementation of the second generation IMPs used in the ARPANET.\nThere was also a version produced for the BBC Micro in the mid-1980s, by Richards Computer Products, a company started by John Richards, the brother of Martin Richards. The BBC Domesday Project made use of the language. Versions of BCPL for the Amstrad CPC and Amstrad PCW computers were also released in 1986 by UK software house Arnor Ltd. MacBCPL was released for the Apple Macintosh in 1985 by Topexpress Ltd, of Kensington, England.\nBoth the design and philosophy of BCPL strongly influenced B, which in turn influenced C. Programmers at the time debated whether an eventual successor to C would be called \"D\", the next letter in the alphabet, or \"P\", the next letter in the parent language name. The language most accepted as being C's successor is C++ (with codice_9 being C's increment operator), although meanwhile, a D programming language also exists.\nIn 1979, implementations of BCPL existed for at least 25 architectures; the language gradually fell out of favour as C became popular on non-Unix systems.\nMartin Richards maintains a modern version of BCPL on his website, last updated in 2018. This can be set up to run on various systems including Linux, FreeBSD, and Mac OS X. The latest distribution includes graphics and sound libraries, and there is a comprehensive manual. He continues to program in it, including for his research on musical automated score following.\nA common informal MIME type for BCPL is text/x-bcpl.\nExamples.\nIf these programs are run using Richards' current version of Cintsys (December 2018), LIBHDR, START and WRITEF must be changed to lower case to avoid errors.\nPrint factorials:\nCount solutions to the N queens problem:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4054", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4054", "title": "Battleship", "text": "Large armored warship with a main battery consisting of heavy caliber guns\nA battleship is a large armored warship with a main battery consisting of large caliber guns. It dominated naval warfare in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\nThe term \"battleship\" came into use in the late 1880s to describe a type of ironclad warship, now referred to by historians as pre-dreadnought battleships. In 1906, the commissioning of into the United Kingdom's Royal Navy heralded a revolution in the field of battleship design. Subsequent battleship designs, influenced by HMS \"Dreadnought\", were referred to as \"dreadnoughts\", though the term eventually became obsolete as dreadnoughts became the only type of battleship in common use.\nBattleships were a symbol of naval dominance and national might, and for decades the battleship was a major factor in both diplomacy and military strategy. A global arms race in battleship construction began in Europe in the 1890s and culminated at the decisive Battle of Tsushima in 1905, the outcome of which significantly influenced the design of HMS \"Dreadnought\". The launch of \"Dreadnought\" in 1906 commenced a new naval arms race. Three major fleet actions between steel battleships took place: the long-range gunnery duel at the Battle of the Yellow Sea in 1904, the decisive Battle of Tsushima in 1905 (both during the Russo-Japanese War) and the inconclusive Battle of Jutland in 1916, during the First World War. Jutland was the largest naval battle and the only full-scale clash of dreadnoughts of the war, and it was the last major battle in naval history fought primarily by battleships.\nThe Naval Treaties of the 1920s and 1930s limited the number of battleships, though technical innovation in battleship design continued. Both the Allied and Axis powers built battleships during World War II, though the increasing importance of the aircraft carrier meant that the battleship played a less important role than had been expected in that conflict.\nThe value of the battleship has been questioned, even during their heyday. There were few of the decisive fleet battles that battleship proponents expected and used to justify the vast resources spent on building battlefleets. Even in spite of their huge firepower and protection, battleships were increasingly vulnerable to much smaller and relatively inexpensive weapons: initially the torpedo and the naval mine, and later aircraft and the guided missile. The growing range of naval engagements led to the aircraft carrier replacing the battleship as the leading capital ship during World War II, with the last battleship to be launched being in 1944. Four battleships were retained by the United States Navy until the end of the Cold War for fire support purposes and were last used in combat during the Gulf War in 1991. The last battleships were struck from the U.S. Naval Vessel Register in the 2000s. Many World War II-era battleships remain in use today as museum ships.\nHistory.\nShips of the line.\nA ship of the line was a large, unarmored wooden sailing ship which mounted a battery of up to 120 smoothbore guns and carronades, which came to prominence with the adoption of line of battle tactics in the early 17th century and the end of the sailing battleship's heyday in the 1830s. From 1794, the alternative term 'line of battle ship' was contracted (informally at first) to 'battle ship' or 'battleship'.\nThe sheer number of guns fired broadside meant a ship of the line could wreck any wooden enemy, holing her hull, knocking down masts, wrecking her rigging, and killing her crew. However, the effective range of the guns was as little as a few hundred yards, so the battle tactics of sailing ships depended in part on the wind.\nOver time, ships of the line gradually became larger and carried more guns, but otherwise remained quite similar. The first major change to the ship of the line concept was the introduction of steam power as an auxiliary propulsion system. Steam power was gradually introduced to the navy in the first half of the 19th century, initially for small craft and later for frigates. The French Navy introduced steam to the line of battle with the 90-gun in 1850\u2014the first true steam battleship. \"Napol\u00e9on\" was armed as a conventional ship-of-the-line, but her steam engines could give her a speed of , regardless of the wind. This was a potentially decisive advantage in a naval engagement. The introduction of steam accelerated the growth in size of battleships. France and the United Kingdom were the only countries to develop fleets of wooden steam screw battleships although several other navies operated small numbers of screw battleships, including Russia (9), the Ottoman Empire (3), Sweden (2), Naples (1), Denmark (1) and Austria (1).\nIronclads.\nThe adoption of steam power was only one of a number of technological advances which revolutionized warship design in the 19th century. The ship of the line was overtaken by the ironclad: powered by steam, protected by metal armor, and armed with guns firing high-explosive shells.\nExplosive shells.\nGuns that fired explosive or incendiary shells were a major threat to wooden ships, and these weapons quickly became widespread after the introduction of 8-inch shell guns as part of the standard armament of French and American line-of-battle ships in 1841. In the Crimean War, six line-of-battle ships and two frigates of the Russian Black Sea Fleet destroyed seven Turkish frigates and three corvettes with explosive shells at the Battle of Sinop in 1853. Later in the war, French ironclad floating batteries used similar weapons against the defenses at the Battle of Kinburn.\nNevertheless, wooden-hulled ships stood up comparatively well to shells, as shown in the 1866 Battle of Lissa, where the modern Austrian steam two-decker ranged across a confused battlefield, rammed an Italian ironclad and took 80 hits from Italian ironclads, many of which were shells, but including at least one 300-pound shot at point-blank range. Despite losing her bowsprit and her foremast, and being set on fire, she was ready for action again the very next day.\nIron armor and construction.\nThe development of high-explosive shells made the use of iron armor plate on warships necessary. In 1859 France launched , the first ocean-going ironclad warship. She had the profile of a ship of the line, cut to one deck due to weight considerations. Although made of wood and reliant on sail for most journeys, \"Gloire\" was fitted with a propeller, and her wooden hull was protected by a layer of thick iron armor. \"Gloire\" prompted further innovation from the Royal Navy, anxious to prevent France from gaining a technological lead.\nThe superior armored frigate followed \"Gloire\" by only 14 months, and both nations embarked on a program of building new ironclads and converting existing screw ships of the line to armored frigates. Within two years, Italy, Austria, Spain and Russia had all ordered ironclad warships, and by the time of the famous clash of the and the at the Battle of Hampton Roads at least eight navies possessed ironclad ships.\nNavies experimented with the positioning of guns, in turrets (like the USS \"Monitor\"), central-batteries or barbettes, or with the ram as the principal weapon. As steam technology developed, masts were gradually removed from battleship designs. By the mid-1870s steel was used as a construction material alongside iron and wood. The French Navy's , laid down in 1873 and launched in 1876, was a central battery and barbette warship which became the first battleship in the world to use steel as the principal building material.\nPre-dreadnought battleship.\nThe term \"battleship\" was officially adopted by the Royal Navy in the re-classification of 1892. By the 1890s, there was an increasing similarity between battleship designs, and the type that later became known as the 'pre-dreadnought battleship' emerged. These were heavily armored ships, mounting a mixed battery of guns in turrets, and without sails. The typical first-class battleship of the pre-dreadnought era displaced 15,000 to 17,000\u00a0tons, had a speed of , and an armament of four guns in two turrets fore and aft with a mixed-caliber secondary battery amidships around the superstructure. An early design with superficial similarity to the pre-dreadnought is the British of 1871.\nThe slow-firing main guns were the principal weapons for battleship-to-battleship combat. The intermediate and secondary batteries had two roles. Against major ships, it was thought a 'hail of fire' from quick-firing secondary weapons could distract enemy gun crews by inflicting damage to the superstructure, and they would be more effective against smaller ships such as cruisers. Smaller guns (12-pounders and smaller) were reserved for protecting the battleship against the threat of torpedo attack from destroyers and torpedo boats.\nThe beginning of the pre-dreadnought era coincided with Britain reasserting her naval dominance. For many years previously, Britain had taken naval supremacy for granted. Expensive naval projects were criticized by political leaders of all inclinations. However, in 1888 a war scare with France and the build-up of the Russian navy gave added impetus to naval construction, and the British Naval Defence Act of 1889 laid down a new fleet including eight new battleships. The principle that Britain's navy should be more powerful than the two next most powerful fleets combined was established. This policy was designed to deter France and Russia from building more battleships, but both nations nevertheless expanded their fleets with more and better pre-dreadnoughts in the 1890s.\nIn the last years of the 19th century and the first years of the 20th, the escalation in the building of battleships became an arms race between Britain and Germany. The German naval laws of 1890 and 1898 authorized a fleet of 38 battleships, a vital threat to the balance of naval power. Britain answered with further shipbuilding, but by the end of the pre-dreadnought era, British supremacy at sea had markedly weakened. In 1883, the United Kingdom had 38 battleships, twice as many as France and almost as many as the rest of the world put together. In 1897, Britain's lead was far smaller due to competition from France, Germany, and Russia, as well as the development of pre-dreadnought fleets in Italy, the United States and Japan. The Ottoman Empire, Spain, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, the Netherlands, Chile and Brazil all had second-rate fleets led by armored cruisers, coastal defence ships or monitors.\nPre-dreadnoughts continued the technical innovations of the ironclad. Turrets, armor plate, and steam engines were all improved over the years, and torpedo tubes were also introduced. A small number of designs, including the American and es, experimented with all or part of the 8-inch intermediate battery superimposed over the 12-inch primary. Results were poor: recoil factors and blast effects resulted in the 8-inch battery being completely unusable, and the inability to train the primary and intermediate armaments on different targets led to significant tactical limitations. Even though such innovative designs saved weight (a key reason for their inception), they proved too cumbersome in practice.\nDreadnought era.\nIn 1906, the British Royal Navy launched the revolutionary . Created as a result of pressure from Admiral Sir John (\"Jackie\") Fisher, HMS \"Dreadnought\" rendered existing battleships obsolete. Combining an \"all-big-gun\" armament of ten 12-inch (305\u00a0mm) guns with unprecedented speed (from steam turbine engines) and protection, she prompted navies worldwide to re-evaluate their battleship building programs. While the Japanese had laid down an all-big-gun battleship, , in 1904 and the concept of an all-big-gun ship had been in circulation for several years, it had yet to be validated in combat. \"Dreadnought\" sparked a new arms race, principally between Britain and Germany but reflected worldwide, as the new class of warships became a crucial element of national power.\nTechnical development continued rapidly through the dreadnought era, with steep changes in armament, armor and propulsion. Ten years after \"Dreadnought\"'s commissioning, much more powerful ships, the super-dreadnoughts, were being built.\nOrigin.\nIn the first years of the 20th century, several navies worldwide experimented with the idea of a new type of battleship with a uniform armament of very heavy guns.\nAdmiral Vittorio Cuniberti, the Italian Navy's chief naval architect, articulated the concept of an all-big-gun battleship in 1903. When the \"Regia Marina\" did not pursue his ideas, Cuniberti wrote an article in \"Jane's\" proposing an \"ideal\" future British battleship, a large armored warship of 17,000\u00a0tons, armed solely with a single calibre main battery (twelve 12-inch [305\u00a0mm] guns), carrying belt armor, and capable of 24 knots (44\u00a0km/h).\nThe Russo-Japanese War provided operational experience to validate the \"all-big-gun\" concept. During the Battle of the Yellow Sea on August 10, 1904, Admiral Togo of the Imperial Japanese Navy commenced deliberate 12-inch gun fire at the Russian flagship \"Tzesarevich\" at 14,200 yards (13,000 meters). At the Battle of Tsushima on May 27, 1905, Russian Admiral Rozhestvensky's flagship fired the first 12-inch guns at the Japanese flagship \"Mikasa\" at 7,000 meters. It is often held that these engagements demonstrated the importance of the gun over its smaller counterparts, though some historians take the view that secondary batteries were just as important as the larger weapons when dealing with smaller fast moving torpedo craft. Such was the case, albeit unsuccessfully, when the Russian battleship \"Knyaz Suvorov\" at Tsushima had been sent to the bottom by destroyer launched torpedoes. When dealing with a mixed 10- and 12-inch armament. The 1903\u201304 design also retained traditional triple-expansion steam engines.\nAs early as 1904, Jackie Fisher had been convinced of the need for fast, powerful ships with an all-big-gun armament. If Tsushima influenced his thinking, it was to persuade him of the need to standardise on guns. Fisher's concerns were submarines and destroyers equipped with torpedoes, then threatening to outrange battleship guns, making speed imperative for capital ships. Fisher's preferred option was his brainchild, the battlecruiser: lightly armored but heavily armed with eight 12-inch guns and propelled to by steam turbines.\nIt was to prove this revolutionary technology that \"Dreadnought\" was designed in January 1905, laid down in October 1905 and sped to completion by 1906. She carried ten 12-inch guns, had an 11-inch armor belt, and was the first large ship powered by turbines. She mounted her guns in five turrets; three on the centerline (one forward, two aft) and two on the wings, giving her at her launch twice the broadside of any other warship. She retained a number of 12-pound (3-inch, 76\u00a0mm) quick-firing guns for use against destroyers and torpedo-boats. Her armor was heavy enough for her to go head-to-head with any other ship in a gun battle, and conceivably win.\n\"Dreadnought\" was to have been followed by three s, their construction delayed to allow lessons from \"Dreadnought\" to be used in their design. While Fisher may have intended \"Dreadnought\" to be the last Royal Navy battleship, the design was so successful he found little support for his plan to switch to a battlecruiser navy. Although there were some problems with the ship (the wing turrets had limited arcs of fire and strained the hull when firing a full broadside, and the top of the thickest armor belt lay below the waterline at full load), the Royal Navy promptly commissioned another six ships to a similar design in the and es.\nAn American design, , authorized in 1905 and laid down in December 1906, was another of the first dreadnoughts, but she and her sister, , were not launched until 1908. Both used triple-expansion engines and had a superior layout of the main battery, dispensing with \"Dreadnought\"'s wing turrets. They thus retained the same broadside, despite having two fewer guns.\nArms race.\nIn 1897, before the revolution in design brought about by , the Royal Navy had 62 battleships in commission or building, a lead of 26 over France and 50 over Germany. From the 1906 launching of \"Dreadnought\", an arms race with major strategic consequences was prompted. Major naval powers raced to build their own dreadnoughts. Possession of modern battleships was not only seen as vital to naval power, but also, as with nuclear weapons after World War II, represented a nation's standing in the world. Germany, France, Japan, Italy, Austria, and the United States all began dreadnought programmes; while the Ottoman Empire, Argentina, Russia, Brazil, and Chile commissioned dreadnoughts to be built in British and American yards.\nWorld War I.\nBy virtue of geography, the Royal Navy was able to use her imposing battleship and battlecruiser fleet to impose a strict and successful naval blockade of Germany and kept Germany's smaller battleship fleet bottled up in the North Sea: only narrow channels led to the Atlantic Ocean and these were guarded by British forces. Both sides were aware that, because of the greater number of British dreadnoughts, a full fleet engagement would be likely to result in a British victory. The German strategy was therefore to try to provoke an engagement on their terms: either to induce a part of the Grand Fleet to enter battle alone, or to fight a pitched battle near the German coastline, where friendly minefields, torpedo-boats and submarines could be used to even the odds. This did not happen however, due in large part to the necessity to keep submarines for the Atlantic campaign. Submarines were the only vessels in the Imperial German Navy able to break out and raid British commerce in force, but even though they sank many merchant ships, they could not successfully counter-blockade the United Kingdom; the Royal Navy successfully adopted convoy tactics to combat Germany's submarine counter-blockade and eventually defeated it. This was in stark contrast to Britain's successful blockade of Germany.\nThe first two years of war saw the Royal Navy's battleships and battlecruisers regularly \"sweep\" the North Sea making sure that no German ships could get in or out. Only a few German surface ships that were already at sea, such as the famous light cruiser , were able to raid commerce. Even some of those that did manage to get out were hunted down by battlecruisers, as in the Battle of the Falklands, December 7, 1914. The results of sweeping actions in the North Sea were battles including the Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank and German raids on the English coast, all of which were attempts by the Germans to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet in an attempt to defeat the Royal Navy in detail. On May 31, 1916, a further attempt to draw British ships into battle on German terms resulted in a clash of the battlefleets in the Battle of Jutland. The German fleet withdrew to port after two short encounters with the British fleet. Less than two months later, the Germans once again attempted to draw portions of the Grand Fleet into battle. The resulting Action of 19 August 1916 proved inconclusive. This reinforced German determination not to engage in a fleet to fleet battle.\nIn the other naval theatres there were no decisive pitched battles. In the Black Sea, engagement between Russian and Ottoman battleships was restricted to skirmishes. In the Baltic Sea, action was largely limited to the raiding of convoys, and the laying of defensive minefields; the only significant clash of battleship squadrons there was the Battle of Moon Sound at which one Russian pre-dreadnought was lost. The Adriatic was in a sense the mirror of the North Sea: the Austro-Hungarian dreadnought fleet remained bottled up by the British and French blockade. And in the Mediterranean, the most important use of battleships was in support of the amphibious assault on Gallipoli.\nIn September 1914, the threat posed to surface ships by German U-boats was confirmed by successful attacks on British cruisers, including the sinking of three British armored cruisers by the German submarine in less than an hour. The British Super-dreadnought soon followed suit as she struck a mine laid by a German U-boat in October 1914 and sank. The threat that German U-boats posed to British dreadnoughts was enough to cause the Royal Navy to change their strategy and tactics in the North Sea to reduce the risk of U-boat attack. Further near-misses from submarine attacks on battleships and casualties amongst cruisers led to growing concern in the Royal Navy about the vulnerability of battleships.\nAs the war wore on however, it turned out that whilst submarines did prove to be a very dangerous threat to older pre-dreadnought battleships, as shown by examples such as the sinking of , which was caught in the Dardanelles by a British submarine and and were torpedoed by \"U-21\" as well as , , etc., the threat posed to dreadnought battleships proved to have been largely a false alarm. HMS \"Audacious\" turned out to be the only dreadnought sunk by a submarine in World War I. While battleships were never intended for anti-submarine warfare, there was one instance of a submarine being sunk by a dreadnought battleship. HMS \"Dreadnought\" rammed and sank the German submarine \"U-29\" on March 18, 1915, off the Moray Firth.\nWhilst the escape of the German fleet from the superior British firepower at Jutland was effected by the German cruisers and destroyers successfully turning away the British battleships, the German attempt to rely on U-boat attacks on the British fleet failed.\nTorpedo boats did have some successes against battleships in World War I, as demonstrated by the sinking of the British pre-dreadnought by during the Dardanelles Campaign and the destruction of the Austro-Hungarian dreadnought by Italian motor torpedo boats in June 1918. In large fleet actions, however, destroyers and torpedo boats were usually unable to get close enough to the battleships to damage them. The only battleship sunk in a fleet action by either torpedo boats or destroyers was the obsolescent German pre-dreadnought . She was sunk by destroyers during the night phase of the Battle of Jutland.\nThe German High Seas Fleet, for their part, were determined not to engage the British without the assistance of submarines; and since the submarines were needed more for raiding commercial traffic, the fleet stayed in port for much of the war.\nInter-war period.\nFor many years, Germany simply had no battleships. The Armistice with Germany required that most of the High Seas Fleet be disarmed and interned in a neutral port; largely because no neutral port could be found, the ships remained in British custody in Scapa Flow, Scotland. The Treaty of Versailles specified that the ships should be handed over to the British. Instead, most of them were scuttled by their German crews on June 21, 1919, just before the signature of the peace treaty. The treaty also limited the German Navy, and prevented Germany from building or possessing any capital ships.\nThe inter-war period saw the battleship subjected to strict international limitations to prevent a costly arms race breaking out.\nWhile the victors were not limited by the Treaty of Versailles, many of the major naval powers were crippled after the war. Faced with the prospect of a naval arms race against the United Kingdom and Japan, which would in turn have led to a possible Pacific war, the United States was keen to conclude the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922. This treaty limited the number and size of battleships that each major nation could possess, and required Britain to accept parity with the U.S. and to abandon the British alliance with Japan. The Washington treaty was followed by a series of other naval treaties, including the First Geneva Naval Conference (1927), the First London Naval Treaty (1930), the Second Geneva Naval Conference (1932), and finally the Second London Naval Treaty (1936), which all set limits on major warships. These treaties became effectively obsolete on September 1, 1939, at the beginning of World War II, but the ship classifications that had been agreed upon still apply. The treaty limitations meant that fewer new battleships were launched in 1919\u20131939 than in 1905\u20131914. The treaties also inhibited development by imposing upper limits on the weights of ships. Designs like the projected British , the first American , and the Japanese \u2014all of which continued the trend to larger ships with bigger guns and thicker armor\u2014never got off the drawing board. Those designs which were commissioned during this period were referred to as treaty battleships.\nRise of air power.\nAs early as 1914, the British Admiral Percy Scott predicted that battleships would soon be made irrelevant by aircraft. By the end of World War I, aircraft had successfully adopted the torpedo as a weapon. In 1921 the Italian general and air theorist Giulio Douhet completed a hugely influential treatise on strategic bombing titled \"The Command of the Air\", which foresaw the dominance of air power over naval units.\nIn the 1920s, General Billy Mitchell of the United States Army Air Corps, believing that air forces had rendered navies around the world obsolete, testified in front of Congress that \"1,000 bombardment airplanes can be built and operated for about the price of one battleship\" and that a squadron of these bombers could sink a battleship, making for more efficient use of government funds. This infuriated the U.S. Navy, but Mitchell was nevertheless allowed to conduct a careful series of bombing tests alongside Navy and Marine bombers. In 1921, he bombed and sank numerous ships, including the \"unsinkable\" German World War I battleship and the American pre-dreadnought .\nAlthough Mitchell had required \"war-time conditions\", the ships sunk were obsolete, stationary, defenseless and had no damage control. The sinking of \"Ostfriesland\" was accomplished by violating an agreement that would have allowed Navy engineers to examine the effects of various munitions: Mitchell's airmen disregarded the rules, and sank the ship within minutes in a coordinated attack. The stunt made headlines, and Mitchell declared, \"No surface vessels can exist wherever air forces acting from land bases are able to attack them.\" While far from conclusive, Mitchell's test was significant because it put proponents of the battleship against naval aviation on the defensive. Rear Admiral William A. Moffett used public relations against Mitchell to make headway toward expansion of the U.S. Navy's nascent aircraft carrier program.\nRearmament.\nThe Royal Navy, United States Navy, and Imperial Japanese Navy extensively upgraded and modernized their World War I\u2013era battleships during the 1930s. Among the new features were an increased tower height and stability for the optical rangefinder equipment (for gunnery control), more armor (especially around turrets) to protect against plunging fire and aerial bombing, and additional anti-aircraft weapons. Some British ships received a large block superstructure nicknamed the \"Queen Anne's castle\", such as in and , which would be used in the new conning towers of the fast battleships. External bulges were added to improve both buoyancy to counteract weight increase and provide underwater protection against mines and torpedoes. The Japanese rebuilt all of their battleships, plus their battlecruisers, with distinctive \"pagoda\" structures, though the received a more modern bridge tower that would influence the new . Bulges were fitted, including steel tube arrays to improve both underwater and vertical protection along the waterline. The U.S. experimented with cage masts and later tripod masts, though after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor some of the most severely damaged ships (such as and ) were rebuilt with tower masts, for an appearance similar to their contemporaries. Radar, which was effective beyond visual range and effective in complete darkness or adverse weather, was introduced to supplement optical fire control.\nEven when war threatened again in the late 1930s, battleship construction did not regain the level of importance it had held in the years before World War I. The \"building holiday\" imposed by the naval treaties meant the capacity of dockyards worldwide had shrunk, and the strategic position had changed.\nIn Germany, the ambitious Plan Z for naval rearmament was abandoned in favor of a strategy of submarine warfare supplemented by the use of battlecruisers and commerce raiding (in particular by s). In Britain, the most pressing need was for air defenses and convoy escorts to safeguard the civilian population from bombing or starvation, and re-armament construction plans consisted of five ships of the . It was in the Mediterranean that navies remained most committed to battleship warfare. France intended to build six battleships of the and es, and the Italians four ships. Neither navy built significant aircraft carriers. The U.S. preferred to spend limited funds on aircraft carriers until the . Japan, also prioritising aircraft carriers, nevertheless began work on three mammoth \"Yamato\"s (although the third, , was later completed as a carrier) and a planned fourth was cancelled.\nAt the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, the Spanish navy included only two small dreadnought battleships, and . \"Espa\u00f1a\" (originally named \"Alfonso XIII\"), by then in reserve at the northwestern naval base of El Ferrol, fell into Nationalist hands in July 1936. The crew aboard \"Jaime I\" remained loyal to the Republic, killed their officers, who apparently supported Franco's attempted coup, and joined the Republican Navy. Thus each side had one battleship; however, the Republican Navy generally lacked experienced officers. The Spanish battleships mainly restricted themselves to mutual blockades, convoy escort duties, and shore bombardment, rarely in direct fighting against other surface units. In April 1937, \"Espa\u00f1a\" ran into a mine laid by friendly forces, and sank with little loss of life. In May 1937, \"Jaime I\" was damaged by Nationalist air attacks and a grounding incident. The ship was forced to go back to port to be repaired. There she was again hit by several aerial bombs. It was then decided to tow the battleship to a more secure port, but during the transport she suffered an internal explosion that caused 300 deaths and her total loss. Several Italian and German capital ships participated in the non-intervention blockade. On May 29, 1937, two Republican aircraft managed to bomb the German pocket battleship outside Ibiza, causing severe damage and loss of life. retaliated two days later by bombarding Almer\u00eda, causing much destruction, and the resulting \"Deutschland\" incident meant the end of German and Italian participation in non-intervention.\nWorld War II.\nThe \u2014an obsolete pre-dreadnought\u2014fired the first shots of World War II with the bombardment of the Polish garrison at Westerplatte; and the final surrender of the Japanese Empire took place aboard a United States Navy battleship, . Between those two events, it had become clear that aircraft carriers were the new principal ships of the fleet and that battleships now performed a secondary role.\nBattleships played a part in major engagements in Atlantic, Pacific and Mediterranean theaters; in the Atlantic, the Germans used their battleships as independent commerce raiders. However, clashes between battleships were of little strategic importance. The Battle of the Atlantic was fought between destroyers and submarines, and most of the decisive fleet clashes of the Pacific war were determined by aircraft carriers.\nIn the first year of the war, armored warships defied predictions that aircraft would dominate naval warfare. and surprised and sank the aircraft carrier off western Norway in June 1940. This engagement marked the only time a fleet carrier was sunk by surface gunnery. In the attack on Mers-el-K\u00e9bir, British battleships opened fire on the French battleships in the harbor near Oran in Algeria with their heavy guns. The fleeing French ships were then pursued by planes from aircraft carriers.\nThe subsequent years of the war saw many demonstrations of the maturity of the aircraft carrier as a strategic naval weapon and its effectiveness against battleships. The British air attack on the Italian naval base at Taranto sank one Italian battleship and damaged two more. The same Swordfish torpedo bombers played a crucial role in sinking the German battleship .\nOn December 7, 1941, the Japanese launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor. Within a short time, five of eight U.S. battleships were sunk or sinking, with the rest damaged. All three American aircraft carriers were out to sea, however, and evaded destruction. The sinking of the British battleship and battlecruiser , demonstrated the vulnerability of a battleship to air attack while at sea without sufficient air cover, settling the argument begun by Mitchell in 1921. Both warships were under way and en route to attack the Japanese amphibious force that had invaded Malaya when they were caught by Japanese land-based bombers and torpedo bombers on December 10, 1941.\nAt many of the early crucial battles of the Pacific, for instance Coral Sea and Midway, battleships were either absent or overshadowed as carriers launched wave after wave of planes into the attack at a range of hundreds of miles. In later battles in the Pacific, battleships primarily performed shore bombardment in support of amphibious landings and provided anti-aircraft defense as escort for the carriers. Even the largest battleships ever constructed, Japan's , which carried a main battery of nine 18-inch (46\u00a0cm) guns and were designed as a principal strategic weapon, were never given a chance to show their potential in the decisive battleship action that figured in Japanese pre-war planning.\nThe last battleship confrontation in history was the Battle of Surigao Strait, on October 25, 1944, in which a numerically and technically superior American battleship group destroyed a lesser Japanese battleship group by gunfire after it had already been devastated by destroyer torpedo attacks. All but one of the American battleships in this confrontation had previously been sunk during the attack on Pearl Harbor and subsequently raised and repaired. fired the last major-caliber salvo of this battle. In April 1945, during the battle for Okinawa, the world's most powerful battleship, the \"Yamato\", was sent out on a suicide mission against a massive U.S. force and sunk by overwhelming pressure from carrier aircraft with nearly all hands lost. After that, Japanese fleet remaining in the mainland was also destroyed by the US naval air force.\nCold War.\nAfter World War II, several navies retained their existing battleships, but they were no longer strategically dominant military assets. It soon became apparent that they were no longer worth the considerable cost of construction and maintenance and only one new battleship was commissioned after the war, . During the war it had been demonstrated that battleship-on-battleship engagements like Leyte Gulf or the sinking of were the exception and not the rule, and with the growing role of aircraft engagement ranges were becoming longer and longer, making heavy gun armament irrelevant. The armor of a battleship was equally irrelevant in the face of a nuclear attack as tactical missiles with a range of or more could be mounted on the Soviet and s. By the end of the 1950s, smaller vessel classes such as destroyers, which formerly offered no noteworthy opposition to battleships, now were capable of eliminating battleships from outside the range of the ship's heavy guns.\nThe remaining battleships met a variety of ends. and were sunk during the testing of nuclear weapons in Operation Crossroads in 1946. Both battleships proved resistant to nuclear air burst but vulnerable to underwater nuclear explosions. The was taken by the Soviets as reparations and renamed \"Novorossiysk\"; she was sunk by a leftover German mine in the Black Sea on October 29, 1955. The two ships were scrapped in 1956. The French was scrapped in 1954, in 1968, and in 1970.\nThe United Kingdom's four surviving ships were scrapped in 1957, and followed in 1960. All other surviving British battleships had been sold or broken up by 1949. The Soviet Union's was scrapped in 1953, in 1957 and (back under her original name, , since 1942) in 1956\u201357. Brazil's was scrapped in Genoa in 1953, and her sister ship sank during a storm in the Atlantic \"en route\" to the breakers in Italy in 1951.\nArgentina kept its two ships until 1956 and Chile kept (formerly ) until 1959. The Turkish battlecruiser (formerly , launched in 1911) was scrapped in 1976 after an offer to sell her back to Germany was refused. Sweden had several small coastal-defense battleships, one of which, , survived until 1970. The Soviets scrapped four large incomplete cruisers in the late 1950s, whilst plans to build a number of new s were abandoned following the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953. The three old German battleships , , and all met similar ends. \"Hessen\" was taken over by the Soviet Union and renamed \"Tsel\". She was scrapped in 1960. \"Schleswig-Holstein\" was renamed \"Borodino\", and was used as a target ship until 1960. \"Schlesien\", too, was used as a target ship. She was broken up between 1952 and 1957.\nThe s gained a new lease of life in the U.S. Navy as fire support ships. Radar and computer-controlled gunfire could be aimed with pinpoint accuracy to target. The U.S. recommissioned all four \"Iowa\"-class battleships for the Korean War and the for the Vietnam War. These were primarily used for shore bombardment, \"New Jersey\" firing nearly 6,000 rounds of 16\u00a0inch shells and over 14,000 rounds of 5\u00a0inch projectiles during her tour on the gunline, seven times more rounds against shore targets in Vietnam than she had fired in the Second World War.\nAs part of Navy Secretary John F. Lehman's effort to build a 600-ship Navy in the 1980s, and in response to the commissioning of \"Kirov\" by the Soviet Union, the United States recommissioned all four \"Iowa\"-class battleships. On several occasions, battleships were support ships in carrier battle groups, or led their own battleship battle group. These were modernized to carry Tomahawk (TLAM) missiles, with \"New Jersey\" seeing action bombarding Lebanon in 1983 and 1984, while and fired their 16-inch (406\u00a0mm) guns at land targets and launched missiles during Operation Desert Storm in 1991. \"Wisconsin\" served as the TLAM strike commander for the Persian Gulf, directing the sequence of launches that marked the opening of \"Desert Storm\", firing a total of 24 TLAMs during the first two days of the campaign. The primary threat to the battleships were Iraqi shore-based surface-to-surface missiles; \"Missouri\" was targeted by two Iraqi Silkworm missiles, with one missing and another being intercepted by the British destroyer .\nEnd of the battleship era.\nAfter was stricken in 1962, the four \"Iowa-class\" ships were the only battleships in commission or reserve anywhere in the world. There was an extended debate when the four \"Iowa\" ships were finally decommissioned in the early 1990s. and were maintained to a standard whereby they could be rapidly returned to service as fire support vessels, pending the development of a superior fire support vessel. These last two battleships were finally stricken from the U.S. Naval Vessel Register in 2006. The Military Balance and Russian states the U.S. Navy listed one battleship in the reserve (Naval Inactive Fleet/Reserve 2nd Turn) in 2010. The Military Balance states the U.S. Navy listed no battleships in the reserve in 2014.\nWhen the last \"Iowa\"-class ship was finally stricken from the Naval Vessel Registry, no battleships remained in service or in reserve with any navy worldwide. A number are preserved as museum ships, either afloat or in drydock. The U.S. has eight battleships on display: , , , , , , , and . \"Missouri\" and \"New Jersey\" are museums at Pearl Harbor and Camden, New Jersey, respectively. \"Iowa\" is on display as an educational attraction at the Los Angeles Waterfront in San Pedro, California. \"Wisconsin\" now serves as a museum ship in Norfolk, Virginia. \"Massachusetts\", which has the distinction of never having lost a man during service, is on display at the Battleship Cove naval museum in Fall River, Massachusetts. \"Texas\", the first battleship turned into a museum, is normally on display at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site, near Houston, but as of 2021 is closed for repairs. \"North Carolina\" is on display in Wilmington, North Carolina. \"Alabama\" is on display in Mobile, Alabama. The wreck of , sunk during the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941, is designated a historical landmark and national gravesite. The wreck of , also sunk during the attack, is a historic landmark.\nThe only other 20th-century battleship on display is the Japanese pre-dreadnought . A replica of the ironclad battleship was built by the Weihai Port Bureau in 2003 and is on display in Weihai, China.\nFormer battleships that were previously used as museum ships included , SMS \"Tegetthoff\", and SMS \"Erzherzog Franz Ferdinand\".\nStrategy and doctrine.\nDoctrine.\nBattleships were the embodiment of sea power. For American naval officer Alfred Thayer Mahan and his followers, a strong navy was vital to the success of a nation, and control of the seas was vital for the projection of force on land and overseas. Mahan's theory, proposed in \"The Influence of Sea Power Upon History, 1660\u20131783\" of 1890, dictated the role of the battleship was to sweep the enemy from the seas. While the work of escorting, blockading, and raiding might be done by cruisers or smaller vessels, the presence of the battleship was a potential threat to any convoy escorted by any vessels other than capital ships. This concept of \"potential threat\" can be further generalized to the mere existence (as opposed to presence) of a powerful fleet tying the opposing fleet down. This concept came to be known as a \"fleet in being\"\u2014an idle yet mighty fleet forcing others to spend time, resource and effort to actively guard against it.\nMahan went on to say victory could only be achieved by engagements between battleships, which came to be known as the \"decisive battle\" doctrine in some navies, while targeting merchant ships (commerce raiding or \"guerre de course\", as posited by the \"Jeune \u00c9cole\") could never succeed.\nMahan was highly influential in naval and political circles throughout the age of the battleship, calling for a large fleet of the most powerful battleships possible. Mahan's work developed in the late 1880s, and by the end of the 1890s it had acquired much international influence on naval strategy; in the end, it was adopted by many major navies (notably the British, American, German, and Japanese). The strength of Mahanian opinion was important in the development of the battleships arms races, and equally important in the agreement of the Powers to limit battleship numbers in the interwar era.\nThe \"fleet in being\" suggested battleships could simply by their existence tie down superior enemy resources. This in turn was believed to be able to tip the balance of a conflict even without a battle. This suggested even for inferior naval powers a battleship fleet could have important strategic effect.\nTactics.\nWhile the role of battleships in both World Wars reflected Mahanian doctrine, the details of battleship deployment were more complex. Unlike ships of the line, the battleships of the late 19th and early 20th centuries had significant vulnerability to torpedoes and mines\u2014because efficient mines and torpedoes did not exist before that\u2014which could be used by relatively small and inexpensive craft. The \"Jeune \u00c9cole\" doctrine of the 1870s and 1880s recommended placing torpedo boats alongside battleships; these would hide behind the larger ships until gun-smoke obscured visibility enough for them to dart out and fire their torpedoes. While this tactic was made less effective by the development of smokeless propellant, the threat from more capable torpedo craft (later including submarines) remained. By the 1890s, the Royal Navy had developed the first destroyers, which were initially designed to intercept and drive off any attacking torpedo boats. During the First World War and subsequently, battleships were rarely deployed without a protective screen of destroyers.\nBattleship doctrine emphasized the concentration of the battlegroup. In order for this concentrated force to be able to bring its power to bear on a reluctant opponent (or to avoid an encounter with a stronger enemy fleet), battlefleets needed some means of locating enemy ships beyond horizon range. This was provided by scouting forces; at various stages battlecruisers, cruisers, destroyers, airships, submarines and aircraft were all used. (With the development of radio, direction finding and traffic analysis would come into play, as well, so even shore stations, broadly speaking, joined the battlegroup.) So for most of their history, battleships operated surrounded by squadrons of destroyers and cruisers. The North Sea campaign of the First World War illustrates how, despite this support, the threat of mine and torpedo attack, and the failure to integrate or appreciate the capabilities of new techniques, seriously inhibited the operations of the Royal Navy Grand Fleet, the greatest battleship fleet of its time.\nStrategic and diplomatic impact.\nThe presence of battleships had a great psychological and diplomatic impact. Similar to possessing nuclear weapons today, the ownership of battleships served to enhance a nation's force projection.\nEven during the Cold War, the psychological impact of a battleship was significant. In 1946, USS \"Missouri\" was dispatched to deliver the remains of the ambassador from Turkey, and her presence in Turkish and Greek waters staved off a possible Soviet thrust into the Balkan region. In September 1983, when Druze militia in Lebanon's Shouf Mountains fired upon U.S. Marine peacekeepers, the arrival of USS \"New Jersey\" stopped the firing. Gunfire from \"New Jersey\" later killed militia leaders.\nValue for money.\nBattleships were the largest and most complex, and hence the most expensive warships of their time; as a result, the value of investment in battleships has always been contested. As the French politician Etienne Lamy wrote in 1879, \"The construction of battleships is so costly, their effectiveness so uncertain and of such short duration, that the enterprise of creating an armored fleet seems to leave fruitless the perseverance of a people\". The \"Jeune \u00c9cole\" school of thought of the 1870s and 1880s sought alternatives to the crippling expense and debatable utility of a conventional battlefleet. It proposed what would nowadays be termed a sea denial strategy, based on fast, long-ranged cruisers for commerce raiding and torpedo boat flotillas to attack enemy ships attempting to blockade French ports. The ideas of the \"Jeune \u00c9cole\" were ahead of their time; it was not until the 20th century that efficient mines, torpedoes, submarines, and aircraft were available that allowed similar ideas to be effectively implemented. The determination of powers such as Germany to build battlefleets with which to confront much stronger rivals has been criticized by historians, who emphasise the futility of investment in a battlefleet that has no chance of matching its opponent in an actual battle.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4055", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4055", "title": "Bifr\u00f6st", "text": "Rainbow bridge between Asgard and Midgard\nIn Norse mythology, Bifr\u00f6st (), also called Bilr\u00f6st, is a burning rainbow bridge that reaches between Midgard (Earth) and Asgard, the realm of the gods. The bridge is attested as \"Bilr\u00f6st\" in the \"Poetic Edda\"; compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, and as \"Bifr\u00f6st\" in the \"Prose Edda\"; written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, and in the poetry of skalds. Both the \"Poetic Edda\" and the \"Prose Edda\" alternately refer to the bridge as \u00c1sbr\u00fa (Old Norse \"\u00c6sir's bridge\").\nAccording to the \"Prose Edda\", the bridge ends in heaven at Himinbj\u00f6rg, the residence of the god Heimdall, who guards it from the j\u00f6tnar. The bridge's destruction during Ragnar\u00f6k by the forces of Muspell is foretold. Scholars have proposed that the bridge may have originally represented the Milky Way and have noted parallels between the bridge and another bridge in Norse mythology, Gjallarbr\u00fa.\nEtymology.\nScholar Andy Orchard suggests that \"Bifr\u00f6st\" may mean \"shimmering path.\" He notes that the first element of \"Bilr\u00f6st\"\u2014\"bil\" (meaning \"a moment\")\u2014\"suggests the fleeting nature of the rainbow,\" which he connects to the first element of \"Bifr\u00f6st\"\u2014the Old Norse verb \"bifa\" (meaning \"to shimmer\" or \"to shake\")\u2014noting that the element evokes notions of the \"lustrous sheen\" of the bridge. Austrian Germanist Rudolf Simek says that \"Bifr\u00f6st\" either means \"the swaying road to heaven\" (also citing \"bifa\") or, if \"Bilr\u00f6st\" is the original form of the two (which Simek says is likely), \"the fleetingly glimpsed rainbow\" (possibly connected to \"bil\", perhaps meaning \"moment, weak point\").\nAttestations.\nTwo poems in the \"Poetic Edda\" and two books in the \"Prose Edda\" provide information about the bridge:\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\", the bridge is mentioned in the poems \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" and \"F\u00e1fnism\u00e1l\", where it is referred to as \"Bilr\u00f6st\". In one of two stanzas in the poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" that mentions the bridge, Gr\u00edmnir (the god Odin in disguise) provides the young Agnarr with cosmological knowledge, including that Bilr\u00f6st is the best of bridges. Later in \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", Gr\u00edmnir notes that Asbr\u00fa \"burns all with flames\" and that, every day, the god Thor wades through the waters of K\u00f6rmt and \u00d6rmt and the two Kerlaugar:\nIn \"F\u00e1fnism\u00e1l\", the dying wyrm Fafnir tells the hero Sigurd that, during the events of Ragnar\u00f6k, bearing spears, gods will meet at \u00d3sk\u00f3pnir. From there, the gods will cross Bilr\u00f6st, which will break apart as they cross over it, causing their horses to dredge through an immense river.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nThe bridge is mentioned in the \"Prose Edda\" books \"Gylfaginning\" and \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", where it is referred to as \"Bifr\u00f6st\". In chapter 13 of \"Gylfaginning\", Gangleri (King Gylfi in disguise) asks the enthroned figure of High what way exists between heaven and earth. Laughing, High replies that the question isn't an intelligent one, and goes on to explain that the gods built a bridge from heaven and earth. He incredulously asks Gangleri if he has not heard the story before. High says that Gangleri must have seen it, and notes that Gangleri may call it a rainbow. High says that the bridge consists of three colors, has great strength, \"and is built with art and skill to a greater extent than other constructions.\"\nHigh notes that, although the bridge is strong, it will break when \"Muspell's lads\" attempt to cross it, and their horses will have to make do with swimming over \"great rivers.\" Gangleri says that it doesn't seem that the gods \"built the bridge in good faith if it is liable to break, considering that they can do as they please.\" High responds that the gods do not deserve blame for the breaking of the bridge, for \"there is nothing in this world that will be secure when Muspell's sons attack.\"\nIn chapter 15 of \"Gylfaginning\", Just-As-High says that Bifr\u00f6st is also called \"Asbr\u00fa\", and that every day the gods ride their horses across it (with the exception of Thor, who instead wades through the boiling waters of the rivers K\u00f6rmt and \u00d6rmt) to reach Ur\u00f0arbrunnr, a holy well where the gods have their court. As a reference, Just-As-High quotes the second of the two stanzas in \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" that mention the bridge (see above). Gangleri asks if fire burns over Bifr\u00f6st. High says that the red in the bridge is burning fire, and, without it, the frost jotnar and mountain jotnar would \"go up into heaven\" if anyone who wanted could cross Bifr\u00f6st. High adds that, in heaven, \"there are many beautiful places\" and that \"everywhere there has divine protection around it.\"\nIn chapter 17, High tells Gangleri that the location of Himinbj\u00f6rg \"stands at the edge of heaven where Bifrost reaches heaven.\" While describing the god Heimdallr in chapter 27, High says that Heimdallr lives in Himinbj\u00f6rg by Bifr\u00f6st, and guards the bridge from mountain jotnar while sitting at the edge of heaven. In chapter 34, High quotes the first of the two \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" stanzas that mention the bridge. In chapter 51, High foretells the events of Ragnar\u00f6k. High says that, during Ragnar\u00f6k, the sky will split open, and from the split will ride forth the \"sons of Muspell\". When the \"sons of Muspell\" ride over Bifr\u00f6st it will break, \"as was said above.\"\nIn the \"Prose Edda\" book \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", the bridge receives a single mention. In chapter 16, a work by the 10th century skald \u00dalfr Uggason is provided, where Bifr\u00f6st is referred to as \"the powers' way.\"\nTheories.\nIn his translation of the \"Prose Edda\", Henry Adams Bellows comments that the \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" stanza mentioning Thor and the bridge stanza may mean that \"Thor has to go on foot in the last days of the destruction, when the bridge is burning. Another interpretation, however, is that when Thor leaves the heavens (i.e., when a thunder-storm is over) the rainbow-bridge becomes hot in the sun.\"\nJohn Lindow points to a parallel between Bifr\u00f6st, which he notes is \"a bridge between earth and heaven, or earth and the world of the gods\", and the bridge Gjallarbr\u00fa, \"a bridge between earth and the underworld, or earth and the world of the dead.\" Several scholars have proposed that Bifr\u00f6st may represent the Milky Way.\nAdaptations.\nIn the final scene of Richard Wagner's 1869 opera \"Das Rheingold\", the god Froh summons a rainbow bridge, over which the gods cross to enter Valhalla.\nThe Bifr\u00f6st appears in comic books associated with the Marvel Comics character Thor and in subsequent adaptations of those comic books. In the Marvel Cinematic Universe film \"Thor\", Jane Foster describes the Bifr\u00f6st as an Einstein\u2013Rosen bridge, which functions as a means of transportation across space in a short period of time.\nThe episode \"The Bellero Shield\" of the original \"The Outer Limits\" TV series features an alien known as the \"bifrost alien\" because he slides to Earth on a beam of light. In the show dialogue, some characters consider this beam to be similar to the bifrost of Norse mythology.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4057", "revid": "1159118850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4057", "title": "Battlecruiser", "text": "Large capital warship, typically faster than battleships\nThe battlecruiser (also written as battle cruiser or battle-cruiser) was a type of capital ship of the first half of the 20th century. These were similar in displacement, armament and cost to battleships, but differed in form and balance of attributes. Battlecruisers typically had thinner armour (to a varying degree) and a somewhat lighter main gun battery than contemporary battleships, installed on a longer hull with much higher engine power in order to attain greater speeds. The first battlecruisers were designed in the United Kingdom, as a development of the armoured cruiser, at the same time as the dreadnought succeeded the pre-dreadnought battleship. The goal of the design was to outrun any ship with similar armament, and chase down any ship with lesser armament; they were intended to hunt down slower, older armoured cruisers and destroy them with heavy gunfire while avoiding combat with the more powerful but slower battleships. However, as more and more battlecruisers were built, they were increasingly used alongside the better-protected battleships.\nBattlecruisers served in the navies of the United Kingdom, Germany, the Ottoman Empire, Australia and Japan during World War I, most notably at the Battle of the Falkland Islands and in the several raids and skirmishes in the North Sea which culminated in a pitched fleet battle, the Battle of Jutland. British battlecruisers in particular suffered heavy losses at Jutland, where poor fire safety and ammunition handling practices left them vulnerable to catastrophic magazine explosions following hits to their main turrets from large-calibre shells. This dismal showing led to a persistent general belief that battlecruisers were too thinly armoured to function successfully. By the end of the war, capital ship design had developed, with battleships becoming faster and battlecruisers becoming more heavily armoured, blurring the distinction between a battlecruiser and a fast battleship. The Washington Naval Treaty, which limited capital ship construction from 1922 onwards, treated battleships and battlecruisers identically, and the new generation of battlecruisers planned by the United States, Great Britain and Japan were scrapped under the terms of the treaty.\nImprovements in armour design and propulsion created the 1930s \"fast battleship\" with the speed of a battlecruiser and armour of a battleship, making the battlecruiser in the traditional sense effectively an obsolete concept. Thus from the 1930s on, only the Royal Navy continued to use \"battlecruiser\" as a classification for the World War I\u2013era capital ships that remained in the fleet; while Japan's battlecruisers remained in service, they had been significantly reconstructed and were re-rated as full-fledged fast battleships.\nBattlecruisers were put into action again during World War II, and only one survived to the end. There was also renewed interest in large \"cruiser-killer\" type warships, but few were ever begun, as construction of battleships and battlecruisers was curtailed in favor of more-needed convoy escorts, aircraft carriers, and cargo ships. Near the end, and after the Cold War era, the Soviet of large guided missile cruisers have been the only active ships termed \"battlecruisers\".\nBackground.\nThe battlecruiser was developed by the Royal Navy in the first years of the 20th century as an evolution of the armoured cruiser. The first armoured cruisers had been built in the 1870s, as an attempt to give armour protection to ships fulfilling the typical cruiser roles of patrol, trade protection and power projection. However, the results were rarely satisfactory, as the weight of armour required for any meaningful protection usually meant that the ship became almost as slow as a battleship. As a result, navies preferred to build protected cruisers with an armoured deck protecting their engines, or simply no armour at all.\nIn the 1890s, technology began to change this balance. New Krupp steel armour meant that it was now possible to give a cruiser side armour which would protect it against the quick-firing guns of enemy battleships and cruisers alike. In 1896\u201397 France and Russia, who were regarded as likely allies in the event of war, started to build large, fast armoured cruisers taking advantage of this. In the event of a war between Britain and France or Russia, or both, these cruisers threatened to cause serious difficulties for the British Empire's worldwide trade.\nBritain, which had concluded in 1892 that it needed twice as many cruisers as any potential enemy to adequately protect its empire's sea lanes, responded to the perceived threat by laying down its own large armoured cruisers. Between 1899 and 1905, it completed or laid down seven classes of this type, a total of 35 ships. This building program, in turn, prompted the French and Russians to increase their own construction. The Imperial German Navy began to build large armoured cruisers for use on their overseas stations, laying down eight between 1897 and 1906.\nThe cost of this cruiser arms race was significant. In the period 1889\u20131896, the Royal Navy spent \u00a37.3\u00a0million on new large cruisers. From 1897 to 1904, it spent \u00a326.9\u00a0million. Many armoured cruisers of the new kind were just as large and expensive as the equivalent battleship.\nThe increasing size and power of the armoured cruiser led to suggestions in British naval circles that cruisers should displace battleships entirely. The battleship's main advantage was its 12-inch heavy guns, and heavier armour designed to protect from shells of similar size. However, for a few years after 1900 it seemed that those advantages were of little practical value. The torpedo now had a range of 2,000 yards, and it seemed unlikely that a battleship would engage within torpedo range. However, at ranges of more than 2,000 yards it became increasingly unlikely that the heavy guns of a battleship would score any hits, as the heavy guns relied on primitive aiming techniques. The secondary batteries of 6-inch quick-firing guns, firing more plentiful shells, were more likely to hit the enemy. As naval expert Fred T. Jane wrote in June 1902,Is there anything outside of 2,000 yards that the big gun in its hundreds of tons of medieval castle can affect, that its weight in 6-inch guns without the castle could not affect equally well? And inside 2,000, what, in these days of gyros, is there that the torpedo cannot effect with far more certainty?\nIn 1904, Admiral John \"Jacky\" Fisher became First Sea Lord, the senior officer of the Royal Navy. He had for some time thought about the development of a new fast armoured ship. He was very fond of the \"second-class battleship\" , a faster, more lightly armoured battleship. As early as 1901, there is confusion in Fisher's writing about whether he saw the battleship or the cruiser as the model for future developments. This did not stop him from commissioning designs from naval architect W. H. Gard for an armoured cruiser with the heaviest possible armament for use with the fleet. The design Gard submitted was for a ship between , capable of , armed with four 9.2-inch and twelve guns in twin gun turrets and protected with six inches of armour along her belt and 9.2-inch turrets, on her 7.5-inch turrets, 10 inches on her conning tower and up to on her decks. However, mainstream British naval thinking between 1902 and 1904 was clearly in favour of heavily armoured battleships, rather than the fast ships that Fisher favoured.\nThe Battle of Tsushima proved conclusively the effectiveness of heavy guns over intermediate ones and the need for a uniform main caliber on a ship for fire control. Even before this, the Royal Navy had begun to consider a shift away from the mixed-calibre armament of the 1890s pre-dreadnought to an \"all-big-gun\" design, and preliminary designs circulated for battleships with all 12-inch or all 10-inch guns and armoured cruisers with all 9.2-inch guns. In late 1904, not long after the Royal Navy had decided to use 12-inch guns for its next generation of battleships because of their superior performance at long range, Fisher began to argue that big-gun cruisers could replace battleships altogether. The continuing improvement of the torpedo meant that submarines and destroyers would be able to destroy battleships; this in Fisher's view heralded the end of the battleship or at least compromised the validity of heavy armour protection. Nevertheless, armoured cruisers would remain vital for commerce protection.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Of what use is a battle fleet to a country called (A) at war with a country called (B) possessing no battleships, but having fast armoured cruisers and clouds of fast torpedo craft? What damage would (A's) battleships do to (B)? Would (B) wish for a few battleships or for more armoured cruisers? Would not (A) willingly exchange a few battleships for more fast armoured cruisers? In such a case, neither side wanting battleships is presumptive evidence that they are not of much value.\nFisher's views were very controversial within the Royal Navy, and even given his position as First Sea Lord, he was not in a position to insist on his own approach. Thus he assembled a \"Committee on Designs\", consisting of a mixture of civilian and naval experts, to determine the approach to both battleship and armoured cruiser construction in the future. While the stated purpose of the committee was to investigate and report on future requirements of ships, Fisher and his associates had already made key decisions. The terms of reference for the committee were for a battleship capable of with 12-inch guns and no intermediate calibres, capable of docking in existing drydocks; and a cruiser capable of , also with 12-inch guns and no intermediate armament, armoured like , the most recent armoured cruiser, and also capable of using existing docks.\nFirst battlecruisers.\nUnder the Selborne plan of 1902, the Royal Navy intended to start three new battleships and four armoured cruisers each year. However, in late 1904 it became clear that the 1905\u20131906 programme would have to be considerably smaller, because of lower than expected tax revenue and the need to buy out two Chilean battleships under construction in British yards, lest they be purchased by the Russians for use against the Japanese, Britain's ally. These economies meant that the 1905\u20131906 programme consisted only of one battleship, but three armoured cruisers. The battleship became the revolutionary battleship , and the cruisers became the three ships of the . Fisher later claimed, however, that he had argued during the committee for the cancellation of the remaining battleship.\nThe construction of the new class was begun in 1906 and completed in 1908, delayed perhaps to allow their designers to learn from any problems with \"Dreadnought\". The ships fulfilled the design requirement quite closely. On a displacement similar to \"Dreadnought\", the \"Invincible\"s were longer to accommodate additional boilers and more powerful turbines to propel them at . Moreover, the new ships could maintain this speed for days, whereas pre-dreadnought battleships could not generally do so for more than an hour. Armed with eight 12-inch Mk X guns, compared to ten on \"Dreadnought\", they had of armour protecting the hull and the gun turrets. (\"Dreadnought\"'s armour, by comparison, was at its thickest.) The class had a very marked increase in speed, displacement and firepower compared to the most recent armoured cruisers but no more armour.\nWhile the \"Invincible\"s were to fill the same role as the armoured cruisers they succeeded, they were expected to do so more effectively. Specifically their roles were:\nConfusion about how to refer to these new battleship-size armoured cruisers set in almost immediately. Even in late 1905, before work was begun on the \"Invincible\"s, a Royal Navy memorandum refers to \"large armoured ships\" meaning both battleships and large cruisers. In October 1906, the Admiralty began to classify all post-Dreadnought battleships and armoured cruisers as \"capital ships\", while Fisher used the term \"dreadnought\" to refer either to his new battleships or the battleships and armoured cruisers together. At the same time, the \"Invincible\" class themselves were referred to as \"cruiser-battleships\", \"dreadnought cruisers\"; the term \"battlecruiser\" was first used by Fisher in 1908. Finally, on 24 November 1911, Admiralty Weekly Order No. 351 laid down that \"All cruisers of the \u201cInvincible\u201d and later types are for the future to be described and classified as \u201cbattle cruisers\u201d to distinguish them from the armoured cruisers of earlier date.\"\nAlong with questions over the new ships' nomenclature came uncertainty about their actual role due to their lack of protection. If they were primarily to act as scouts for the battle fleet and hunter-killers of enemy cruisers and commerce raiders, then the seven inches of belt armour with which they had been equipped would be adequate. If, on the other hand, they were expected to reinforce a battle line of dreadnoughts with their own heavy guns, they were too thin-skinned to be safe from an enemy's heavy guns. The \"Invincible\"s were essentially extremely large, heavily armed, fast armoured cruisers. However, the viability of the armoured cruiser was already in doubt. A cruiser that could have worked with the Fleet might have been a more viable option for taking over that role.\nBecause of the \"Invincible\"s' size and armament, naval authorities considered them capital ships almost from their inception\u2014an assumption that might have been inevitable. Complicating matters further was that many naval authorities, including Lord Fisher, had made overoptimistic assessments from the Battle of Tsushima in 1905 about the armoured cruiser's ability to survive in a battle line against enemy capital ships due to their superior speed. These assumptions had been made without taking into account the Russian Baltic Fleet's inefficiency and tactical ineptitude. By the time the term \"battlecruiser\" had been given to the \"Invincible\"s, the idea of their parity with battleships had been fixed in many people's minds.\nNot everyone was so convinced. \"Brassey's Naval Annual\", for instance, stated that with vessels as large and expensive as the \"Invincible\"s, an admiral \"will be certain to put them in the line of battle where their comparatively light protection will be a disadvantage and their high speed of no value.\" Those in favor of the battlecruiser countered with two points\u2014first, since all capital ships were vulnerable to new weapons such as the torpedo, armour had lost some of its validity; and second, because of its greater speed, the battlecruiser could control the range at which it engaged an enemy.\nBattlecruisers in the dreadnought arms race.\nBetween the launching of the \"Invincible\"s to just after the outbreak of the First World War, the battlecruiser played a junior role in the developing dreadnought arms race, as it was never wholeheartedly adopted as the key weapon in British imperial defence, as Fisher had presumably desired. The biggest factor for this lack of acceptance was the marked change in Britain's strategic circumstances between their conception and the commissioning of the first ships. The prospective enemy for Britain had shifted from a Franco-Russian alliance with many armoured cruisers to a resurgent and increasingly belligerent Germany. Diplomatically, Britain had entered the Entente cordiale in 1904 and the Anglo-Russian Entente. Neither France nor Russia posed a particular naval threat; the Russian navy had largely been sunk or captured in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u20131905, while the French were in no hurry to adopt the new dreadnought-type design. Britain also boasted very cordial relations with two of the significant new naval powers: Japan (bolstered by the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, signed in 1902 and renewed in 1905), and the US. These changed strategic circumstances, and the great success of the \"Dreadnought\" ensured that she rather than the \"Invincible\" became the new model capital ship. Nevertheless, battlecruiser construction played a part in the renewed naval arms race sparked by the \"Dreadnought\".\nFor their first few years of service, the \"Invincible\"s entirely fulfilled Fisher's vision of being able to sink any ship fast enough to catch them, and run from any ship capable of sinking them. An \"Invincible\" would also, in many circumstances, be able to take on an enemy pre-dreadnought battleship. Naval circles concurred that the armoured cruiser in its current form had come to the logical end of its development and the \"Invincible\"s were so far ahead of any enemy armoured cruiser in firepower and speed that it proved difficult to justify building more or bigger cruisers. This lead was extended by the surprise both \"Dreadnought\" and \"Invincible\" produced by having been built in secret; this prompted most other navies to delay their building programmes and radically revise their designs. This was particularly true for cruisers, because the details of the \"Invincible\" class were kept secret for longer; this meant that the last German armoured cruiser, , was armed with only guns, and was no match for the new battlecruisers.\nThe Royal Navy's early superiority in capital ships led to the rejection of a 1905\u20131906 design that would, essentially, have fused the battlecruiser and battleship concepts into what would eventually become the fast battleship. The 'X4' design combined the full armour and armament of \"Dreadnought\" with the 25-knot speed of \"Invincible\". The additional cost could not be justified given the existing British lead and the new Liberal government's need for economy; the slower and cheaper , a relatively close copy of \"Dreadnought\", was adopted instead. The X4 concept would eventually be fulfilled in the and later by other navies.\nThe next British battlecruisers were the three , slightly improved \"Invincible\"s built to fundamentally the same specification, partly due to political pressure to limit costs and partly due to the secrecy surrounding German battlecruiser construction, particularly about the heavy armour of . This class came to be widely seen as a mistake and the next generation of British battlecruisers were markedly more powerful. By 1909\u20131910 a sense of national crisis about rivalry with Germany outweighed cost-cutting, and a naval panic resulted in the approval of a total of eight capital ships in 1909\u20131910. Fisher pressed for all eight to be battlecruisers, but was unable to have his way; he had to settle for six battleships and two battlecruisers of the . The \"Lion\"s carried eight 13.5-inch guns, the now-standard caliber of the British \"super-dreadnought\" battleships. Speed increased to and armour protection, while not as good as in German designs, was better than in previous British battlecruisers, with armour belt and barbettes. The two \"Lion\"s were followed by the very similar .\nBy 1911 Germany had built battlecruisers of her own, and the superiority of the British ships could no longer be assured. Moreover, the German Navy did not share Fisher's view of the battlecruiser. In contrast to the British focus on increasing speed and firepower, Germany progressively improved the armour and staying power of their ships to better the British battlecruisers. \"Von der Tann\", begun in 1908 and completed in 1910, carried eight 11.1-inch guns, but with 11.1-inch (283\u00a0mm) armour she was far better protected than the \"Invincible\"s. The two s were quite similar but carried ten 11.1-inch guns of an improved design. , designed in 1909 and finished in 1913, was a modified \"Moltke\"; speed increased by one knot to , while her armour had a maximum thickness of 12 inches, equivalent to the s of a few years earlier. \"Seydlitz\" was Germany's last battlecruiser completed before World War I.\nThe next step in battlecruiser design came from Japan. The Imperial Japanese Navy had been planning the ships from 1909, and was determined that, since the Japanese economy could support relatively few ships, each would be more powerful than its likely competitors. Initially the class was planned with the \"Invincible\"s as the benchmark. On learning of the British plans for \"Lion\", and the likelihood that new U.S. Navy battleships would be armed with guns, the Japanese decided to radically revise their plans and go one better. A new plan was drawn up, carrying eight 14-inch guns, and capable of , thus marginally having the edge over the \"Lion\"s in speed and firepower. The heavy guns were also better-positioned, being superfiring both fore and aft with no turret amidships. The armour scheme was also marginally improved over the \"Lion\"s, with nine inches of armour on the turrets and on the barbettes. The first ship in the class was built in Britain, and a further three constructed in Japan. The Japanese also re-classified their powerful armoured cruisers of the \"Tsukuba\" and \"Ibuki\" classes, carrying four 12-inch guns, as battlecruisers; nonetheless, their armament was weaker and they were slower than any battlecruiser.\nThe next British battlecruiser, , was intended initially as the fourth ship in the \"Lion\" class, but was substantially redesigned. She retained the eight 13.5-inch guns of her predecessors, but they were positioned like those of \"Kong\u014d\" for better fields of fire. She was faster (making on sea trials), and carried a heavier secondary armament. \"Tiger\" was also more heavily armoured on the whole; while the maximum thickness of armour was the same at nine inches, the height of the main armour belt was increased. Not all the desired improvements for this ship were approved, however. Her designer, Sir Eustace Tennyson d'Eyncourt, had wanted small-bore water-tube boilers and geared turbines to give her a speed of , but he received no support from the authorities and the engine makers refused his request.\n1912 saw work begin on three more German battlecruisers of the , the first German battlecruisers to mount 12-inch guns. These ships, like \"Tiger\" and the \"Kong\u014d\"s, had their guns arranged in superfiring turrets for greater efficiency. Their armour and speed was similar to the previous \"Seydlitz\" class. In 1913, the Russian Empire also began the construction of the four-ship , which were designed for service in the Baltic Sea. These ships were designed to carry twelve 14-inch guns, with armour up to 12 inches thick, and a speed of . The heavy armour and relatively slow speed of these ships made them more similar to German designs than to British ships; construction of the \"Borodino\"s was halted by the First World War and all were scrapped after the end of the Russian Civil War.\nWorld War I.\nConstruction.\nFor most of the combatants, capital ship construction was very limited during the war. Germany finished the \"Derfflinger\" class and began work on the . The \"Mackensen\"s were a development of the \"Derfflinger\" class, with 13.8-inch guns and a broadly similar armour scheme, designed for .\nIn Britain, Jackie Fisher returned to the office of First Sea Lord in October 1914. His enthusiasm for big, fast ships was unabated, and he set designers to producing a design for a battlecruiser with 15-inch guns. Because Fisher expected the next German battlecruiser to steam at 28 knots, he required the new British design to be capable of 32 knots. He planned to reorder two s, which had been approved but not yet laid down, to a new design. Fisher finally received approval for this project on 28 December 1914 and they became the . With six 15-inch guns but only 6-inch armour they were a further step forward from \"Tiger\" in firepower and speed, but returned to the level of protection of the first British battlecruisers.\nAt the same time, Fisher resorted to subterfuge to obtain another three fast, lightly armoured ships that could use several spare gun turrets left over from battleship construction. These ships were essentially light battlecruisers, and Fisher occasionally referred to them as such, but officially they were classified as \"large light cruisers\". This unusual designation was required because construction of new capital ships had been placed on hold, while there were no limits on light cruiser construction. They became and her sisters and , and there was a bizarre imbalance between their main guns of 15 inches (or in \"Furious\") and their armour, which at thickness was on the scale of a light cruiser. The design was generally regarded as a failure (nicknamed in the Fleet \"Outrageous\", \"Uproarious\" and \"Spurious\"), though the later conversion of the ships to aircraft carriers was very successful. Fisher also speculated about a new mammoth, but lightly built battlecruiser, that would carry guns, which he termed ; this never got beyond the concept stage.\nIt is often held that the \"Renown\" and \"Courageous\" classes were designed for Fisher's plan to land troops (possibly Russian) on the German Baltic coast. Specifically, they were designed with a reduced draught, which might be important in the shallow Baltic. This is not clear-cut evidence that the ships were designed for the Baltic: it was considered that earlier ships had too much draught and not enough freeboard under operational conditions. Roberts argues that the focus on the Baltic was probably unimportant at the time the ships were designed, but was inflated later, after the disastrous Dardanelles Campaign.\nThe final British battlecruiser design of the war was the , which was born from a requirement for an improved version of the \"Queen Elizabeth\" battleship. The project began at the end of 1915, after Fisher's final departure from the Admiralty. While initially envisaged as a battleship, senior sea officers felt that Britain had enough battleships, but that new battlecruisers might be required to combat German ships being built (the British overestimated German progress on the \"Mackensen\" class as well as their likely capabilities). A battlecruiser design with eight 15-inch guns, 8\u00a0inches of armour and capable of 32 knots was decided on. The experience of battlecruisers at the Battle of Jutland meant that the design was radically revised and transformed again into a fast battleship with armour up to 12 inches thick, but still capable of . The first ship in the class, , was built according to this design to counter the possible completion of any of the Mackensen-class ship. The plans for her three sisters, on which little work had been done, were revised once more later in 1916 and in 1917 to improve protection.\nThe Admiral class would have been the only British ships capable of taking on the German \"Mackensen\" class; nevertheless, German shipbuilding was drastically slowed by the war, and while two \"Mackensen\"s were launched, none were ever completed. The Germans also worked briefly on a further three ships, of the , which were modified versions of the \"Mackensen\"s with 15-inch guns. Work on the three additional Admirals was suspended in March 1917 to enable more escorts and merchant ships to be built to deal with the new threat from U-boats to trade. They were finally cancelled in February 1919.\nBattlecruisers in action.\nThe first combat involving battlecruisers during World War I was the Battle of Heligoland Bight in August 1914. A force of British light cruisers and destroyers entered the Heligoland Bight (the part of the North Sea closest to Hamburg) to attack German destroyer patrols. When they met opposition from light cruisers, Vice Admiral David Beatty took his squadron of five battlecruisers into the Bight and turned the tide of the battle, ultimately sinking three German light cruisers and killing their commander, Rear Admiral Leberecht Maass.\nThe German battlecruiser perhaps made the most impact early in the war. Stationed in the Mediterranean, she and the escorting light cruiser evaded British and French ships on the outbreak of war, and steamed to Constantinople (Istanbul) with two British battlecruisers in hot pursuit. The two German ships were handed over to the Ottoman Navy, and this was instrumental in bringing the Ottoman Empire into the war as one of the Central Powers. \"Goeben\" herself, renamed \"Yavuz Sultan Selim\", fought engagements against the Imperial Russian Navy in the Black Sea before being knocked out of the action for the remainder of the war after the Battle of Imbros against British forces in the Aegean Sea in January 1918.\nThe original battlecruiser concept proved successful in December 1914 at the Battle of the Falkland Islands. The British battlecruisers and did precisely the job for which they were intended when they chased down and annihilated the German East Asia Squadron, centered on the armoured cruisers and , along with three light cruisers, commanded by Admiral Maximilian Graf Von Spee, in the South Atlantic Ocean. Prior to the battle, the Australian battlecruiser had unsuccessfully searched for the German ships in the Pacific.\nDuring the Battle of Dogger Bank in 1915, the aftermost barbette of the German flagship \"Seydlitz\" was struck by a British 13.5-inch shell from HMS \"Lion\". The shell did not penetrate the barbette, but it dislodged a piece of the barbette armour that allowed the flame from the shell's detonation to enter the barbette. The propellant charges being hoisted upwards were ignited, and the fireball flashed up into the turret and down into the magazine, setting fire to charges removed from their brass cartridge cases. The gun crew tried to escape into the next turret, which allowed the flash to spread into that turret as well, killing the crews of both turrets. \"Seydlitz\" was saved from near-certain destruction only by emergency flooding of her after magazines, which had been effected by Wilhelm Heidkamp. This near-disaster was due to the way that ammunition handling was arranged and was common to both German and British battleships and battlecruisers, but the lighter protection on the latter made them more vulnerable to the turret or barbette being penetrated. The Germans learned from investigating the damaged \"Seydlitz\" and instituted measures to ensure that ammunition handling minimised any possible exposure to flash.\nApart from the cordite handling, the battle was mostly inconclusive, though both the British flagship \"Lion\" and \"Seydlitz\" were severely damaged. \"Lion\" lost speed, causing her to fall behind the rest of the battleline, and Beatty was unable to effectively command his ships for the remainder of the engagement. A British signalling error allowed the German battlecruisers to withdraw, as most of Beatty's squadron mistakenly concentrated on the crippled armoured cruiser \"Bl\u00fccher\", sinking her with great loss of life. The British blamed their failure to win a decisive victory on their poor gunnery and attempted to increase their rate of fire by stockpiling unprotected cordite charges in their ammunition hoists and barbettes.\nAt the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916, both British and German battlecruisers were employed as fleet units. The British battlecruisers became engaged with both their German counterparts, the battlecruisers, and then German battleships before the arrival of the battleships of the British Grand Fleet. The result was a disaster for the Royal Navy's battlecruiser squadrons: \"Invincible\", \"Queen Mary\", and exploded with the loss of all but a handful of their crews. The exact reason why the ships' magazines detonated is not known, but the plethora of exposed cordite charges stored in their turrets, ammunition hoists and working chambers in the quest to increase their rate of fire undoubtedly contributed to their loss. Beatty's flagship \"Lion\" herself was almost lost in a similar manner, save for the heroic actions of Major Francis Harvey.\nThe better-armoured German battlecruisers fared better, in part due to the poor performance of British fuzes (the British shells tended to explode or break up on impact with the German armour). \u2014the only German battlecruiser lost at Jutland\u2014had only 128 killed, for instance, despite receiving more than thirty hits. The other German battlecruisers, , \"Von der Tann\", \"Seydlitz\", and , were all heavily damaged and required extensive repairs after the battle, \"Seydlitz\" barely making it home, for they had been the focus of British fire for much of the battle.\nInterwar period.\nIn the years immediately after World War I, Britain, Japan and the US all began design work on a new generation of ever more powerful battleships and battlecruisers. The new burst of shipbuilding that each nation's navy desired was politically controversial and potentially economically crippling. This nascent arms race was prevented by the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922, where the major naval powers agreed to limits on capital ship numbers. The German navy was not represented at the talks; under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, Germany was not allowed any modern capital ships at all.\nThrough the 1920s and 1930s only Britain and Japan retained battlecruisers, often modified and rebuilt from their original designs. The line between the battlecruiser and the modern fast battleship became blurred; indeed, the Japanese \"Kong\u014d\"s were formally redesignated as battleships after their very comprehensive reconstruction in the 1930s.\nPlans in the aftermath of World War I.\n\"Hood\", launched in 1918, was the last World War I battlecruiser to be completed. Owing to lessons from Jutland, the ship was modified during construction; the thickness of her belt armour was increased by an average of 50 percent and extended substantially, she was given heavier deck armour, and the protection of her magazines was improved to guard against the ignition of ammunition. This was hoped to be capable of resisting her own weapons\u2014the classic measure of a \"balanced\" battleship. \"Hood\" was the largest ship in the Royal Navy when completed; thanks to her great displacement, in theory she combined the firepower and armour of a battleship with the speed of a battlecruiser, causing some to refer to her as a fast battleship. However, her protection was markedly less than that of the British battleships built immediately after World War I, the .\nThe navies of Japan and the United States, not being affected immediately by the war, had time to develop new heavy guns for their latest designs and to refine their battlecruiser designs in light of combat experience in Europe. The Imperial Japanese Navy began four s. These vessels would have been of unprecedented size and power, as fast and well armoured as \"Hood\" whilst carrying a main battery of ten 16-inch guns, the most powerful armament ever proposed for a battlecruiser. They were, for all intents and purposes, fast battleships\u2014the only differences between them and the s which were to precede them were less side armour and a increase in speed. The United States Navy, which had worked on its battlecruiser designs since 1913 and watched the latest developments in this class with great care, responded with the . If completed as planned, they would have been exceptionally fast and well armed with eight 16-inch guns, but carried armour little better than the \"Invincible\"s\u2014this after an increase in protection following Jutland. The final stage in the post-war battlecruiser race came with the British response to the \"Amagi\" and \"Lexington\" types: four G3 battlecruisers. Royal Navy documents of the period often described any battleship with a speed of over about as a battlecruiser, regardless of the amount of protective armour, although the G3 was considered by most to be a well-balanced fast battleship.\nThe Washington Naval Treaty meant that none of these designs came to fruition. Ships that had been started were either broken up on the slipway or converted to aircraft carriers. In Japan, \"Amagi\" and were selected for conversion. \"Amagi\" was damaged beyond repair by the 1923 Great Kant\u014d earthquake and was broken up for scrap; the hull of one of the proposed \"Tosa\"-class battleships, , was converted in her stead. The United States Navy also converted two battlecruiser hulls into aircraft carriers in the wake of the Washington Treaty: and , although this was only considered marginally preferable to scrapping the hulls outright (the remaining four: \"Constellation\", \"Ranger\", \"Constitution\" and \"United States\" were scrapped). In Britain, Fisher's \"large light cruisers,\" were converted to carriers. \"Furious\" had already been partially converted during the war and \"Glorious\" and \"Courageous\" were similarly converted.\nRebuilding programmes.\nIn total, nine battlecruisers survived the Washington Naval Treaty, although HMS \"Tiger\" later became a victim of the London Naval Conference 1930 and was scrapped. Because their high speed made them valuable surface units in spite of their weaknesses, most of these ships were significantly updated before World War II. and were modernized significantly in the 1920s and 1930s. Between 1934 and 1936, \"Repulse\" was partially modernized and had her bridge modified, an aircraft hangar, catapult and new gunnery equipment added and her anti-aircraft armament increased. \"Renown\" underwent a more thorough reconstruction between 1937 and 1939. Her deck armour was increased, new turbines and boilers were fitted, an aircraft hangar and catapult added and she was completely rearmed aside from the main guns which had their elevation increased to +30 degrees. The bridge structure was also removed and a large bridge similar to that used in the battleships installed in its place. While conversions of this kind generally added weight to the vessel, \"Renown\"'s tonnage actually decreased due to a substantially lighter power plant. Similar thorough rebuildings planned for \"Repulse\" and \"Hood\" were cancelled due to the advent of World War II.\nUnable to build new ships, the Imperial Japanese Navy also chose to improve its existing battlecruisers of the \"Kong\u014d\" class (initially the , , and \u2014the only later as it had been disarmed under the terms of the Washington treaty) in two substantial reconstructions (one for \"Hiei\"). During the first of these, elevation of their main guns was increased to +40 degrees, anti-torpedo bulges and of horizontal armour added, and a \"pagoda\" mast with additional command positions built up. This reduced the ships' speed to . The second reconstruction focused on speed as they had been selected as fast escorts for aircraft carrier task forces. Completely new main engines, a reduced number of boilers and an increase in hull length by allowed them to reach up to 30 knots once again. They were reclassified as \"fast battleships,\" although their armour and guns still fell short compared to surviving World War I\u2013era battleships in the American or the British navies, with dire consequences during the Pacific War, when \"Hiei\" and \"Kirishima\" were easily crippled by US gunfire during actions off Guadalcanal, forcing their scuttling shortly afterwards. Perhaps most tellingly, \"Hiei\" was crippled by medium-caliber gunfire from heavy and light cruisers in a close-range night engagement.\nThere were two exceptions: Turkey's \"Yavuz Sultan Selim\" and the Royal Navy's \"Hood\". The Turkish Navy made only minor improvements to the ship in the interwar period, which primarily focused on repairing wartime damage and the installation of new fire control systems and anti-aircraft batteries. \"Hood\" was in constant service with the fleet and could not be withdrawn for an extended reconstruction. She received minor improvements over the course of the 1930s, including modern fire control systems, increased numbers of anti-aircraft guns, and in March 1941, radar.\nNaval rearmament.\nIn the late 1930s navies began to build capital ships again, and during this period a number of large commerce raiders and small, fast battleships were built that are sometimes referred to as battlecruisers. Germany and Russia designed new battlecruisers during this period, though only the latter laid down two of the 35,000-ton . They were still on the slipways when the Germans invaded in 1941 and construction was suspended. Both ships were scrapped after the war.\nThe Germans planned three battlecruisers of the as part of the expansion of the Kriegsmarine (Plan Z). With six 15-inch guns, high speed, excellent range, but very thin armour, they were intended as commerce raiders. Only one was ordered shortly before World War II; no work was ever done on it. No names were assigned, and they were known by their contract names: 'O', 'P', and 'Q'. The new class was not universally welcomed in the Kriegsmarine. Their abnormally-light protection gained it the derogatory nickname \"Ohne Panzer Quatsch\" (without armour nonsense) within certain circles of the Navy.\nWorld War II.\nThe Royal Navy deployed some of its battlecruisers during the Norwegian Campaign in April 1940. The and the were engaged during the action off Lofoten by \"Renown\" in very bad weather and disengaged after \"Gneisenau\" was damaged. One of \"Renown\"'s 15-inch shells passed through \"Gneisenau\"'s director-control tower without exploding, severing electrical and communication cables as it went and destroyed the rangefinders for the forward 150\u00a0mm (5.9\u00a0in) turrets. Main-battery fire control had to be shifted aft due to the loss of electrical power. Another shell from \"Renown\" knocked out \"Gneisenau\"'s aft turret. The British ship was struck twice by German shells that failed to inflict any significant damage. She was the only pre-war battlecruiser to survive the war.\nIn the early years of the war various German ships had a measure of success hunting merchant ships in the Atlantic. Allied battlecruisers such as \"Renown\", \"Repulse\", and the fast battleships \"Dunkerque\" and were employed on operations to hunt down the commerce-raiding German ships. The one stand-up fight occurred when the battleship and the heavy cruiser sortied into the North Atlantic to attack British shipping and were intercepted by \"Hood\" and the battleship in May 1941 in the Battle of the Denmark Strait. The elderly British battlecruiser was no match for the modern German battleship: within minutes, the \"Bismarck\"'s 15-inch shells caused a magazine explosion in \"Hood\" reminiscent of the Battle of Jutland. Only three men survived.\nThe first battlecruiser to see action in the Pacific War was \"Repulse\" when she was sunk by Japanese torpedo bombers north of Singapore on 10 December 1941 whilst in company with \"Prince of Wales\". She was lightly damaged by a single bomb and near-missed by two others in the first Japanese attack. Her speed and agility enabled her to avoid the other attacks by level bombers and dodge 33 torpedoes. The last group of torpedo bombers attacked from multiple directions and \"Repulse\" was struck by five torpedoes. She quickly capsized with the loss of 27 officers and 486 crewmen; 42 officers and 754 enlisted men were rescued by the escorting destroyers. The loss of \"Repulse\" and \"Prince of Wales\" conclusively proved the vulnerability of capital ships to aircraft without air cover of their own.\nThe Japanese \"Kong\u014d\"-class battlecruisers were extensively used as carrier escorts for most of their wartime career due to their high speed. Their World War I\u2013era armament was weaker and their upgraded armour was still thin compared to contemporary battleships. On 13 November 1942, during the First Naval Battle of Guadalcanal, \"Hiei\" stumbled across American cruisers and destroyers at point-blank range. The ship was badly damaged in the encounter and had to be towed by her sister ship \"Kirishima\". Both were spotted by American aircraft the following morning and \"Kirishima\" was forced to cast off her tow because of repeated aerial attacks. \"Hiei\"'s captain ordered her crew to abandon ship after further damage and scuttled \"Hiei\" in the early evening of 14 November. On the night of 14/15 November during the Second Naval Battle of Guadalcanal, \"Kirishima\" returned to Ironbottom Sound, but encountered the American battleships and . While failing to detect \"Washington\", \"Kirishima\" engaged \"South Dakota\" with some effect. \"Washington\" opened fire a few minutes later at short range and badly damaged \"Kirishima\", knocking out her aft turrets, jamming her rudder, and hitting the ship below the waterline. The flooding proved to be uncontrollable and \"Kirishima\" capsized three and a half hours later.\nReturning to Japan after the Battle of Leyte Gulf, \"Kong\u014d\" was torpedoed and sunk by the American submarine on 21 November 1944. \"Haruna\" was moored at Kure, Japan when the naval base was attacked by American carrier aircraft on 24 and 28 July 1945. The ship was only lightly damaged by a single bomb hit on 24 July, but was hit a dozen more times on 28 July and sank at her pier. She was refloated after the war and scrapped in early 1946.\nLarge cruisers or \"cruiser killers\".\nA late renaissance in popularity of ships between battleships and cruisers in size occurred on the eve of World War II. Described by some as battlecruisers, but never classified as capital ships, they were variously described as \"super cruisers\", \"large cruisers\" or even \"unrestricted cruisers\". The Dutch, American, and Japanese navies all planned these new classes specifically to counter the heavy cruisers, or their counterparts, being built by their naval rivals.\nThe first such battlecruisers were the Dutch Design 1047, designed to protect their colonies in the East Indies in the face of Japanese aggression. Never officially assigned names, these ships were designed with German and Italian assistance. While they broadly resembled the German \"Scharnhorst\" class and had the same main battery, they would have been more lightly armoured and only protected against eight-inch gunfire. Although the design was mostly completed, work on the vessels never commenced as the Germans overran the Netherlands in May 1940. The first ship would have been laid down in June of that year.\nThe only class of these late battlecruisers actually built were the United States Navy's \"large cruisers\". Two of them were completed, and ; a third, , was cancelled while under construction and three others, to be named \"Philippines\", \"Puerto Rico\" and \"Samoa\", were cancelled before they were laid down. They were classified as \"large cruisers\" instead of battlecruisers. These ships were named after territories or protectorates. (Battleships, were named after states and cruisers after cities.) With a main armament of nine 12-inch guns in three triple turrets and a displacement of , the \"Alaska\"s were twice the size of s and had guns some 50% larger in diameter. They lacked the thick armoured belt and intricate torpedo defence system of true capital ships. However, unlike most battlecruisers, they were considered a balanced design according to cruiser standards as their protection could withstand fire from their own caliber of gun, albeit only in a very narrow range band. They were designed to hunt down Japanese heavy cruisers, though by the time they entered service most Japanese cruisers had been sunk by American aircraft or submarines. Like the contemporary fast battleships, their speed ultimately made them more useful as carrier escorts and bombardment ships than as the surface combatants they were developed to be.\nThe Japanese started designing the B64 class, which was similar to the \"Alaska\" but with guns. News of the \"Alaska\"s led them to upgrade the design, creating Design B-65. Armed with 356\u00a0mm guns, the B65s would have been the best armed of the new breed of battlecruisers, but they still would have had only sufficient protection to keep out eight-inch shells. Much like the Dutch, the Japanese got as far as completing the design for the B65s, but never laid them down. By the time the designs were ready the Japanese Navy recognized that they had little use for the vessels and that their priority for construction should lie with aircraft carriers. Like the \"Alaska\"s, the Japanese did not call these ships battlecruisers, referring to them instead as super-heavy cruisers.\nCold War\u2013era designs.\nIn spite of the fact that most navies abandoned the battleship and battlecruiser concepts after World War II, Joseph Stalin's fondness for big-gun-armed warships caused the Soviet Union to plan a large cruiser class in the late 1940s. In the Soviet Navy, they were termed \"heavy cruisers\" (\"tjazholyj krejser\"). The fruits of this program were the Project 82 (\"Stalingrad\") cruisers, of standard load, nine guns and a speed of . Three ships were laid down in 1951\u20131952, but they were cancelled in April 1953 after Stalin's death. Only the central armoured hull section of the first ship, \"Stalingrad\", was launched in 1954 and then used as a target.\nThe Soviet is sometimes referred to as a battlecruiser. This description arises from their over displacement, which is roughly equal to that of a First World War battleship and more than twice the displacement of contemporary cruisers; upon entry into service, \"Kirov\" was the largest surface combatant to be built since World War II. The \"Kirov\" class lacks the armour that distinguishes battlecruisers from ordinary cruisers and they are classified as heavy nuclear-powered missile cruisers (\"T'Yazholiy atomn'iy raketn'iy Krey'Ser\") by Russia, with their primary surface armament consisting of twenty P-700 Granit surface to surface missiles. Four members of the class were completed during the 1980s and 1990s, but due to budget constraints only the is operational with the Russian Navy, though plans were announced in 2010 to return the other three ships to service. As of 2021, was being refitted, but the other two ships are reportedly beyond economical repair.\nNotes.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4059", "revid": "34058276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4059", "title": "Bob Hawke", "text": "Prime Minister of Australia from 1983 to 1991\nRobert James Lee Hawke (9 December 1929\u00a0\u2013 16 May 2019) was an Australian politician and union organiser who served as the 23rd prime minister of Australia, from 1983 to 1991, holding office as the leader of the Australian Labor Party (ALP). Previously he was the president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions from 1969 to 1980 and president of the Labor Party national executive from 1973 to 1980.\nHawke was born in Border Town, South Australia. He attended the University of Western Australia and went on to study at University College, Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar, during which time he set a world record for downing a yard of ale in 11\u00a0seconds. In 1956, Hawke joined the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) as a research officer. Having risen to become responsible for national wage case arbitration, he was elected as president of the ACTU in 1969, where he achieved a high public profile. In 1973, he was appointed as president of the Labor Party.\nIn 1980, Hawke stood down from his roles as ACTU and Labor Party president to announce his intention to enter parliamentary politics, and was subsequently elected to the Australian House of Representatives as a member of parliament (MP) for the division of Wills at the 1980 federal election. Three years later, he was elected unopposed to replace Bill Hayden as leader of the Australian Labor Party, and within just five weeks led Labor to a landslide victory at the 1983 election, and was sworn in as prime minister. He led Labor to victory three more times, with successful outcomes in 1984, 1987 and 1990 elections, making him the most electorally successful prime minister in the history of the Labor Party.\nThe Hawke government implemented a significant number of reforms, including major economic reforms, the establishment of Landcare, the introduction of the universal healthcare scheme Medicare, brokering the Prices and Incomes Accord, creating APEC, floating the Australian dollar, deregulating the financial sector, introducing the Family Assistance Scheme, enacting the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 to prevent discrimination in the workplace, declaring \"Advance Australia Fair\" as the country's national anthem, initiating superannuation pension schemes for all workers, negotiating a ban on mining in Antarctica and overseeing passage of the Australia Act 1986 that removed all remaining jurisdiction by the United Kingdom from Australia.\nIn June 1991, Hawke faced a leadership challenge by the Treasurer of Australia, Paul Keating, but Hawke managed to retain power; however, Keating mounted a second challenge six months later, and won narrowly, replacing Hawke as prime minister. Hawke subsequently retired from parliament, pursuing both a business career and a number of charitable causes, until his death in 2019, aged 89. Hawke remains his party's longest-serving Prime Minister, and Australia's third-longest-serving prime minister behind Robert Menzies and John Howard. He is also the only prime minister to be born in South Australia and the only one raised and educated in Western Australia. Hawke holds the highest ever approval rating for an Australian prime minister, reaching 75% approval in 1984. Historians have generally praised the reforms implemented by the Hawke government, and his government is often credited for the modernisation of Australia's economy. Hawke is frequently ranked within the upper-tier of Australian prime ministers.\nEarly life and family.\nBob Hawke was born on 9 December 1929 in Border Town, South Australia, the second child of Arthur \"Clem\" Hawke (1898\u20131989), a Congregationalist minister, and his wife Edith Emily (Lee) (1897\u20131979) (known as Ellie), a schoolteacher. His uncle, Albert, was the Labor premier of Western Australia between 1953 and 1959.\nHawke's brother Neil, who was seven years his senior, died at the age of seventeen after contracting meningitis, for which there was no cure at the time. Ellie Hawke subsequently developed an almost messianic belief in her son's destiny, and this contributed to Hawke's supreme self-confidence throughout his career. At the age of fifteen, he presciently boasted to friends that he would one day become the prime minister of Australia.\nAt the age of seventeen, the same age that his brother Neil had died, Hawke had a serious crash while riding his Panther motorcycle that left him in a critical condition for several days. This near-death experience acted as his catalyst, driving him to make the most of his talents and not let his abilities go to waste. He joined the Labor Party in 1947 at the age of eighteen.\nEducation and early career.\nHawke was educated at West Leederville State School, Perth Modern School and the University of Western Australia, graduating in 1952 with Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Laws degrees. He was also president of the university's guild during the same year. The following year, Hawke won a Rhodes Scholarship to attend University College, Oxford, where he began a Bachelor of Arts course in philosophy, politics and economics (PPE). He soon found he was covering much the same ground as he had in his education at the University of Western Australia, and transferred to a Bachelor of Letters course. He wrote his thesis on wage-fixing in Australia and successfully presented it in January 1956.\nHis academic achievements were complemented by setting a new world record for beer drinking; he downed \u2014equivalent to a yard of ale\u2014from a sconce pot in 11\u00a0seconds as part of a college penalty. In his memoirs, Hawke suggested that this single feat may have contributed to his political success more than any other, by endearing him to an electorate with a strong beer culture.\nIn 1956, Hawke accepted a scholarship to undertake doctoral studies in the area of arbitration law in the law department at the Australian National University in Canberra. Soon after his arrival at ANU, Hawke became the students' representative on the University Council. A year later, Hawke was recommended to the President of the ACTU to become a research officer, replacing Harold Souter who had become ACTU Secretary. The recommendation was made by Hawke's mentor at ANU, H. P. Brown, who for a number of years had assisted the ACTU in national wage cases. Hawke decided to abandon his doctoral studies and accept the offer, moving to Melbourne with his wife Hazel.\nAustralian Council of Trade Unions.\nNot long after Hawke began work at the ACTU, he became responsible for the presentation of its annual case for higher wages to the national wages tribunal, the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. He was first appointed as an ACTU advocate in 1959. The 1958 case, under previous advocate R.L. Eggleston, had yielded only a five-shilling increase. The 1959 case found for a fifteen-shilling increase, and was regarded as a personal triumph for Hawke. He went on to attain such success and prominence in his role as an ACTU advocate that, in 1969, he was encouraged to run for the position of ACTU President, despite the fact that he had never held elected office in a trade union.\nHe was elected ACTU President in 1969 on a modernising platform by the narrow margin of 399 to 350, with the support of the left of the union movement, including some associated with the Communist Party of Australia. He later credited Ray Gietzelt, General Secretary of the FMWU, as the single most significant union figure in helping him achieve this outcome. Questioned after his election on his political stance, Hawke stated that \"socialist is not a word I would use to describe myself\", saying instead his approach to politics was pragmatic. His commitment to the cause of Jewish Refuseniks purportedly led to a planned assassination attempt on Hawke by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, and its Australian operative Munif Mohammed Abou Rish.\nIn 1971, Hawke along with other members of the ACTU requested that South Africa send a non-racially biased team for the Rugby Union tour, with the intention of unions agreeing not to serve the team in Australia. Prior to arrival, the Western Australian branch of the Transport Workers Union, and the Barmaids' and Barmens' Union, announced that they would serve the team, which allowed the Springboks to land in Perth. The tour commenced on 26 June and riots occurred as anti-apartheid protesters disrupted games. Hawke and his family started to receive malicious mail and phone calls from people who thought that sport and politics should not mix. Hawke remained committed to the ban on apartheid teams and later that year, the South African cricket team was successfully denied and no apartheid team was to ever come to Australia again. It was this ongoing dedication to racial equality in South Africa that would later earn Hawke the respect and friendship of Nelson Mandela.\nIn industrial matters, Hawke continued to demonstrate a preference for, and considerable skill at, negotiation, and was generally liked and respected by employers as well as the unions he advocated for. As early as 1972, speculation began that he would seek to enter the Parliament of Australia and eventually run to become the Leader of the Australian Labor Party. But while his professional career continued successfully, his heavy drinking and womanising placed considerable strains on his family life.\nIn June 1973, Hawke was elected as the Federal President of the Labor Party. Two years later, when the Whitlam government was controversially dismissed by the Governor-General, Hawke showed an initial keenness to enter Parliament at the ensuing election. Harry Jenkins, the MP for Scullin, came under pressure to step down to allow Hawke to stand in his place, but he strongly resisted this push. Hawke eventually decided not to attempt to enter Parliament at that time, a decision he soon regretted. After Labor was defeated at the election, Whitlam initially offered the leadership to Hawke, although it was not within Whitlam's power to decide who would succeed him. Despite not taking on the offer, Hawke remained influential, playing a key role in averting national strike action.\nDuring the 1977 federal election, he emerged as a strident opponent of accepting Vietnamese boat people as refugees into Australia, stating that they should be subject to normal immigration requirements and should otherwise be deported. He further stated only refugees selected off-shore should be accepted.\nHawke resigned as President of the Labor Party in August 1978. Neil Batt was elected in his place. The strain of this period took its toll on Hawke and in 1979 he suffered a physical collapse. This shock led Hawke to publicly announce his alcoholism in a television interview, and that he would make a concerted\u2014and ultimately successful\u2014effort to overcome it. He was helped through this period by the relationship that he had established with writer Blanche d'Alpuget, who, in 1982, published a biography of Hawke. His popularity with the public was, if anything, enhanced by this period of rehabilitation, and opinion polling suggested that he was a more popular public figure than either Labor Leader Bill Hayden or Liberal Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser.\nInformer for the United States.\nDuring the period of 1973 to 1979, Hawke acted as an informant for the United States government. During his time as ACTU leader, Hawke informed the US of details surrounding labour disputes, especially those relating to American companies and individuals, such as union disputes with Ford Motor Company and the black ban of Frank Sinatra. The major industrial action taken against Sinatra came about because Sinatra had made sexist comments against female journalists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In retaliation, unions grounded Sinatra's private jet in Melbourne, demanding he apologise. The popular view was that Mr Hawke engaged in protracted, boozy negotiations with Ol' Blue Eyes to reach a settlement. The [diplomatic] cables say the US embassy reached a deal with Mr Hawke to end the standoff, no apology was sought from Sinatra and that most of Mr Hawke's time was spent with the singer's lawyer.\nThe dispute was the subject of the 2003 film \"The Night We Called It a Day\". Hawke was described by US diplomats as \"a bulwark against anti-American sentiment and resurgent communism during the economic turmoil of the 1970s\", and often disputed with the Whitlam government over issues of foreign policy and industrial relations. With the knowledge of US diplomats, Hawke secretly planned to leave Labor in 1974 to form a new centrist political party to challenge the Whitlam government. This plan had the support of Rupert Murdoch and Hawke's confidant, Peter Abeles, but did not eventuate because of the events of 1975. US diplomats played a major role in shaping Hawke's consensus politics and economics.\nMember of Parliament.\nHawke's first attempt to enter Parliament came during the 1963 federal election. He stood in the seat of Corio in Geelong and managed to achieve a 3.1% swing against the national trend, although he fell short of ousting longtime Liberal incumbent Hubert Opperman. Hawke rejected several opportunities to enter Parliament throughout the 1970s, something he later wrote that he \"regretted\". He eventually stood for election to the House of Representatives at the 1980 election for the safe Melbourne seat of Wills, winning it comfortably. Immediately upon his election to Parliament, Hawke was appointed to the Shadow Cabinet by Labor Leader Bill Hayden as Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations.\nHayden, after having led the Labour party to narrowly lose the 1980 election, was increasingly subject to criticism from Labor MPs over his leadership style. To quell speculation over his position, Hayden called a leadership spill on 16 July 1982, believing that if he won he would be guaranteed to lead Labor through to the next election. Hawke decided to challenge Hayden in the spill, but Hayden defeated him by five votes; the margin of victory, however, was too slim to dispel doubts that he could lead the Labor Party to victory at an election. Despite his defeat, Hawke began to agitate more seriously behind the scenes for a change in leadership, with opinion polls continuing to show that Hawke was a far more popular public figure than both Hayden and Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser. Hayden was further weakened after Labor's unexpectedly poor performance at a by-election in December 1982 for the Victorian seat of Flinders, following the resignation of the sitting member, former deputy Liberal leader Phillip Lynch. Labor needed a swing of 5.5% to win the seat and had been predicted by the media to win, but could only achieve 3%.\nLabor Party power-brokers, such as Graham Richardson and Barrie Unsworth, now openly switched their allegiance from Hayden to Hawke. More significantly, Hayden's staunch friend and political ally, Labor's Senate Leader John Button, had become convinced that Hawke's chances of victory at an election were greater than Hayden's. Initially, Hayden believed that he could remain in his job, but Button's defection proved to be the final straw in convincing Hayden that he would have to resign as Labor Leader. Less than two months after the Flinders by-election result, Hayden announced his resignation as Leader of the Labor Party on 3 February 1983. Hawke was subsequently elected as Leader unopposed on 8 February, and became Leader of the Opposition in the process. Having learned that morning about the possible leadership change, on the same that Hawke assumed the leadership of the Labor Party, Malcolm Fraser called a snap election for 5 March 1983, unsuccessfully attempting to prevent Labor from making the leadership change. However, he was unable to have the Governor-General confirm the election before Labor announced the change.\nAt the 1983 election, Hawke led Labor to a landslide victory, achieving a 24-seat swing and ending seven years of Liberal Party rule.\nWith the election called at the same time that Hawke became Labor leader this meant that Hawke never sat in Parliament as Leader of the Opposition\nhaving spent the entirety of his short Opposition leadership in the election campaign which he won.\nPrime Minister of Australia (1983\u20131991).\nLeadership style.\nAfter Labor's landslide victory, Hawke was sworn in as the Prime Minister by the Governor-General Ninian Stephen on 11 March 1983. The style of the Hawke government were deliberately distinct from the Whitlam government, the most recent Labor government that preceded it. Rather than immediately initiating multiple extensive reform programs as Whitlam had, Hawke announced that Malcolm Fraser's pre-election concealment of the budget deficit meant that many of Labor's election commitments would have to be deferred. As part of his internal reforms package, Hawke divided the government into two tiers, with only the most senior ministers sitting in the Cabinet of Australia. The Labor caucus was still given the authority to determine who would make up the Ministry, but this move gave Hawke unprecedented powers to empower individual ministers.\nIn particular, the political partnership that developed between Hawke and his Treasurer, Paul Keating, proved to be essential to Labor's success in government, with multiple Labor figures in years since citing the partnership as the party's greatest ever. The two men proved a study in contrasts: Hawke was a Rhodes Scholar; Keating left high school early. Hawke's enthusiasms were cigars, betting and most forms of sport; Keating preferred classical architecture, Mahler symphonies and collecting British Regency and French Empire antiques. Despite not knowing one another before Hawke assumed the leadership in 1983, the two formed a personal as well as political relationship which enabled the Government to pursue a significant number of reforms, although there were occasional points of tension between the two.\nThe Labor Caucus under Hawke also developed a more formalised system of parliamentary factions, which significantly altered the dynamics of caucus operations. Unlike many of his predecessor leaders, Hawke's authority within the Labor Party was absolute. This enabled him to persuade MPs to support a substantial set of policy changes which had not been considered achievable by Labor governments in the past. Individual accounts from ministers indicate that while Hawke was not often the driving force behind individual reforms, outside of broader economic changes, he took on the role of providing political guidance on what was electorally feasible and how best to sell it to the public, tasks at which he proved highly successful. Hawke took on a very public role as Prime Minister, campaigning frequently even outside of election periods, and for much of his time in office proved to be incredibly popular with the Australian electorate; to this date he still holds the highest ever AC Nielsen approval rating of 75%.\nEconomic policy.\nThe Hawke government oversaw significant economic reforms, and is often cited by economic historians as being a \"turning point\" from a protectionist, agricultural model to a more globalised and services-oriented economy. According to the journalist Paul Kelly, \"the most influential economic decisions of the 1980s were the floating of the Australian dollar and the deregulation of the financial system\". Although the Fraser government had played a part in the process of financial deregulation by commissioning the 1981 Campbell Report, opposition from Fraser himself had stalled this process. Shortly after its election in 1983, the Hawke government took the opportunity to implement a comprehensive program of economic reform, in the process \"transform(ing) economics and politics in Australia\".\nHawke and Keating together led the process for overseeing the economic changes by launching a \"National Economic Summit\" one month after their election in 1983, which brought together business and industrial leaders together with politicians and trade union leaders; the three-day summit led to a unanimous adoption of a national economic strategy, generating sufficient political capital for widespread reform to follow. Among other reforms, the Hawke government floated the Australian dollar, repealed rules that prohibited foreign-owned banks to operate in Australia, dismantled the protectionist tariff system, privatised several state sector industries, ended the subsidisation of loss-making industries, and sold off part of the state-owned Commonwealth Bank.\nThe taxation system was also significantly reformed, with income tax rates reduced and the introduction of a fringe benefits tax and a capital gains tax; the latter two reforms were strongly opposed by the Liberal Party at the time, but were never reversed by them when they eventually returned to office in 1996. Partially offsetting these imposts upon the business community\u2014the \"main loser\" from the 1985 Tax Summit according to Paul Kelly\u2014was the introduction of full dividend imputation, a reform insisted upon by Keating. Funding for schools was also considerably increased as part of this package, while financial assistance was provided for students to enable them to stay at school longer; the number of Australian children completing school rose from 3 in 10 at the beginning of the Hawke government to 7 in 10 by its conclusion in 1991. Considerable progress was also made in directing assistance \"to the most disadvantaged recipients over the whole range of welfare benefits.\"\nSocial and environmental policy.\nAlthough criticisms were leveled against the Hawke government that it did not achieve all it said it would do on social policy, it nevertheless enacting a series of reforms which remain in place to the present day. From 1983 to 1989, the Government oversaw the permanent establishment of universal health care in Australia with the creation of Medicare, doubled the number of subsidised childcare places, began the introduction of occupational superannuation, oversaw a significant increase in school retention rates, created subsidised homecare services, oversaw the elimination of poverty traps in the welfare system, increased the real value of the old-age pension, reintroduced the six-monthly indexation of single-person unemployment benefits, and established a wide-ranging programme for paid family support, known as the Family Income Supplement. During the 1980s, the proportion of total government outlays allocated to families, the sick, single parents, widows, the handicapped, and veterans was significantly higher than under the previous Fraser and Whitlam governments.\nIn 1984, the Hawke government enacted the landmark Sex Discrimination Act 1984, which eliminated discrimination on the grounds of sex within the workplace. In 1989, Hawke oversaw the gradual re-introduction of some tuition fees for university study, creating set up the Higher Education Contributions Scheme (HECS). Under the original HECS, a $1,800 fee was charged to all university students, and the Commonwealth paid the balance. A student could defer payment of this HECS amount and repay the debt through the tax system, when the student's income exceeds a threshold level. As part of the reforms, Colleges of Advanced Education entered the University sector by various means. by doing so, university places were able to be expanded. Further notable policy decisions taken during the Government's time in office included the public health campaign regarding HIV/AIDS, and Indigenous land rights reform, with an investigation of the idea of a treaty between Aborigines and the Government being launched, although the latter would be overtaken by events, notably the Mabo court decision.\nThe Hawke government also drew attention for a series of notable environmental decisions, particularly in its second and third terms. In 1983, Hawke personally vetoed the construction of the Franklin Dam in Tasmania, responding to a groundswell of protest around the issue. Hawke also secured the nomination of the Wet Tropics of Queensland as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, preventing the forests there from being logged. Hawke would later appoint Graham Richardson as Environment Minister, tasking him with winning the second-preference support from environmental parties, something which Richardson later claimed was the major factor in the government's narrow re-election at the 1990 election. In the Government's fourth term, Hawke personally led the Australian delegation to secure changes to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, ultimately winning a guarantee that drilling for minerals within Antarctica would be totally prohibited until 2048 at the earliest. Hawke later claimed that the Antarctic drilling ban was his \"proudest achievement\".\nIndustrial relations policy.\nAs a former ACTU President, Hawke was well-placed to engage in reform of the industrial relations system in Australia, taking a lead on this policy area as in few others. Working closely with ministerial colleagues and the ACTU Secretary, Bill Kelty, Hawke negotiated with trade unions to establish the Prices and Incomes Accord in 1983, an agreement whereby unions agreed to restrict their demands for wage increases, and in turn the Government guaranteed to both minimise inflation and promote an increased social wage, including by establishing new social programmes such as Medicare.\nInflation had been a significant issue for the previous decade prior to the election of the Hawke government, regularly running into double-digits. The process of the Accord, by which the Government and trade unions would arbitrate and agree upon wage increases in many sectors, led to a decrease in both inflation and unemployment through to 1990. Criticisms of the Accord would come from both the right and the left of politics. Left-wing critics claimed that it kept real wages stagnant, and that the Accord was a policy of class collaboration and corporatism. By contrast, right-wing critics claimed that the Accord reduced the flexibility of the wages system. Supporters of the Accord, however, pointed to the improvements in the social security system that occurred, including the introduction of rental assistance for social security recipients, the creation of labour market schemes such as NewStart, and the introduction of the Family Income Supplement. In 1986, the Hawke government passed a bill to de-register the Builders Labourers Federation federally due to the union not following the Accord agreements.\nDespite a percentage fall in real money wages from 1983 to 1991, the social wage of Australian workers was argued by the Government to have improved drastically as a result of these reforms, and the ensuing decline in inflation. The Accord was revisited six further times during the Hawke government, each time in response to new economic developments. The seventh and final revisiting would ultimately lead to the establishment of the enterprise bargaining system, although this would be finalised shortly after Hawke left office in 1991.\nForeign policy.\nArguably the most significant foreign policy achievement of the Government took place in 1989, after Hawke proposed a south-east Asian region-wide forum for leaders and economic ministers to discuss issues of common concern. After winning the support of key countries in the region, this led to the creation of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). The first APEC meeting duly took place in Canberra in November 1989; the economic ministers of Australia, Brunei, Canada, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and the United States all attended. APEC would subsequently grow to become one of the most pre-eminent high-level international forums in the world, particularly after the later inclusions of China and Russia, and the Keating government's later establishment of the APEC Leaders' Forum.\nElsewhere in Asia, the Hawke government played a significant role in the build-up to the United Nations peace process for Cambodia, culminating in the Transitional Authority; Hawke's Foreign Minister Gareth Evans was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize for his role in negotiations. Hawke also took a major public stand after the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre; despite having spent years trying to get closer relations with China, Hawke gave a tearful address on national television describing the massacre in graphic detail, and unilaterally offered asylum to over 42,000 Chinese students who were living in Australia at the time, many of whom had publicly supported the Tiananmen protesters. Hawke did so without even consulting his Cabinet, stating later that he felt he simply had to act.\nThe Hawke government pursued a close relationship with the United States, assisted by Hawke's close friendship with US Secretary of State George Shultz; this led to a degree of controversy when the Government supported the US's plans to test ballistic missiles off the coast of Tasmania in 1985, as well as seeking to overturn Australia's long-standing ban on uranium exports. Although the US ultimately withdrew the plans to test the missiles, the furore led to a fall in Hawke's approval ratings. Shortly after the 1990 election, Hawke would lead Australia into its first overseas military campaign since the Vietnam War, forming a close alliance with US President George H. W. Bush to join the coalition in the Gulf War. The Royal Australian Navy contributed several destroyers and frigates to the war effort, which successfully concluded in February 1991, with the expulsion of Iraqi forces from Kuwait. The success of the campaign, and the lack of any Australian casualties, led to a brief increase in the popularity of the Government.\nThrough his role on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Hawke played a leading role in ensuring the Commonwealth initiated an international boycott on foreign investment into South Africa, building on work undertaken by his predecessor Malcolm Fraser, and in the process clashing publicly with Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Margaret Thatcher, who initially favoured a more cautious approach. The resulting boycott, led by the Commonwealth, was widely credited with helping bring about the collapse of apartheid, and resulted in a high-profile visit by Nelson Mandela in October 1990, months after the latter's release from a 27-year stint in prison. During the visit, Mandela publicly thanked the Hawke government for the role it played in the boycott.\nElection wins and leadership challenges.\nHawke benefited greatly from the disarray into which the Liberal Party fell after the resignation of Fraser following the 1983 election. The Liberals were torn between supporters of the more conservative John Howard and the more liberal Andrew Peacock, with the pair frequently contesting the leadership. Hawke and Keating were also able to use the concealment of the size of the budget deficit by Fraser before the 1983 election to great effect, damaging the Liberal Party's economic credibility as a result.\nHowever, Hawke's time as Prime Minister also saw friction develop between himself and the grassroots of the Labor Party, many of whom were unhappy at what they viewed as Hawke's iconoclasm and willingness to cooperate with business interests. Hawke regularly and publicly expressed his willingness to cull Labor's \"sacred cows\". The Labor Left faction, as well as prominent Labor backbencher Barry Jones, offered repeated criticisms of a number of government decisions. Hawke was also subject to challenges from some former colleagues in the trade union movement over his \"confrontationalist style\" in siding with the airline companies in the 1989 Australian pilots' strike.\nNevertheless, Hawke was able to comfortably maintain a lead as preferred prime minister in the vast majority of opinion polls carried out throughout his time in office. He recorded the highest popularity rating ever measured by an Australian opinion poll, reaching 75% approval in 1984. After leading Labor to a comfortable victory in the snap 1984 election, called to bring the mandate of the House of Representatives back in line with the Senate, Hawke was able to secure an unprecedented third consecutive term for Labor with a landslide victory in the double dissolution election of 1987. Hawke was subsequently able to lead the nation in the bicentennial celebrations of 1988, culminating with him welcoming Queen Elizabeth II to open the newly constructed Parliament House.\nThe late 1980s recession, and the accompanying high interest rates, saw the Government fall in opinion polls, with many doubting that Hawke could win a fourth election. Keating, who had long understood that he would eventually succeed Hawke as prime minister, began to plan a leadership change; at the end of 1988, Keating put pressure on Hawke to retire in the new year. Hawke rejected this suggestion but reached a secret agreement with Keating, the so-called \"Kirribilli Agreement\", stating that he would step down in Keating's favour at some point after the 1990 election. Hawke subsequently won that election, in the process leading Labor to a record fourth consecutive electoral victory, albeit by a slim margin. Hawke appointed Keating as deputy prime minister to replace the retiring Lionel Bowen.\nBy the end of 1990, frustrated by the lack of any indication from Hawke as to when he might retire, Keating made a provocative speech to the Federal Parliamentary Press Gallery. Hawke considered the speech disloyal, and told Keating he would renege on the Kirribilli Agreement as a result. After attempting to force a resolution privately, Keating finally resigned from the Government in June 1991 to challenge Hawke for the leadership. Hawke won the leadership spill, and in a press conference after the result, Keating declared that he had fired his \"one shot\" on the leadership. Hawke appointed John Kerin to replace Keating as Treasurer.\nDespite his victory in the June spill, Hawke quickly began to be regarded by many of his colleagues as a \"wounded\" leader; he had now lost his long-term political partner, his rating in opinion polls were beginning to fall significantly, and after nearly nine years as Prime Minister, there was speculation that it would soon be time for a new leader. Hawke's leadership was ultimately irrevocably damaged at the end of 1991; after Liberal Leader John Hewson released 'Fightback!', a detailed proposal for sweeping economic change, including the introduction of a goods and services tax, Hawke was forced to sack Kerin as Treasurer after the latter made a public gaffe attempting to attack the policy. Keating duly challenged for the leadership a second time on 19 December, arguing that he would better placed to defeat Hewson; this time, Keating succeeded, narrowly defeating Hawke by 56 votes to 51.\nIn a speech to the House of Representatives following the vote, Hawke declared that his nine years as prime minister had left Australia a better and wealthier country, and he was given a standing ovation by those present. He subsequently tendered his resignation to the Governor-General and pledged support to his successor. Hawke briefly returned to the backbench, before resigning from Parliament on 20 February 1992, sparking a by-election which was won by the independent candidate Phil Cleary from among a record field of 22 candidates. Keating would go on to lead Labor to a fifth victory at the 1993 election, although he was defeated by the Liberal Party at the 1996 election.\nHawke wrote that he had very few regrets over his time in office, although stated he wished he had been able to advance the cause of Indigenous land rights further. His bitterness towards Keating over the leadership challenges surfaced in his earlier memoirs, although by the 2000s Hawke stated he and Keating had buried their differences, and that they regularly dined together and considered each other friends. The publication of the book \"Hawke: The Prime Minister\", by Hawke's second wife, Blanche d'Alpuget, in 2010, reignited conflict between the two, with Keating accusing Hawke and d'Alpuget of spreading falsehoods about his role in the Hawke government. Despite this, the two campaigned together for Labor several times, including at the 2019 election, where they released their first joint article for nearly three decades; Craig Emerson, who worked for both men, said they had reconciled in later years after Hawke grew ill.\nRetirement and later life.\nAfter leaving Parliament, Hawke entered the business world, taking on a number of directorships and consultancy positions which enabled him to achieve considerable financial success. He avoided public involvement with the Labor Party during Keating's tenure as Prime Minister, not wanting to be seen as attempting to overshadow his successor. After Keating's defeat and the election of the Howard government at the 1996 election, he returned to public campaigning with Labor and regularly appearing at election launches. Despite his personal affection for Queen Elizabeth II, boasting that he had been her \"favourite Prime Minister\", Hawke was an enthusiastic republican and joined the campaign for a Yes vote in the 1999 republic referendum.\nIn 2002, Hawke was named to South Australia's Economic Development Board during the Rann government. In the lead up to the 2007 election, Hawke made a considerable personal effort to support Kevin Rudd, making speeches at a large number of campaign office openings across Australia, and appearing in multiple campaign advertisements. As well as campaigning against WorkChoices, Hawke also attacked John Howard's record as Treasurer, stating \"it was the judgement of every economist and international financial institution that it was the restructuring reforms undertaken by my government, with the full cooperation of the trade union movement, which created the strength of the Australian economy today\". In February 2008, after Rudd's victory, Hawke joined former Prime Ministers Gough Whitlam, Malcolm Fraser and Paul Keating in Parliament House to witness the long anticipated apology to the Stolen Generations.\nIn 2009, Hawke helped establish the Centre for Muslim and Non-Muslim Understanding at the University of South Australia. Interfaith dialogue was an important issue for Hawke, who told the \"Adelaide Review\" that he was \"convinced that one of the great potential dangers confronting the world is the lack of understanding in regard to the Muslim world. Fanatics have misrepresented what Islam is. They give a false impression of the essential nature of Islam.\"\nIn 2016, after taking part in Andrew Denton's Better Off Dead podcast, Hawke added his voice to calls for voluntary euthanasia to be legalised. Hawke labelled as 'absurd' the lack of political will to fix the problem. He revealed that he had such an arrangement with his wife Blanche should such a devastating medical situation occur. He also publicly advocated for nuclear power and the importation of international spent nuclear fuel to Australia for storage and disposal, stating that this could lead to considerable economic benefits for Australia.\nIn late December 2018, Hawke revealed that he was in \"terrible health\". While predicting a Labor win in the upcoming 2019 federal election, Hawke said he \"may not witness the party's success\". In May 2019, the month of the election, he issued a joint statement with Paul Keating endorsing Labor's economic plan and condemning the Liberal Party for \"completely [giving] up the economic reform agenda\". They stated that \"Shorten's Labor is the only party of government focused on the need to modernise the economy to deal with the major challenge of our time: human induced climate change\". It was the first joint press statement released by the two since 1991.\nOn 16 May 2019, two days before the election, Hawke died at his home in Northbridge at the age of 89, following a short illness. His family held a private cremation on 27 May at Macquarie Park Cemetery and Crematorium where he was subsequently interred. A state memorial was held at the Sydney Opera House on 14 June; speakers included Craig Emerson as master of ceremonies and Kim Beazley reading the eulogy, as well as Paul Keating, Julia Gillard, Bill Kelty, Ross Garnaut, and incumbent Prime Minister Scott Morrison and Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese.\nPersonal life.\nHawke married Hazel Masterson in 1956 at Perth Trinity Church. They had three children: Susan (born 1957), Stephen (born 1959) and Roslyn (born 1960). Their fourth child, Robert Jr, died in early infancy in 1963. Hawke was named Victorian Father of the Year in 1971, an honour which his wife disputed due to his heavy drinking and womanising. The couple divorced in 1995, after he left her for the writer Blanche d'Alpuget, and the two lived together in Northbridge, a suburb of the North Shore of Sydney. The divorce estranged Hawke from some of his family for a period, although they had reconciled by the 2010s.\nThroughout his early life, Hawke was a heavy drinker, having set a world record for drinking during his years as a student. Hawke eventually suffered from alcohol poisoning following the death of his and Hazel's infant son in 1963. He publicly announced in 1980 that he would abstain from alcohol to seek election to Parliament, in a move which garnered significant public attention and support. Hawke began to drink again following his retirement from politics, although to a more manageable extent; on several occasions, in his later years, videos of Hawke downing beer at cricket matches would frequently go viral.\nOn the subject of religion, Hawke wrote, while attending the 1952 World Christian Youth Conference in India, that \"there were all these poverty stricken kids at the gate of this palatial place where we were feeding our face and I just (was) struck by this enormous sense of irrelevance of religion to the needs of people\". He subsequently abandoned his Christian beliefs. By the time he entered politics he was a self-described agnostic. Hawke told Andrew Denton in 2008 that his father's Christian faith had continued to influence his outlook, saying \"My father said if you believe in the fatherhood of God you must necessarily believe in the brotherhood of man, it follows necessarily, and even though I left the church and was not religious, that truth remained with me.\"\nHawke was a supporter of National Rugby League club the Canberra Raiders.\nLegacy.\nA biographical television film, \"Hawke\", premiered on the Ten Network in Australia on 18 July 2010, with Richard Roxburgh playing the title character. Rachael Blake and Felix Williamson portrayed Hazel Hawke and Paul Keating, respectively. Roxburgh reprised his role as Hawke in the 2020 episode \"Terra Nullius\" of the Netflix series \"The Crown\".\nIn July 2019, the Australian Government announced it would spend $750,000 to purchase and renovate the house in Bordertown where Hawke was born and spent his early childhood. In January 2021, the Tatiara District Council decided to turn the house into tourist accommodation.\nIn December 2020, the Western Australian Government announced that it had purchased Hawke's childhood home in West Leederville and would maintain it as a state asset. The property will also be assessed for entry onto the State Register of Heritage Places.\nThe Australian Government pledged $5 million in July 2019 to establish a new annual scholarship\u2014the Bob Hawke John Monash Scholarship\u2014through the General Sir John Monash Foundation. Bob Hawke College, a high school in Subiaco, Western Australia named after Hawke, was opened in February 2020.\nIn March 2020, the Australian Electoral Commission announced that it would create a new Australian electoral division in the House of Representatives named in honour of Hawke. The Division of Hawke was first contested at the 2022 federal election, and is located in the state of Victoria, near the seat of Wills, which Hawke represented from 1980 to 1992.\nHonours.\nOrders\nForeign honours\nAwards.\nFellowships\nHonorary degrees\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4060", "revid": "13756482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4060", "title": "Baldr", "text": "Norse deity\nBaldr (Old Norse: ]; also Balder, Baldur) is a god in Germanic mythology. In Norse mythology, he is a son of the god Odin and the goddess Frigg, and has numerous brothers, such as Thor and V\u00e1li. In wider Germanic mythology, the god was known in Old English as ', and in Old High German as ', all ultimately stemming from the Proto-Germanic theonym ('hero' or 'prince').\nDuring the 12th century, Danish accounts by Saxo Grammaticus and other Danish Latin chroniclers recorded a euhemerized account of his story. Compiled in Iceland during the 13th century, but based on older Old Norse poetry, the \"Poetic Edda\" and the \"Prose Edda\" contain numerous references to the death of Baldr as both a great tragedy to the \u00c6sir and a harbinger of Ragnar\u00f6k.\nAccording to \"Gylfaginning\", a book of Snorri Sturluson's Prose Edda, Baldr's wife is Nanna and their son is Forseti. Baldr had the greatest ship ever built, \"Hringhorni\", and there is no place more beautiful than his hall, Breidablik.\nName.\nThe Old Norse theonym \"Baldr\" ('brave, defiant'; also 'lord, prince') and its various Germanic cognates \u2013 including Old English \"B\u00e6ld\u00e6g\" and Old High German \"Balder\" (or \"Palter\") \u2013 probably stems from Proto-Germanic \"*Bal\u00f0raz\" ('Hero, Prince'; cf. Old Norse \"mann-baldr\" 'great man', Old English \"bealdor\" 'prince, hero'), itself a derivative of \"*bal\u00feaz\", meaning 'brave' (cf. Old Norse \"ballr\" 'hard, stubborn', Gothic \"bal\u00fea*\" 'bold, frank', Old English \"beald\" 'bold, brave, confident', Old Saxon \"bald\" 'valiant, bold', Old High German \"bald\" 'brave, courageous').\nThis etymology was originally proposed by Jacob Grimm (1835), who also speculated on a comparison with the Lithuanian \"b\u00e1ltas\" ('white', also the name of a light-god) based on the semantic development from 'white' to 'shining' then 'strong'. According to linguist Vladimir Orel, this could be linguistically tenable. Philologist Rudolf Simek also argues that the Old English \"B\u00e6ld\u00e6g\" should be interpreted as meaning 'shining day', from a Proto-Germanic root *\"b\u0113l\"- (cf. Old English \"b\u00e6l\", Old Norse \"b\u00e1l\" 'fire') attached to \"d\u00e6g\" ('day').\nOld Norse also shows the usage of the word as an honorific in a few cases, as in \"baldur \u00ee brynju\" (S\u00e6m. 272b) and \"herbaldr\" (S\u00e6m. 218b), in general epithets of heroes. In continental Saxon and Anglo-Saxon tradition, the son of Woden is called not \"Bealdor\" but \"Baldag\" (Saxon) and \"B\u00e6ld\u00e6g, Beldeg\" (Anglo-Saxon), which shows association with \"day\", possibly with Day personified as a deity. This, as Grimm points out, would agree with the meaning \"shining one, white one, a god\" derived from the meaning of Baltic \"baltas\", further adducing Slavic \"Belobog\" and German \"Berhta\".\nAttestations.\nMerseburg Incantation.\nOne of the two Merseburg Incantations names \"Baldere\", but also mentions a figure named \"Phol\", considered to be a byname for Baldr (as in Scandinavian \"Falr\", \"Fjalarr\"; (in Saxo) \"Balderus\" : \"Fjallerus\"). The incantation relates of \"Phol ende Wotan\" riding to the woods, where the foot of Baldr's foal is sprained. Sinthgunt (the sister of the sun), Freyja and Odin sing to the foot in order for it to heal.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nUnlike the Prose Edda, in the Poetic Edda the tale of Baldr's death is referred to rather than recounted at length. Baldr is mentioned in \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", in \"Lokasenna\", and is the subject of the Eddic poem \"Baldr's Dreams\".\nAmong the visions which the V\u00f6lva sees and describes in V\u00f6lusp\u00e1 is Baldr's death. In stanza 32, the V\u00f6lva says she saw the fate of Baldr \"the bleeding god\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the next two stanzas, the V\u00f6lva refers to Baldr's killing, describes the birth of V\u00e1li for the slaying of H\u00f6\u00f0r and the weeping of Frigg:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;so slender and fair\nCame a harmful shaft\nIn stanza 62 of V\u00f6lusp\u00e1, looking far into the future, the V\u00f6lva says that H\u00f6\u00f0r and Baldr will come back, with the union, according to Bellows, being a symbol of the new age of peace:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;bear ripened fruit,\nAll ills grow better,\nBaldr is mentioned in two stanzas of Lokasenna, a poem which describes a flyting between the gods and the god Loki. In the first of the two stanzas, Frigg, Baldr's mother, tells Loki that if she had a son like Baldr, Loki would be killed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the next stanza, Loki responds to Frigg, and says that he is the reason Baldr \"will never ride home again\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Eddic poem \"Baldr's Dreams\" opens with the gods holding a council discussing why Baldr had had bad dreams:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;together met,\nAnd the goddesses came\nOdin then rides to Hel to a V\u00f6lva's grave and awakens her using magic. The V\u00f6lva asks Odin, who she does not recognize, who he is, and Odin answers that he is Vegtam (\"Wanderer\"). Odin asks the V\u00f6lva for whom are the benches covered in rings and the floor covered in gold. The V\u00f6lva tells him that in their location mead is brewed for Baldr, and that she spoke unwillingly, so she will speak no more:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the mead is brewed,\nThe shining drink,\nOdin asks the V\u00f6lva to not be silent and asks her who will kill Baldr. The V\u00f6lva replies and says that H\u00f6\u00f0r will kill Baldr, and again says that she spoke unwillingly, and that she will speak no more:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the far-famed branch,\nHe shall the bane\nOdin again asks the V\u00f6lva to not be silent and asks her who will avenge Baldr's death. The V\u00f6lva replies that V\u00e1li will, when he will be one night old. Once again, she says that she will speak no more:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;in Vestrsalir,\nAnd one night old\nOdin again asks the V\u00f6lva to not be silent and says that he seeks to know who the women that will then weep be. The V\u00f6lva realizes that Vegtam is Odin in disguise. Odin says that the V\u00f6lva is not a V\u00f6lva, and that she is the mother of three giants. The V\u00f6lva tells Odin to ride back home proud, because she will speak to no more men until Loki escapes his bounds.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nIn \"Gylfaginning\", Baldur is described as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nApart from this description, Baldr is known primarily for the story of his death, which is seen as the first in a chain of events that will ultimately lead to the destruction of the gods at Ragnar\u00f6k. According to \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", Baldr will be reborn in the new world.\nHe had a dream of his own death and his mother had the same dream. Since dreams were usually prophetic, this depressed him, so his mother Frigg made every object on earth vow never to hurt Baldr. All objects made this vow except mistletoe\u2014a detail which has traditionally been explained with the idea that it was too unimportant and nonthreatening to bother asking it to make the vow, but which Merrill Kaplan has instead argued echoes the fact that young people were not eligible to swear legal oaths, which could make them a threat later in life.\nWhen Loki, the mischief-maker, heard of this, he made a magical spear from this plant (in some later versions, an arrow). He hurried to the place where the gods were indulging in their new pastime of hurling objects at Baldr, which would bounce off without harming him. Loki gave the spear to Baldr's brother, the blind god H\u00f6\u00f0r, who then inadvertently killed his brother with it (other versions suggest that Loki guided the arrow himself). For this act, Odin and the asynja Rindr gave birth to V\u00e1li, who grew to adulthood within a day and slew H\u00f6\u00f0r.\nBaldr was ceremonially burnt upon his ship, Hringhorni, the largest of all ships. As he was carried to the ship, Odin whispered in his ear. This was to be a key riddle asked by Odin (in disguise) of the giant Vafthrudnir (and which was unanswerable) in the poem \"Vafthrudnismal\". The riddle also appears in the riddles of Gestumblindi in \"Hervarar saga\".\nThe dwarf Litr was kicked by Thor into the funeral fire and burnt alive. Nanna, Baldr's wife, also threw herself on the funeral fire to await Ragnar\u00f6k when she would be reunited with her husband (alternatively, she died of grief). Baldr's horse with all its trappings was also burned on the pyre. The ship was set to sea by Hyrrokin, a giantess, who came riding on a wolf and gave the ship such a push that fire flashed from the rollers and all the earth shook.\nUpon Frigg's entreaties, delivered through the messenger Hermod, Hel promised to release Baldr from the underworld if all objects alive and dead would weep for him. All did, except a giantess, \u00de\u00f6kk (often presumed to be the god Loki in disguise), who refused to mourn the slain god. Thus Baldr had to remain in the underworld, not to emerge until after Ragnar\u00f6k, when he and his brother H\u00f6\u00f0r would be reconciled and rule the new earth together with Thor's sons.\nBesides descriptions of Baldr, the Prose Edda also explicitly links \"Baldr\" to the Anglo-Saxon \"Beldeg\" in its prologue.\n\"Gesta Danorum\".\nWriting during the end of the 12th century, the Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus tells the story of Baldr (recorded as \"Balderus\") in a form that professes to be historical. According to him, Balderus and H\u00f8therus were rival suitors for the hand of Nanna, daughter of Gewar, King of Norway. Balderus was a demigod and common steel could not wound his sacred body. The two rivals encountered each other in a terrific battle. Though Odin and Thor and the other gods fought for Balderus, he was defeated and fled away, and H\u00f8therus married the princess.\nNevertheless, Balderus took heart of grace and again met H\u00f8therus in a stricken field. But he fared even worse than before. H\u00f8therus dealt him a deadly wound with a magic sword, named Mistletoe, which he had received from Mimir, the satyr of the woods; after lingering three days in pain Balderus died of his injury and was buried with royal honours in a barrow.\n\"Chronicon Lethrense\" and \"Annales Lundenses\".\nThere are also two lesser known Danish Latin chronicles, the and the \"Annales Lundenses\" of which the latter is included in the former. These two sources provide a second euhemerized account of H\u00f6\u00f0r's slaying of Baldr.\nIt relates that Hother was the king of the Saxons and son of Hothbrodd and Hadding. Hother first slew Othen's (i.e. Odin) son Balder in battle and then chased Othen and Thor. Finally, Othen's son Both killed Hother. Hother, Balder, Othen and Thor were incorrectly considered to be gods.\nUtrecht Inscription.\nA Latin votive inscription from Utrecht, from the 3rd or 4th century C.E., has been theorized as containing the dative form \"Baldruo\", pointing to a Latin nominative singular *\"Baldruus\", which some have identified with the Norse/Germanic god, although both the reading and this interpretation have been questioned.\n\"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\".\nIn the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle Baldr is named as the ancestor of the monarchy of Kent, Bernicia, Deira, and Wessex through his supposed son Brond.\nToponyms.\nThere are a few old place names in Scandinavia that contain the name \"Baldr\". The most certain and notable one is the (former) parish name Balleshol in Hedmark county, Norway: \"a Balldrshole\" 1356 (where the last element is \"h\u00f3ll\" m \"mound; small hill\"). Others may be (in Norse forms) \"Baldrsberg\" in Vestfold county, \"Baldrsheimr\" in Hordaland county \"Baldrsnes\" in S\u00f8r-Tr\u00f8ndelag county\u2014and (very uncertain) the Balsfjorden fjord and Balsfjord municipality in Troms county.\nIn Copenhagen, there is also a Baldersgade, or \"Balder's Street\". A street in downtown Reykjav\u00edk is called Baldursgata (Baldur's Street).\nIn Sweden there is a Baldersgatan (Balder's Street) in Stockholm. There is also Baldersn\u00e4s (Balder's isthmus), Baldersvik (Balder's bay), Balders udde (Balder's headland) and Baldersberg (Balder's mountain) at various places.\nIn popular culture.\nBalder the Brave is a fictional character based on Baldr. He has appeared in comic books published by Marvel Comics as the half-brother of Thor, and son of Odin, ruler of the gods. \nBaldr is featured in a number of video games. In Ensemble Studios' 2002 video game \"Age of Mythology\" Baldr is one of nine minor gods Norse players can worship. Baldr (spelled Baldur in-game) is also the main antagonist in Santa Monica Studio's 2018 video game \"God of War\". However, he differs greatly in the game from the Baldr depicted in Norse writings and traditional artistic depictions as he is much more aggressive, crude, and rugged in appearance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4061", "revid": "202394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4061", "title": "Breidablik", "text": "&lt;noinclude&gt;Home of Baldr in Nordic mythology\nBrei\u00f0ablik (sometimes anglicised as Breithablik or Breidablik) is the home of Baldr in Nordic mythology.\nMeaning.\nThe word has been variously translated as 'broad sheen', 'Broad gleam', 'Broad-gleaming' or 'the far-shining one', \nAttestations.\nGr\u00edmism\u00e1l.\nThe Eddic poem Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l describes Brei\u00f0ablik as the fair home of Baldr:\nGylfaginning.\nIn Snorri Sturluson's Gylfaginning, Brei\u00f0ablik is described in a list of places in heaven, identified by some scholars as Asgard:\nLater in the work, when Snorri describes Baldr, he gives another description, citing \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", though he does not name the poem:\nInterpretation and discussion.\nThe name of Brei\u00f0ablik has been noted to link with Baldr's attributes of light and beauty.\nSimilarities have been drawn between the description of Brei\u00f0ablik in Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l and Heorot in Beowulf, which are both free of 'baleful runes' ( and Old English: respectively). In Beowulf, the lack of refers to the absence of crimes being committed, and therefore both halls have been proposed to be sanctuaries.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4062", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4062", "title": "Bilskirnir", "text": "Mythological location\nBilskirnir (Old Norse \"lightning-crack\") is the hall of the god Thor in Norse mythology. Here he lives with his wife Sif and their children. According to \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", the hall is the greatest of buildings and contains 540 rooms, located in Asgard, as are all the dwellings of the gods, in the kingdom of \u00der\u00fa\u00f0heimr (or \u00der\u00fa\u00f0vangar according to \"Gylfaginning\" and \"Ynglinga saga\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4063", "revid": "13127810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4063", "title": "Br\u00edsingamen", "text": "Torc or necklace in Norse mythology\nIn Norse mythology, Br\u00edsingamen (or Br\u00edsinga men) is the torc or necklace of the goddess Freyja. The name is an Old Norse compound \"br\u00edsinga-men\" whose second element is \"men\" \"(ornamental) neck-ring (of precious metal), torc\". The etymology of the first element is uncertain. It has been derived from Old Norse \"br\u00edsingr\", a poetic term for \"fire\" or \"amber\" mentioned in the anonymous versified word-lists (\"\u00feulur\") appended to many manuscripts of the Prose Edda, making Br\u00edsingamen \"gleaming torc\", \"sunny torc\", or the like. However, \"Br\u00edsingr\" can also be an ethnonym, in which case \"Br\u00edsinga men\" is \"torque of the Br\u00edsings\"; the Old English parallel in \"Beowulf\" supports this derivation, though who the Br\u00edsings (Old Norse \"Br\u00edsingar\") may have been remains unknown.\nAttestations.\n\"Beowulf\".\nBr\u00edsingamen is referred to in the Anglo-Saxon epic \"Beowulf\" as \"Brosinga mene\". The brief mention in \"Beowulf\" is as follows (trans. by Howell Chickering, 1977):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \"Beowulf\" poet is clearly referring to the legends about Theoderic the Great. The \"\u00dei\u00f0rekssaga\" tells that the warrior Heime (\"H\u00e1ma\" in Old English) takes sides against Ermanaric (\"Eormanric\"), king of the Goths, and has to flee his kingdom after robbing him; later in life, Hama enters a monastery and gives them all his stolen treasure. However, this saga makes no mention of the great necklace.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn the poem \"\u00derymskvi\u00f0a\" of the \"Poetic Edda\", \u00derymr, the king of the j\u01ebtnar, steals Thor's hammer, Mj\u00f6lnir. Freyja lends Loki her falcon cloak to search for it; but upon returning, Loki tells Freyja that \u00derymr has hidden the hammer and demanded to marry her in return. Freyja is so wrathful that all the \u00c6sir\u2019s halls beneath her are shaken and the necklace Br\u00edsingamen breaks off from her neck. Later Thor borrows Br\u00edsingamen when he dresses up as Freyja to go to the wedding at J\u01ebtunheimr.\n\"Prose Edda\".\n\"H\u00fasdr\u00e1pa\", a skaldic poem partially preserved in the \"Prose Edda\", relates the story of the theft of Br\u00edsingamen by Loki. One day when Freyja wakes up and finds Br\u00edsingamen missing, she enlists the help of Heimdallr to help her search for it. Eventually they find the thief, who turns out to be Loki who has transformed himself into a seal. Heimdallr turns into a seal as well and fights Loki. After a lengthy battle at Singasteinn, Heimdallr wins and returns Br\u00edsingamen to Freyja.\nSnorri Sturluson quoted this old poem in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", saying that because of this legend Heimdallr is called \"Seeker of Freyja's Necklace\" (\"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", section 8) and Loki is called \"Thief of Br\u00edsingamen\" (\"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", section 16). A similar story appears in the later \"S\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr\", where Heimdallr does not appear.\n\"S\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr\".\nS\u00f6rla \u00fe\u00e1ttr is a short story in the later and extended version of the \"Saga of Olaf Tryggvason\" in the manuscript of the \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\", which was written and compiled by two Christian priests, Jon Thordson and Magnus Thorhalson, in the late 14th century. In the end of the story, the arrival of Christianity dissolves the old curse that traditionally was to endure until Ragnar\u00f6k.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Freyja was a human in Asia and was the favorite concubine of Odin, King of Asialand. When this woman wanted to buy a golden necklace (no name given) forged by four dwarves (named Dvalinn, Alfrik, Berlingr, and Grer), she offered them gold and silver but they replied that they would only sell it to her if she would lie a night by each of them. She came home afterward with the necklace and kept silent as if nothing happened. But a man called Loki somehow knew it, and came to tell Odin. King Odin commanded Loki to steal the necklace, so Loki turned into a fly to sneak into Freyja's bower and stole it. When Freyja found her necklace missing, she came to ask king Odin. In exchange for it, Odin ordered her to make two kings, each served by twenty kings, fight forever unless some christened men so brave would dare to enter the battle and slay them. She said yes, and got that necklace back. Under the spell, king H\u00f6gni and king He\u00f0inn battled for one hundred and forty-three years, as soon as they fell down they had to stand up again and fight on. But in the end, the Christian lord Olaf Tryggvason, who has a great fate and luck, arrived with his christened men, and whoever slain by a Christian would stay dead. Thus the pagan curse was finally dissolved by the arrival of Christianity. After that, the noble man, king Olaf, went back to his realm.\nThe battle of H\u00f6gni and He\u00f0inn is recorded in several medieval sources, including the skaldic poem \"Ragnarsdr\u00e1pa\", \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" (section 49), and \"Gesta Danorum\": king H\u00f6gni's daughter, Hildr, is kidnapped by king He\u00f0inn. When H\u00f6gni comes to fight He\u00f0inn on an island, Hildr comes to offer her father a necklace on behalf of He\u00f0inn for peace; but the two kings still battle, and Hildr resurrects the fallen to make them fight until Ragnar\u00f6k. None of these earlier sources mentions Freyja or king Olaf Tryggvason, the historical figure who Christianized Norway and Iceland in the 10th Century.\nArchaeological record.\nA V\u00f6lva was buried c.\u20091000 with considerable splendour in Hagebyh\u00f6ga in \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland, Sweden. In addition to being buried with her wand, she had received great riches which included horses, a wagon and an Arabian bronze pitcher. There was also a silver pendant, which represents a woman with a broad necklace around her neck. This kind of necklace was only worn by the most prominent women during the Iron Age and some have interpreted it as Freyja's necklace Br\u00edsingamen. The pendant may represent Freyja herself.\nModern influence.\nAlan Garner wrote a children's fantasy novel called \"The Weirdstone of Brisingamen\", published in 1960, about an enchanted teardrop bracelet.\nDiana Paxson's novel \"Brisingamen\" features Freyja and her bracelet.\nBlack Phoenix Alchemy Lab has a perfumed oil scent named Brisingamen.\nFreyja's necklace Brisingamen features prominently in Betsy Tobin's novel \"Iceland\", where the necklace is seen to have significant protective powers.\nThe Brisingamen feature as a major item in Joel Rosenberg's Keepers of the Hidden Ways series of books. In it, there are seven jewels that were created for the necklace by the Dwarfs and given to the Norse goddess. She in turn eventually split them up into the seven separate jewels and hid them throughout the realm, as together they hold the power to shape the universe by its holder. The book's plot is about discovering one of them and deciding what to do with the power they allow while avoiding Loki and other Norse characters.\nIn Christopher Paolini's \"Inheritance Cycle\", the word \"brisingr\" means fire. This is probably a distillation of the word \"brisinga\".\nUrsula Le Guin's short story \"Semley's Necklace\", the first part of her novel \"Rocannon's World\", is a retelling of the Brisingamen story on an alien planet.\nBrisingamen is represented as a card in the \"Yu-Gi-Oh!\" Trading Card Game, \"Nordic Relic Brisingamen\".\nBrisingamen was part of MMORPG \"Ragnarok Online\" lore, which is ranked as \"God item\". The game is heavily based from Norse mythology.\nIn the \"Firefly Online\" game, one of the planets of the Himinbj\u00f6rg system (which features planets named after figures from Germanic mythology) is named Brisingamen. It is third from the star, and has moons named Freya, Beowulf, and Alberich.\nThe Brisingamen is an item that can be found and equipped in the video game, \"\".\nIn the French comics \"Freaks' Squeele\", the character of Valkyrie accesses her costume change ability by touching a decorative torque necklace affixed to her forehead, named Brizingamen.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4064", "revid": "1157552646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4064", "title": "Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem", "text": "Theorem in topology\nIn mathematics, the Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem states that every continuous function from an \"n\"-sphere into Euclidean \"n\"-space maps some pair of antipodal points to the same point. Here, two points on a sphere are called antipodal if they are in exactly opposite directions from the sphere's center.\nFormally: if formula_1 is continuous then there exists an formula_2 such that: formula_3.\nThe case formula_4 can be illustrated by saying that there always exist a pair of opposite points on the Earth's equator with the same temperature. The same is true for any circle. This assumes the temperature varies continuously in space.\nThe case formula_5 is often illustrated by saying that at any moment, there is always a pair of antipodal points on the Earth's surface with equal temperatures and equal barometric pressures, assuming that both parameters vary continuously in space.\nThe Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem has several equivalent statements in terms of odd functions. Recall that formula_6 is the \"n\"-sphere and formula_7 is the \"n\"-ball:\nHistory.\nAccording to , the first historical mention of the statement of the Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem appears in . The first proof was given by Karol Borsuk\u00a0(1933), where the formulation of the problem was attributed to Stanislaw Ulam. Since then, many alternative proofs have been found by various authors, as collected by .\nEquivalent statements.\nThe following statements are equivalent to the Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem.\nWith odd functions.\nA function formula_16 is called \"odd\" (aka \"antipodal\" or \"antipode-preserving\") if for every formula_17: formula_18.\nThe Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem is equivalent to the following statement: A continuous odd function from an \"n\"-sphere into Euclidean \"n\"-space has a zero. PROOF: \nWith retractions.\nDefine a \"retraction\" as a function formula_25 The Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem is equivalent to the following claim: there is no continuous odd retraction.\nProof: If the theorem is correct, then every continuous odd function from formula_6 must include 0 in its range. However, formula_27 so there cannot be a continuous odd function whose range is formula_12.\nConversely, if it is incorrect, then there is a continuous odd function formula_29 with no zeroes. Then we can construct another odd function formula_30 by:\nformula_31\nsince formula_16 has no zeroes, formula_33 is well-defined and continuous. Thus we have a continuous odd retraction.\nProofs.\n1-dimensional case.\nThe 1-dimensional case can easily be proved using the intermediate value theorem (IVT).\nLet formula_16 be the odd real-valued continuous function on a circle defined by formula_22. Pick an arbitrary formula_17. If formula_10 then we are done. Otherwise, without loss of generality, formula_38 But formula_39 Hence, by the IVT, there is a point formula_40 between formula_17 and formula_42 at which formula_43.\nGeneral case.\nAlgebraic topological proof.\nAssume that formula_30 is an odd continuous function with formula_45 (the case formula_46 is treated above, the case formula_47 can be handled using basic covering theory). By passing to orbits under the antipodal action, we then get an induced continuous function formula_48 between real projective spaces, which induces an isomorphism on fundamental groups. By the Hurewicz theorem, the induced ring homomorphism on cohomology with formula_49 coefficients [where formula_49 denotes the field with two elements], \nformula_51\nsends formula_52 to formula_53. But then we get that formula_54 is sent to formula_55, a contradiction.\nOne can also show the stronger statement that any odd map formula_56 has odd degree and then deduce the theorem from this result.\nCombinatorial proof.\nThe Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem can be proved from Tucker's lemma.\nLet formula_8 be a continuous odd function. Because \"g\" is continuous on a compact domain, it is uniformly continuous. Therefore, for every formula_58, there is a formula_59 such that, for every two points of formula_60 which are within formula_61 of each other, their images under \"g\" are within formula_62 of each other.\nDefine a triangulation of formula_60 with edges of length at most formula_61. Label each vertex formula_65 of the triangulation with a label formula_66 in the following way:\nBecause \"g\" is odd, the labeling is also odd: formula_69. Hence, by Tucker's lemma, there are two adjacent vertices formula_70 with opposite labels. Assume w.l.o.g. that the labels are formula_71. By the definition of \"l\", this means that in both formula_72 and formula_73, coordinate #1 is the largest coordinate: in formula_72 this coordinate is positive while in formula_73 it is negative. By the construction of the triangulation, the distance between formula_72 and formula_73 is at most formula_62, so in particular formula_79 (since formula_80 and formula_81 have opposite signs) and so formula_82. But since the largest coordinate of formula_72 is coordinate #1, this means that formula_84 for each formula_85. So formula_86, where formula_87 is some constant depending on formula_88 and the norm formula_89 which you have chosen.\nThe above is true for every formula_58; since formula_60 is compact there must hence be a point \"u\" in which formula_92.\nEquivalent results.\nAbove we showed how to prove the Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem from Tucker's lemma. The converse is also true: it is possible to prove Tucker's lemma from the Borsuk\u2013Ulam theorem. Therefore, these two theorems are equivalent.\nThere are several fixed-point theorems which come in three equivalent variants: an algebraic topology variant, a combinatorial variant and a set-covering variant. Each variant can be proved separately using totally different arguments, but each variant can also be reduced to the other variants in its row. Additionally, each result in \nthe top row can be deduced from the one below it in the same column.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4067", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4067", "title": "Bragi", "text": "Skaldic god of poetry in Norse mythology\nBragi (; Old Norse: ]) is the skaldic god of poetry in Norse mythology.\nEtymology.\nThe theonym Bragi probably stems from the masculine noun \"bragr\", which can be translated in Old Norse as 'poetry' (cf. Icelandic \"bragur\" 'poem, melody, wise') or as 'the first, noblest' (cf. poetic Old Norse \"bragnar\" 'chiefs, men', \"bragningr\" 'king'). It is unclear whether the theonym semantically derives from the first meaning or the second.\nA connection has been also suggested with the Old Norse \"bragarfull\", the cup drunk in solemn occasions with the taking of vows. The word is usually taken to semantically derive from the second meaning of \"bragr\" ('first one, noblest'). A relation with the Old English term \"brego\" ('lord, prince') remains uncertain.\n\"Bragi\" regularly appears as a personal name in Old Norse and Old Swedish sources, which according to linguist Jan de Vries might indicate the secondary character of the god's name.\nAttestations.\nSnorri Sturluson writes in the \"Gylfaginning\" after describing Odin, Thor, and Baldr:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One is called Bragi: he is renowned for wisdom, and most of all for fluency of speech and skill with words. He knows most of skaldship, and after him skaldship is called \"bragr\", and from his name that one is called \"bragr\"-man or -woman, who possesses eloquence surpassing others, of women or of men. His wife is I\u00f0unn.\nIn \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" Snorri writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How should one periphrase Bragi? By calling him \"husband of I\u00f0unn\", \"first maker of poetry\", and \"the long-bearded god\" (after his name, a man who has a great beard is called Beard-Bragi), and \"son of Odin\".\nThat Bragi is Odin's son is clearly mentioned only here and in some versions of a list of the sons of Odin (see Sons of Odin). But \"wish-son\" in stanza 16 of the \"Lokasenna\" could mean \"Odin's son\" and is translated by Hollander as \"Odin's kin\". Bragi's mother is possibly the giantess Gunnlod. If Bragi's mother is Frigg, then Frigg is somewhat dismissive of Bragi in the \"Lokasenna\" in stanza 27 when Frigg complains that if she had a son in \u00c6gir's hall as brave as Baldr then Loki would have to fight for his life.\nIn that poem Bragi at first forbids Loki to enter the hall but is overruled by Odin. Loki then gives a greeting to all gods and goddesses who are in the hall save to Bragi. Bragi generously offers his sword, horse, and an arm ring as peace gift but Loki only responds by accusing Bragi of cowardice, of being the most afraid to fight of any of the \u00c6sir and Elves within the hall. Bragi responds that if they were outside the hall, he would have Loki's head, but Loki only repeats the accusation. When Bragi's wife I\u00f0unn attempts to calm Bragi, Loki accuses her of embracing her brother's slayer, a reference to matters that have not survived. It may be that Bragi had slain I\u00f0unn's brother.\nA passage in the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"Sigrdr\u00edfum\u00e1l\" describes runes being graven on the sun, on the ear of one of the sun-horses and on the hoofs of the other, on Sleipnir's teeth, on bear's paw, on eagle's beak, on wolf's claw, and on several other things including on Bragi's tongue. Then the runes are shaved off and the shavings are mixed with mead and sent abroad so that \u00c6sir have some, Elves have some, Vanir have some, and Men have some, these being speech runes and birth runes, ale runes, and magic runes. The meaning of this is obscure.\nThe first part of Snorri Sturluson's \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" is a dialogue between \u00c6gir and Bragi about the nature of poetry, particularly skaldic poetry. Bragi tells the origin of the mead of poetry from the blood of Kvasir and how Odin obtained this mead. He then goes on to discuss various poetic metaphors known as \"kennings\".\nSnorri Sturluson clearly distinguishes the god Bragi from the mortal skald Bragi Boddason, whom he often mentions separately. The appearance of Bragi in the \"Lokasenna\" indicates that if these two Bragis were originally the same, they have become separated for that author also, or that chronology has become very muddled and Bragi Boddason has been relocated to mythological time. Compare the appearance of the Welsh Taliesin in the second branch of the Mabinogi. Legendary chronology sometimes does become muddled. Whether Bragi the god originally arose as a deified version of Bragi Boddason was much debated in the 19th century, especially by the scholars Eugen Mogk and Sophus Bugge. The debate remains undecided.\nIn the poem \"Eir\u00edksm\u00e1l\" Odin, in Valhalla, hears the coming of the dead Norwegian king Eric Bloodaxe and his host, and bids the heroes Sigmund and Sinfj\u00f6tli rise to greet him. Bragi is then mentioned, questioning how Odin knows that it is Eric and why Odin has let such a king die. In the poem \"H\u00e1konarm\u00e1l\", H\u00e1kon the Good is taken to Valhalla by the valkyrie G\u00f6ndul and Odin sends Herm\u00f3\u00f0r and Bragi to greet him. In these poems Bragi could be either a god or a dead hero in Valhalla. Attempting to decide is further confused because \"Herm\u00f3\u00f0r\" also seems to be sometimes the name of a god and sometimes the name of a hero. That Bragi was also the first to speak to Loki in the \"Lokasenna\" as Loki attempted to enter the hall might be a parallel. It might have been useful and customary that a man of great eloquence and versed in poetry should greet those entering a hall. He is also depicted in tenth-century court poetry of helping to prepare Valhalla for new arrivals and welcoming the kings who have been slain in battle to the hall of Odin.\nSkalds named Bragi.\nBragi Boddason.\nIn the \"Prose Edda\" Snorri Sturluson quotes many stanzas attributed to Bragi Boddason the old (\"Bragi Boddason inn gamli\"), a Norwegian court poet who served several Swedish kings, Ragnar Lodbrok, \u00d6sten Beli and Bj\u00f6rn at Hauge who reigned in the first half of the 9th century. This Bragi was reckoned as the first skaldic poet, and was certainly the earliest skaldic poet then remembered by name whose verse survived in memory.\nSnorri especially quotes passages from Bragi's \"Ragnarsdr\u00e1pa\", a poem supposedly composed in honor of the famous legendary Viking Ragnar Lodbrok ('Hairy-breeches') describing the images on a decorated shield which Ragnar had given to Bragi. The images included Thor's fishing for J\u00f6rmungandr, Gefjun's ploughing of Zealand from the soil of Sweden, the attack of Hamdir and Sorli against King J\u00f6rmunrekk, and the never-ending battle between Hedin and H\u00f6gni.\nBragi son of H\u00e1lfdan the Old.\nBragi son of H\u00e1lfdan the Old is mentioned only in the \"Skj\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\". This Bragi is the sixth of the second of two groups of nine sons fathered by King H\u00e1lfdan the Old on Alvig the Wise, daughter of King Eymund of H\u00f3lmgard. This second group of sons are all eponymous ancestors of legendary families of the north. Snorri says:\nBragi, from whom the Bragnings are sprung (that is the race of H\u00e1lfdan the Generous).\nOf the Bragnings as a race and of H\u00e1lfdan the Generous nothing else is known. However, \"Bragning\" is often, like some others of these dynastic names, used in poetry as a general word for 'king' or 'ruler'.\nBragi H\u00f6gnason.\nIn the eddic poem \"Helgakvi\u00f0a Hundingsbana II\", Bragi H\u00f6gnason, his brother Dag, and his sister Sigr\u00fan were children of H\u00f6gne, the king of East G\u00f6taland. The poem relates how Sigmund's son Helgi Hundingsbane agreed to take Sigr\u00fan daughter of H\u00f6gni as his wife against her unwilling betrothal to Hodbrodd son of Granmar the king of S\u00f6dermanland. In the subsequent battle of Frekastein (probably one of the 300 hill forts of S\u00f6dermanland, as \"stein\" meant \"hill fort\") against H\u00f6gni and Granmar, all the chieftains on Granmar's side are slain, including Bragi, except for Bragi's brother Dag.\nIn popular culture.\nBragi is featured in the digital card game Mythgard (2019) as a mythic minion in the Norden faction, whose full name is Bragi Runesinger.\nBragi is portrayed by Dean O'Gorman in the New Zealand comedy The Almighty Johnsons.\nIn the 2002 Ensemble Studios game \"Age of Mythology\", Bragi is one of nine minor gods Norse players can worship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4068", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4068", "title": "Blaise Pascal", "text": "French mathematician, physicist, inventor, writer, and Christian philosopher (1623\u20131662)\nBlaise Pascal ( , , ; ]; 19 June 1623 \u2013 19 August 1662) was a French mathematician, physicist, inventor, philosopher, and Catholic writer.\nPascal was a child prodigy who was educated by his father, a tax collector in Rouen. His earliest mathematical work was on conic sections; he wrote a significant treatise on the subject of projective geometry at the age of 16. He later corresponded with Pierre de Fermat on probability theory, strongly influencing the development of modern economics and social science. In 1642, while still a teenager, he started some pioneering work on calculating machines (called Pascal's calculators and later Pascalines), establishing him as one of the first two inventors of the mechanical calculator.\nLike his contemporary Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Pascal was also a pioneer in the natural and applied sciences. Pascal wrote in defense of the scientific method and produced several controversial results. He made important contributions to the study of fluids, and clarified the concepts of pressure and vacuum by generalising the work of Evangelista Torricelli. Following Torricelli and Galileo Galilei, he rebutted the likes of Aristotle and Descartes who insisted that nature abhors a vacuum in 1647.\nIn 1646, he and his sister Jacqueline identified with the religious movement within Catholicism known by its detractors as Jansenism. Following a religious experience in late 1654, he began writing influential works on philosophy and theology. His two most famous works date from this period: the \"Lettres provinciales\" and the \"Pens\u00e9es\", the former set in the conflict between Jansenists and Jesuits. The latter contains Pascal's wager, known in the original as the \"Discourse on the Machine\", a fideistic probabilistic argument for God's existence. In that year, he also wrote an important treatise on the arithmetical triangle. Between 1658 and 1659, he wrote on the cycloid and its use in calculating the volume of solids.\nThroughout his life, Pascal was in frail health, especially after the age of 18; he died just two months after his 39th birthday.\nLife.\nEarly life and education.\nPascal was born in Clermont-Ferrand, which is in France's Auvergne region, by the Massif Central. He lost his mother, Antoinette Begon, at the age of three. His father, \u00c9tienne Pascal (1588\u20131651), who also had an interest in science and mathematics, was a local judge and member of the \"Noblesse de Robe\". Pascal had two sisters, the younger Jacqueline and the elder Gilberte.\nIn 1631, five years after the death of his wife, \u00c9tienne Pascal moved with his children to Paris. The newly arrived family soon hired Louise Delfault, a maid who eventually became a key member of the family. \u00c9tienne, who never remarried, decided that he alone would educate his children, for they all showed extraordinary intellectual ability, particularly his son Blaise. The young Pascal showed an amazing aptitude for mathematics and science.\n\"Essay on Conics\".\nParticularly of interest to Pascal was a work of Desargues on conic sections. Following Desargues' thinking, the 16-year-old Pascal produced, as a means of proof, a short treatise on what was called the \"Mystic Hexagram\", \"Essai pour les coniques\" (\"Essay on Conics\") and sent it\u2014his first serious work of mathematics\u2014to P\u00e8re Mersenne in Paris; it is known still today as Pascal's theorem. It states that if a hexagon is inscribed in a circle (or conic) then the three intersection points of opposite sides lie on a line (called the Pascal line).\nPascal's work was so precocious that Ren\u00e9 Descartes was convinced that Pascal's father had written it. When assured by Mersenne that it was, indeed, the product of the son and not the father, Descartes dismissed it with a sniff: \"I do not find it strange that he has offered demonstrations about conics more appropriate than those of the ancients,\" adding, \"but other matters related to this subject can be proposed that would scarcely occur to a 16-year-old child.\"\nLeaving Paris.\nIn France at that time offices and positions could be\u2014and were\u2014bought and sold. In 1631, \u00c9tienne sold his position as second president of the \"Cour des Aides\" for 65,665 livres. The money was invested in a government bond which provided, if not a lavish, then certainly a comfortable income which allowed the Pascal family to move to, and enjoy, Paris. But in 1638 Richelieu, desperate for money to carry on the Thirty Years' War, defaulted on the government's bonds. Suddenly \u00c9tienne Pascal's worth had dropped from nearly 66,000 livres to less than 7,300.\nLike so many others, \u00c9tienne was eventually forced to flee Paris because of his opposition to the fiscal policies of Cardinal Richelieu, leaving his three children in the care of his neighbour Madame Sainctot, a great beauty with an infamous past who kept one of the most glittering and intellectual salons in all France. It was only when Jacqueline performed well in a children's play with Richelieu in attendance that \u00c9tienne was pardoned. In time, \u00c9tienne was back in good graces with the Cardinal and in 1639 had been appointed the king's commissioner of taxes in the city of Rouen\u2014a city whose tax records, thanks to uprisings, were in utter chaos.\nPascaline.\nIn 1642, in an effort to ease his father's endless, exhausting calculations, and recalculations, of taxes owed and paid (into which work the young Pascal had been recruited), Pascal, not yet 19, constructed a mechanical calculator capable of addition and subtraction, called \"Pascal's calculator\" or the \"Pascaline\". Of the eight Pascalines known to have survived, four are held by the Mus\u00e9e des Arts et M\u00e9tiers in Paris and one more by the Zwinger museum in Dresden, Germany, exhibit two of his original mechanical calculators.\nAlthough these machines are pioneering forerunners to a further 400 years of development of mechanical methods of calculation, and in a sense to the later field of computer engineering, the calculator failed to be a great commercial success. Partly because it was still quite cumbersome to use in practice, but probably primarily because it was extraordinarily expensive, the Pascaline became little more than a toy, and a status symbol, for the very rich both in France and elsewhere in Europe. Pascal continued to make improvements to his design through the next decade, and he refers to some 50 machines that were built to his design. He built 20 finished machines over the following 10 years.\nMathematics.\nProbability.\nPascal's development of probability theory was his most influential contribution to mathematics. Originally applied to gambling, today it is extremely important in economics, especially in actuarial science. John Ross writes, \"Probability theory and the discoveries following it changed the way we regard uncertainty, risk, decision-making, and an individual's and society's ability to influence the course of future events.\" However, Pascal and Fermat, though doing important early work in probability theory, did not develop the field very far. Christiaan Huygens, learning of the subject from the correspondence of Pascal and Fermat, wrote the first book on the subject. Later figures who continued the development of the theory include Abraham de Moivre and Pierre-Simon Laplace.\nIn 1654, prompted by his friend the Chevalier de M\u00e9r\u00e9, he corresponded with Pierre de Fermat on the subject of gambling problems, and from that collaboration was born the mathematical theory of probabilities. The specific problem was that of two players who want to finish a game early and, given the current circumstances of the game, want to divide the stakes fairly, based on the chance each has of winning the game from that point. From this discussion, the notion of expected value was introduced. Pascal later (in the \"Pens\u00e9es\") used a probabilistic argument, Pascal's wager, to justify belief in God and a virtuous life. The work done by Fermat and Pascal into the calculus of probabilities laid important groundwork for Leibniz' formulation of the calculus.\n\"Treatise on the Arithmetical Triangle\".\nPascal's \"Trait\u00e9 du triangle arithm\u00e9tique\", written in 1654 but published posthumously in 1665, described a convenient tabular presentation for binomial coefficients which he called the arithmetical triangle, but is now called Pascal's triangle. The triangle can also be represented:\nHe defined the numbers in the triangle by recursion: Call the number in the (\"m\"\u00a0+\u00a01)th row and (\"n\"\u00a0+\u00a01)th column \"t\"\"mn\". Then \"t\"\"mn\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"t\"\"m\"\u20131,\"n\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"t\"\"m\",\"n\"\u20131, for \"m\"\u00a0=\u00a00,\u00a01,\u00a02,\u00a0... and \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a00,\u00a01,\u00a02,\u00a0... The boundary conditions are \"t\"\"m\",\u22121\u00a0=\u00a00, \"t\"\u22121,\"n\"\u00a0=\u00a00 for \"m\"\u00a0=\u00a01,\u00a02,\u00a03,\u00a0... and \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01,\u00a02,\u00a03,\u00a0... The generator \"t\"00\u00a0=\u00a01. Pascal concluded with the proof,\nformula_1\nIn the same treatise, Pascal gave an explicit statement of the principle of mathematical induction. In 1654, he proved \"Pascal's identity\" relating the sums of the \"p\"-th powers of the first \"n\" positive integers for \"p\" = 0, 1, 2, ..., \"k\".\nThat same year, Pascal had a religious experience, and mostly gave up work in mathematics.\nCycloid.\nIn 1658, Pascal, while suffering from a toothache, began considering several problems concerning the cycloid. His toothache disappeared, and he took this as a heavenly sign to proceed with his research. Eight days later he had completed his essay and, to publicize the results, proposed a contest.\nPascal proposed three questions relating to the center of gravity, area and volume of the cycloid, with the winner or winners to receive prizes of 20 and 40 Spanish doubloons. Pascal, Gilles de Roberval and Pierre de Carcavi were the judges, and neither of the two submissions (by John Wallis and Antoine de Lalouv\u00e8re) were judged to be adequate. While the contest was ongoing, Christopher Wren sent Pascal a proposal for a proof of the rectification of the cycloid; Roberval claimed promptly that he had known of the proof for years. Wallis published Wren's proof (crediting Wren) in Wallis's \"Tractus Duo\", giving Wren priority for the first published proof.\nPhysics.\nPascal contributed to several fields in physics, most notably the fields of fluid mechanics and pressure. In honour of his scientific contributions, the name \"Pascal\" has been given to the SI unit of pressure and Pascal's law (an important principle of hydrostatics). He introduced a primitive form of roulette and the roulette wheel in his search for a perpetual motion machine.\nFluid dynamics.\nHis work in the fields of hydrodynamics and hydrostatics centered on the principles of hydraulic fluids. His inventions include the hydraulic press (using hydraulic pressure to multiply force) and the syringe. He proved that hydrostatic pressure depends not on the weight of the fluid but on the elevation difference. He demonstrated this principle by attaching a thin tube to a barrel full of water and filling the tube with water up to the level of the third floor of a building. This caused the barrel to leak, in what became known as Pascal's barrel experiment.\nVacuum.\nBy 1647, Pascal had learned of Evangelista Torricelli's experimentation with barometers. Having replicated an experiment that involved placing a tube filled with mercury upside down in a bowl of mercury, Pascal questioned what force kept some mercury in the tube and what filled the space above the mercury in the tube. At the time, most scientists including Descartes believed in a plenum, i. e. some invisible matter filled all of space, rather than a vacuum. \"Nature abhors a vacuum.\" This was based on the Aristotelian notion that everything in motion was a substance, moved by another substance. Furthermore, light passed through the glass tube, suggesting a substance such as aether rather than vacuum filled the space.\nFollowing more experimentation in this vein, in 1647 Pascal produced \"Experiences nouvelles touchant le vide\" (\"New experiments with the vacuum\"), which detailed basic rules describing to what degree various liquids could be supported by air pressure. It also provided reasons why it was indeed a vacuum above the column of liquid in a barometer tube. This work was followed by \"R\u00e9cit de la grande exp\u00e9rience de l'\u00e9quilibre des liqueurs\" (\"Account of the great experiment on equilibrium in liquids\") published in 1648.\nThe Torricellian vacuum found that air pressure is equal to the weight of 30 inches of mercury. If air has a finite weight, Earth's atmosphere must have a maximum height. Pascal reasoned that if true, air pressure on a high mountain must be less than at a lower altitude. He lived near the Puy de D\u00f4me mountain, tall, but his health was poor so could not climb it. On 19 September 1648, after many months of Pascal's friendly but insistent prodding, Florin P\u00e9rier, husband of Pascal's elder sister Gilberte, was finally able to carry out the fact-finding mission vital to Pascal's theory. The account, written by P\u00e9rier, reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The weather was chancy last Saturday...[but] around five o'clock that morning...the Puy-de-D\u00f4me was visible...so I decided to give it a try. Several important people of the city of Clermont had asked me to let them know when I would make the ascent...I was delighted to have them with me in this great work...\n...at eight o'clock we met in the gardens of the Minim Fathers, which has the lowest elevation in town...First I poured 16 pounds of quicksilver...into a vessel...then took several glass tubes...each four feet long and hermetically sealed at one end and opened at the other...then placed them in the vessel [of quicksilver]...I found the quick silver stood at 26\" and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 lines above the quicksilver in the vessel...I repeated the experiment two more times while standing in the same spot...[they] produced the same result each time...\nI attached one of the tubes to the vessel and marked the height of the quicksilver and...asked Father Chastin, one of the Minim Brothers...to watch if any changes should occur through the day...Taking the other tube and a portion of the quick silver...I walked to the top of Puy-de-D\u00f4me, about 500 fathoms higher than the monastery, where upon experiment...found that the quicksilver reached a height of only 23\" and 2 lines...I repeated the experiment five times with care...each at different points on the summit...found the same height of quicksilver...in each case...\nPascal replicated the experiment in Paris by carrying a barometer up to the top of the bell tower at the church of Saint-Jacques-de-la-Boucherie, a height of about 50 metres. The mercury dropped two lines.\nIn a reply to the plenist Estienne Noel, Pascal wrote, echoing contemporary notions of science and falsifiability: \"In order to show that a hypothesis is evident, it does not suffice that all the phenomena follow from it; instead, if it leads to something contrary to a single one of the phenomena, that suffices to establish its falsity.\"\nBlaise Pascal Chairs are given to outstanding international scientists to conduct their research in the Ile de France region.\nAdult life: religion, literature, and philosophy.\nReligious conversion.\nIn the winter of 1646, Pascal's 58-year-old father broke his hip when he slipped and fell on an icy street of Rouen; given the man's age and the state of medicine in the 17th century, a broken hip could be a very serious condition, perhaps even fatal. Rouen was home to two of the finest doctors in France, Deslandes and de la Bouteillerie. The elder Pascal \"would not let anyone other than these men attend him...It was a good choice, for the old man survived and was able to walk again...\" But treatment and rehabilitation took three months, during which time La Bouteillerie and Deslandes had become regular visitors.\nBoth men were followers of Jean Guillebert, proponent of a splinter group from Catholic teaching known as Jansenism. This still fairly small sect was making surprising inroads into the French Catholic community at that time. It espoused rigorous Augustinism. Blaise spoke with the doctors frequently, and after their successful treatment of his father, borrowed from them works by Jansenist authors. In this period, Pascal experienced a sort of \"first conversion\" and began to write on theological subjects in the course of the following year.\nPascal fell away from this initial religious engagement and experienced a few years of what some biographers have called his \"worldly period\" (1648\u201354). His father died in 1651 and left his inheritance to Pascal and his sister Jacqueline, for whom Pascal acted as conservator. Jacqueline announced that she would soon become a postulant in the Jansenist convent of Port-Royal. Pascal was deeply affected and very sad, not because of her choice, but because of his chronic poor health; he needed her just as she had needed him.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Suddenly there was war in the Pascal household. Blaise pleaded with Jacqueline not to leave, but she was adamant. He commanded her to stay, but that didn't work, either. At the heart of this was...Blaise's fear of abandonment...if Jacqueline entered Port-Royal, she would have to leave her inheritance behind...[but] nothing would change her mind.\nBy the end of October in 1651, a truce had been reached between brother and sister. In return for a healthy annual stipend, Jacqueline signed over her part of the inheritance to her brother. Gilberte had already been given her inheritance in the form of a dowry. In early January, Jacqueline left for Port-Royal. On that day, according to Gilberte concerning her brother, \"He retired very sadly to his rooms without seeing Jacqueline, who was waiting in the little parlor...\"\nIn early June 1653, after what must have seemed like endless badgering from Jacqueline,\nPascal formally signed over the whole of his sister's inheritance to Port-Royal, which, to him, \"had begun to smell like a cult.\" With two-thirds of his father's estate now gone, the 29-year-old Pascal was now consigned to genteel poverty.\nFor a while, Pascal pursued the life of a bachelor. During visits to his sister at Port-Royal in 1654, he displayed contempt for affairs of the world but was not drawn to God.\nThe \"Memorial\".\nOn the 23 of November, 1654, between 10:30 and 12:30 at night, Pascal had an intense religious experience and immediately wrote a brief note to himself which began: \"Fire. God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, not of the philosophers and the scholars...\" and concluded by quoting Psalm 119:16: \"I will not forget thy word. Amen.\" He seems to have carefully sewn this document into his coat and always transferred it when he changed clothes; a servant discovered it only by chance after his death. This piece is now known as the \"Memorial\". The story of a carriage accident as having led to the experience described in the \"Memorial\" is disputed by some scholars.\nHis belief and religious commitment revitalized, Pascal visited the older of two convents at Port-Royal for a two-week retreat in January 1655. For the next four years, he regularly travelled between Port-Royal and Paris. It was at this point immediately after his conversion when he began writing his first major literary work on religion, the \"Provincial Letters\".\nLiterature.\nIn literature, Pascal is regarded as one of the most important authors of the French Classical Period and is read today as one of the greatest masters of French prose. His use of satire and wit influenced later polemicists.\nThe \"Provincial Letters\".\nBeginning in 1656\u201357, Pascal published his memorable attack on casuistry, a popular ethical method used by Catholic thinkers in the early modern period (especially the Jesuits, and in particular Antonio Escobar). Pascal denounced casuistry as the mere use of complex reasoning to justify moral laxity and all sorts of sins. The 18-letter series was published between 1656 and 1657 under the pseudonym Louis de Montalte and incensed Louis XIV. The king ordered that the book be shredded and burnt in 1660. In 1661, in the midsts of the formulary controversy, the Jansenist school at Port-Royal was condemned and closed down; those involved with the school had to sign a 1656 papal bull condemning the teachings of Jansen as heretical. The final letter from Pascal, in 1657, had defied Alexander VII himself. Even Pope Alexander, while publicly opposing them, nonetheless was persuaded by Pascal's arguments.\nAside from their religious influence, the \"Provincial Letters\" were popular as a literary work. Pascal's use of humor, mockery, and vicious satire in his arguments made the letters ripe for public consumption, and influenced the prose of later French writers like Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.\nIt is in the \"Provincial Letters\" that Pascal made his oft-quoted apology for writing a long letter, as he had not had time to write a shorter one.\nFrom Letter XVI, as translated by Thomas M'Crie:\n'Reverend fathers, my letters were not wont either to be so prolix, or to follow so closely on\none another. Want of time must plead my excuse for both of these faults. The present letter is\na very long one, simply because I had no leisure to make it shorter.'\nCharles Perrault wrote of the \"Letters\": \"Everything is there\u2014purity of language, nobility of thought, solidity in reasoning, finesse in raillery, and throughout an \"agr\u00e9ment\" not to be found anywhere else.\"\nPhilosophy.\nPascal is arguably best known as a philosopher, considered by some the second greatest French mind behind Ren\u00e9 Descartes. He was a dualist following Descartes. However, he is also remembered for his opposition to both the rationalism of the likes of Descartes and simultaneous opposition to the main countervailing epistemology, empiricism, preferring fideism.\nHe cared above all about the philosophy of religion. Pascalian theology has grown out of his perspective that humans are, according to Wood, \"born into a duplicitous world that shapes us into duplicitous subjects and so we find it easy to reject God continually and deceive ourselves about our own sinfulness\".\nPhilosophy of mathematics.\nPascal's major contribution to the philosophy of mathematics came with his \"De l'Esprit g\u00e9om\u00e9trique\" (\"Of the Geometrical Spirit\"), originally written as a preface to a geometry textbook for one of the famous Petites \u00e9coles de Port-Royal (\"Little Schools of Port-Royal\"). The work was unpublished until over a century after his death. Here, Pascal looked into the issue of discovering truths, arguing that the ideal of such a method would be to found all propositions on already established truths. At the same time, however, he claimed this was impossible because such established truths would require other truths to back them up\u2014first principles, therefore, cannot be reached. Based on this, Pascal argued that the procedure used in geometry was as perfect as possible, with certain principles assumed and other propositions developed from them. Nevertheless, there was no way to know the assumed principles to be true.\nPascal also used \"De l'Esprit g\u00e9om\u00e9trique\" to develop a theory of definition. He distinguished between definitions which are conventional labels defined by the writer and definitions which are within the language and understood by everyone because they naturally designate their referent. The second type would be characteristic of the philosophy of essentialism. Pascal claimed that only definitions of the first type were important to science and mathematics, arguing that those fields should adopt the philosophy of formalism as formulated by Descartes.\nIn \"De l'Art de persuader\" (\"On the Art of Persuasion\"), Pascal looked deeper into geometry's axiomatic method, specifically the question of how people come to be convinced of the axioms upon which later conclusions are based. Pascal agreed with Montaigne that achieving certainty in these axioms and conclusions through human methods is impossible. He asserted that these principles can be grasped only through intuition, and that this fact underscored the necessity for submission to God in searching out truths.\nPens\u00e9es.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Man is only a reed, the weakest in nature, but he is a thinking reed.\nBlaise Pascal, \"Pens\u00e9es\" No. 200\nPascal's most influential theological work, referred to posthumously as the \"Pens\u00e9es\" (\"Thoughts\") is widely considered to be a masterpiece, and a landmark in \"French prose\". When commenting on one particular section (Thought #72), Sainte-Beuve praised it as the finest pages in the French language. Will Durant hailed the Pens\u00e9es as \"the most eloquent book in French prose\".\nThe \"Pens\u00e9es\" was not completed before his death. It was to have been a sustained and coherent examination and defense of the Christian faith, with the original title \"Apologie de la religion Chr\u00e9tienne\" (\"Defense of the Christian Religion\"). The first version of the numerous scraps of paper found after his death appeared in print as a book in 1669 titled \"Pens\u00e9es de M. Pascal sur la religion, et sur quelques autres sujets\" (\"Thoughts of M. Pascal on religion, and on some other subjects\") and soon thereafter became a classic.\nOne of the \"Apologie\"'s main strategies was to use the contradictory philosophies of Pyrrhonism and Stoicism, personalized by Montaigne on one hand, and Epictetus on the other, in order to bring the unbeliever to such despair and confusion that he would embrace God.\nLast works and death.\nT. S. Eliot described him during this phase of his life as \"a man of the world among ascetics, and an ascetic among men of the world.\" Pascal's ascetic lifestyle derived from a belief that it was natural and necessary for a person to suffer. In 1659, Pascal fell seriously ill. During his last years, he frequently tried to reject the ministrations of his doctors, saying, \"Sickness is the natural state of Christians.\"\nLouis XIV suppressed the Jansenist movement at Port-Royal in 1661. In response, Pascal wrote one of his final works, \"\u00c9crit sur la signature du formulaire\" (\"Writ on the Signing of the Form\"), exhorting the Jansenists not to give in. Later that year, his sister Jacqueline died, which convinced Pascal to cease his polemics on Jansenism. Pascal's last major achievement, returning to his mechanical genius, was inaugurating perhaps the first bus line, the carrosses \u00e0 cinq sols, moving passengers within Paris in a carriage with many seats. Pascal also designated the operation principles which were later used to plan public transportation: The carriages has a fixed route, fixed price, and left even if there were no passengers. It is widely considered that the idea of public transportation was well ahead of time. The lines were not commercially successful, and the last one closed by 1675.\nIn 1662, Pascal's illness became more violent, and his emotional condition had severely worsened since his sister's death. Aware that his health was fading quickly, he sought a move to the hospital for incurable diseases, but his doctors declared that he was too unstable to be carried. In Paris on 18 August 1662, Pascal went into convulsions and received extreme unction. He died the next morning, his last words being \"May God never abandon me,\" and was buried in the cemetery of Saint-\u00c9tienne-du-Mont.\nAn autopsy performed after his death revealed grave problems with his stomach and other organs of his abdomen, along with damage to his brain. Despite the autopsy, the cause of his poor health was never precisely determined, though speculation focuses on tuberculosis, stomach cancer, or a combination of the two. The headaches which affected Pascal are generally attributed to his brain lesion.\nLegacy.\nCultural references.\nOne of the Universities of Clermont-Ferrand, France \u2013 Universit\u00e9 Blaise Pascal \u2013 is named after him. \u00c9tablissement scolaire fran\u00e7ais Blaise-Pascal in Lubumbashi, Democratic Republic of the Congo is named after Pascal.\nThe 1969 Eric Rohmer film \"My Night at Maud's\" is based on the work of Pascal. Roberto Rossellini directed a filmed biopic, \"Blaise Pascal\", which originally aired on Italian television in 1971. Pascal was a subject of the first edition of the 1984 BBC Two documentary, \"Sea of Faith\", presented by Don Cupitt. The chameleon in the film \"Tangled\" is named for Pascal.\nA programming language is named for Pascal. In 2014, Nvidia announced its new Pascal microarchitecture, which is named for Pascal. The first graphics cards featuring Pascal were released in 2016.\nThe 2017 game \"\" has multiple characters named after famous philosophers; one of these is a sentient pacifistic machine named Pascal, who serves as a major supporting character. Pascal creates a village for machines to live peacefully with the androids they're at war with and acts as a parental figure for other machines trying to adapt to their newly-found individuality.\nThe otter in the \"Animal Crossing\" series is named for Pascal.\nMinor planet 4500 Pascal is named in his honor.\nPope Paul VI, in encyclical \"Populorum progressio\", quotes Pascal's \"Pens\u00e9es\": &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;True humanism points the way toward God and acknowledges the task to which we are called, the task which offers us the real meaning of human life. Man is not the ultimate measure of man. Man becomes truly man only by passing beyond himself. In the words of Pascal: \"Man infinitely surpasses man.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4069", "revid": "1537936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4069", "title": "Brittonic languages", "text": "Celtic subfamily including Welsh, Cornish, Breton and Cumbric\nThe Brittonic languages (also Brythonic or British Celtic; ; ; ) form one of the two branches of the Insular Celtic language family; the other is Goidelic. It comprises the extant languages Breton, Cornish, and Welsh. The name \"Brythonic\" was derived by Welsh Celticist John Rhys from the Welsh word , meaning Ancient Britons as opposed to an Anglo-Saxon or Gael.\nThe Brittonic languages derive from the Common Brittonic language, spoken throughout Great Britain during the Iron Age and Roman period. In the 5th and 6th centuries emigrating Britons also took Brittonic speech to the continent, most significantly in Brittany and Britonia. During the next few centuries the language began to split into several dialects, eventually evolving into Welsh, Cornish, Breton, Cumbric, and probably Pictish. Welsh and Breton continue to be spoken as native languages, while a revival in Cornish has led to an increase in speakers of that language. Cumbric and Pictish are extinct, having been replaced by Goidelic and Anglic speech. The Isle of Man and Orkney may also have originally spoken a Brittonic language, but this was later supplanted by Goidelic on the Isle of Man and Norse on Orkney. There is also a community of Brittonic language speakers in (the Welsh settlement in Patagonia).\nName.\nThe names \"Brittonic\" and \"Brythonic\" are scholarly conventions referring to the Celtic languages of Britain and to the ancestral language they originated from, designated Common Brittonic, in contrast to the Goidelic languages originating in Ireland. Both were created in the 19th century to avoid the ambiguity of earlier terms such as \"British\" and \"Cymric\". \"Brythonic\" was coined in 1879 by the Celticist John Rhys from the Welsh word . \"Brittonic\", derived from \"Briton\" and also earlier spelled \"Britonic\" and \"Britonnic\", emerged later in the 19th century. It became more prominent through the 20th century, and was used in Kenneth H. Jackson's highly influential 1953 work on the topic, \"Language and History in Early Britain\". Jackson noted that by that time \"Brythonic\" had become a dated term, and that \"of late there has been an increasing tendency to use Brittonic instead.\" Today, \"Brittonic\" often replaces \"Brythonic\" in the literature. Rudolf Thurneysen used \"Britannic\" in his influential \"A Grammar of Old Irish\", although this never became popular among subsequent scholars.\nComparable historical terms include the Medieval Latin and and the Welsh . Some writers use \"British\" for the language and its descendants, although, due to the risk of confusion, others avoid it or use it only in a restricted sense. Jackson, and later John T. Koch, use \"British\" only for the early phase of the Common Brittonic language.\nBefore Jackson's work, \"Brittonic\" and \"Brythonic\" were often used for all the P-Celtic languages, including not just the varieties in Britain but those Continental Celtic languages that similarly experienced the evolution of the Proto-Celtic language element /k\u02b7/ to /p/. However, subsequent writers have tended to follow Jackson's scheme, rendering this use obsolete.\nThe name \"Britain\" itself comes from , via Old French ' and Middle English ', possibly influenced by Old English \"\", probably also from Latin \"Brittania\", ultimately an adaptation of the native word for the island, \"*Pritan\u012b\".\nAn early written reference to the British Isles may derive from the works of the Greek explorer Pytheas of Massalia; later Greek writers such as Diodorus of Sicily and Strabo who quote Pytheas' use of variants such as (), \"The Britannic [land, island]\", and \u03bd\u03b7\u03c3\u03bf\u03b9 \u03b2\u03c1\u03b5\u03c4\u03c4\u03b1\u03bd\u03b9\u03b1\u03b9 (), \"Britannic islands\", with \"\" being a Celtic word that might mean \"the painted ones\" or \"the tattooed folk\", referring to body decoration (see below).\nEvidence.\nKnowledge of the Brittonic languages comes from a variety of sources. The early language's information is obtained from coins, inscriptions, and comments by classical writers as well as place names and personal names recorded by them. For later languages, there is information from medieval writers and modern native speakers, together with place names. The names recorded in the Roman period are given in Rivet and Smith.\nCharacteristics.\nThe Brittonic branch is also referred to as \"P-Celtic\" because linguistic reconstruction of the Brittonic reflex of the Proto-Indo-European phoneme *k\u02b7 is \"p\" as opposed to Goidelic \"k\". Such nomenclature usually implies acceptance of the P-Celtic and Q-Celtic hypothesis rather than the Insular Celtic hypothesis because the term includes certain Continental Celtic languages as well. (For a discussion, see Celtic languages.)\nOther major characteristics include:\nInitial \"s-\":\nLenition:\nVoiceless spirants:\nNasal assimilation:\nClassification.\nThe family tree of the Brittonic languages is as follows:\nBrittonic languages in use today are Welsh, Cornish and Breton. Welsh and Breton have been spoken continuously since they formed. For all practical purposes Cornish died out during the 18th or 19th century, but a revival movement has more recently created small numbers of new speakers. Also notable are the extinct language Cumbric, and possibly the extinct Pictish. One view, advanced in the 1950s and based on apparently unintelligible ogham inscriptions, was that the Picts may have also used a non-Indo-European language. This view, while attracting broad popular appeal, has virtually no following in contemporary linguistic scholarship.\nHistory and origins.\nThe modern Brittonic languages are generally considered to all derive from a common ancestral language termed \"Brittonic\", \"British\", \"Common Brittonic\", \"Old Brittonic\" or \"Proto-Brittonic\", which is thought to have developed from Proto-Celtic or early Insular Celtic by the 6th century BC.\nA major archaeogenetics study uncovered a migration into southern Britain in the middle to late Bronze Age, during the 500-year period 1,300\u2013800 BC. The newcomers were genetically most similar to ancient individuals from Gaul. During 1,000\u2013875 BC, their genetic markers swiftly spread through southern Britain, but not northern Britain. The authors describe this as a \"plausible vector for the spread of early Celtic languages into Britain\". There was much less inward migration during the Iron Age, so it is likely that Celtic reached Britain before then. Barry Cunliffe suggests that a Goidelic branch of Celtic may already have been spoken in Britain, but that this middle Bronze Age migration would have introduced the Brittonic branch.\nBrittonic languages were probably spoken before the Roman invasion throughout most of Great Britain, though the Isle of Man later had a Goidelic language, Manx. During the period of the Roman occupation of what is now England and Wales (AD 43 to c. 410), Common Brittonic borrowed a large stock of Latin words, both for concepts unfamiliar in the pre-urban society of Celtic Britain such as urbanization and new tactics of warfare as well as for rather more mundane words which displaced native terms (most notably, the word for \"fish\" in all the Brittonic languages derives from the Latin \"piscis\" rather than the native *\"\u0113skos\" - which may survive, however, in the Welsh name of the River Usk, ). Approximately 800 of these Latin loan-words have survived in the three modern Brittonic languages. Pictish may have resisted Latin influence to a greater extent than the other Brittonic languages.\nIt is probable that at the start of the Post-Roman period \"Common Brittonic\" was differentiated into at least two major dialect groups \u2013 Southwestern and Western (also we may posit additional dialects, such as Eastern Brittonic, spoken in what is now the East of England, which have left little or no evidence). Between the end of the Roman occupation and the mid 6th century the two dialects began to diverge into recognizably separate varieties, the Western into Cumbric and Welsh and the Southwestern into Cornish and its closely related sister language Breton, which was carried to continental Armorica. Jackson showed that a few of the dialect distinctions between West and Southwest Brittonic go back a long way. New divergencies began around AD 500 but other changes that were shared occurred in the 6th century. Other common changes occurred in the 7th century onward and are possibly due to inherent tendencies. Thus the concept of a Common Brittonic language ends by AD 600. Substantial numbers of Britons certainly remained in the expanding area controlled by Anglo-Saxons, but over the fifth and sixth centuries they mostly adopted the English language.\nDecline.\nThe Brittonic languages spoken in what is now Scotland, the Isle of Man and what is now England began to be displaced in the 5th century through the settlement of Irish-speaking Gaels and Germanic peoples. Henry of Huntingdon wrote that Pictish was \"no longer spoken\" in c.1129.\nThe displacement of the languages of Brittonic descent was probably complete in all of Britain except Cornwall and Wales and the English counties bordering these areas such as Devon by the 11th century. Western Herefordshire continued to speak Welsh until the late nineteenth century, and isolated pockets of Shropshire speak Welsh today.\nSound changes.\nThe regular consonantal sound changes from Proto-Celtic to Welsh, Cornish, and Breton are summarised in the following table. Where the graphemes have a different value from the corresponding IPA symbols, the IPA equivalent is indicated between slashes. V represents a vowel; C represents a consonant.\nRemnants in England, Scotland and Ireland.\nPlace names and river names.\nThe principal legacy left behind in those territories from which the Brittonic languages were displaced is that of toponyms (place names) and hydronyms (names of rivers and other bodies of water). There are many Brittonic place names in lowland Scotland and in the parts of England where it is agreed that substantial Brittonic speakers remained (Brittonic names, apart from those of the former Romano-British towns, are scarce over most of England). Names derived (sometimes indirectly) from Brittonic include London, Penicuik, Perth, Aberdeen, York, Dorchester, Dover and Colchester. Brittonic elements found in England include \"bre-\" and \"bal-\" for hills, while some such as combe or coomb(e) for a small deep valley and tor for a hill are examples of Brittonic words that were borrowed into English. Others reflect the presence of Britons such as Dumbarton \u2013 from the Scottish Gaelic \"D\u00f9n Breatainn\" meaning \"Fort of the Britons\", or Walton meaning a \"tun\" or settlement where the \"Wealh\" \"Britons\" still lived.\nThe number of Celtic river names in England generally increases from east to west, a map showing these being given by Jackson. These names include ones such as Avon, Chew, Frome, Axe, Brue and Exe, but also river names containing the elements \"der-/dar-/dur-\" and \"-went\" e.g. \"Derwent, Darwen, Deer, Adur, Dour, Darent, Went\". These names exhibit multiple different Celtic roots. One is *dubri- \"water\" [Bret. \"dour\", C. \"dowr\", W. \"d\u0175r\"], also found in the place-name \"Dover\" (attested in the Roman period as \"Dubr\u012bs\"); this is the source of rivers named \"Dour\". Another is *deru\u032fo- \"oak\" or \"true\" [Bret. \"derv\", C. \"derow\", W. \"derw\"], coupled with 2 agent suffixes, *-ent- and *-i\u016b; this is the origin of \"Derwent\", \" Darent\" and \"Darwen\" (attested in the Roman period as \"Deru\u032fenti\u014d\"). The final root to be examined is \"went\". In Roman Britain, there were three tribal capitals named \"U\u032fent\u0101\" (modern Winchester, Caerwent and Caistor St Edmunds), whose meaning was 'place, town'.\nBrittonicisms in English.\nSome, including J. R. R. Tolkien, have argued that Celtic has acted as a substrate to English for both the lexicon and syntax. It is generally accepted that Brittonic effects on English are lexically few, aside from toponyms, consisting of a small number of domestic and geographical words, which 'may' include bin, brock, carr, comb, crag and tor. Another legacy may be the sheep-counting system Yan Tan Tethera in the north, in the traditionally Celtic areas of England such as Cumbria. Several Cornish mining words are still in use in English language mining terminology, such as costean, gunnies, and vug.\nThose who argue against the theory of a more significant Brittonic influence than is widely accepted point out that many toponyms have no semantic continuation from the Brittonic language. A notable example is Avon which comes from the Celtic term for river abona or the Welsh term for river, afon, but was used by the English as a personal name. Likewise the River Ouse, Yorkshire contains the word usa which merely means 'water' and the name of the river Trent simply comes from the Welsh word for a trespasser \"(an over-flowing river)\".\nIt has been argued that the use of periphrastic constructions (using auxiliary verbs such as \"do\" and \"be\" in the continuous/progressive) in the English verb, which is more widespread than in the other Germanic languages, is traceable to Brittonic influence. Others, however, find this unlikely since many of these forms are only attested in the later Middle English period; these scholars claim a native English development rather than Celtic influence. Ian G. Roberts postulates Northern Germanic influence, despite such constructions not existing in Norse. Literary Welsh has the simple present Caraf = \"I love\" and the present stative (al. continuous/progressive) Yr wyf yn caru = \"I am loving\", where the Brittonic syntax is partly mirrored in English (Note that \"I am loving\" comes from older \"I am a-loving\", from still older ich am on luvende \"I am in the process of loving\"). In the Germanic sister languages of English there is only one form, for example ich liebe in German, though in \"colloquial\" usage in some German dialects, a progressive aspect form has evolved which is formally similar to those found in Celtic languages, and somewhat less similar to the Modern English form, e.g. \"I am working\" is ich bin am Arbeiten, literally: \"I am on the working\". The same structure is also found in modern Dutch (ik ben aan het werk), alongside other structures (e.g. ik zit te werken, lit. \"I sit to working\"). These parallel developments suggest that the English progressive is not necessarily due to Celtic influence; moreover, the native English development of the structure can be traced over 1000 years and more of English literature.\nSome researchers (Filppula \"et al.\", 2001) argue that other elements of English syntax reflect Brittonic influences. For instance, in English tag questions, the form of the tag depends on the verb form in the main statement (\"aren't I?\", \"isn't he?\", \"won't we?\" etc.). The German nicht wahr? and the French n'est-ce pas?, by contrast, are fixed forms which can be used with almost any main statement. It has been claimed that the English system has been borrowed from Brittonic, since Welsh tag questions vary in almost exactly the same way.\nBrittonic effect on the Goidelic languages.\nFar more notable, but less well known, are Brittonic influences on Scottish Gaelic, though Scottish and Irish Gaelic, with their wider range of preposition-based periphrastic constructions, suggest that such constructions descend from their common Celtic heritage. Scottish Gaelic contains several P-Celtic loanwords, but, as there is a far greater overlap in terms of Celtic vocabulary, than with English, it is not always possible to disentangle P- and Q-Celtic words. However, some common words such as monadh = Welsh mynydd, Cumbric *monidh are particularly evident.\nThe Brittonic influence on Scots Gaelic is often indicated by considering Irish language usage, which is not likely to have been influenced so much by Brittonic. In particular, the word srath (anglicised as \"Strath\") is a native Goidelic word, but its usage appears to have been modified by the Brittonic cognate ystrad whose meaning is slightly different. The effect on Irish has been the loan from British of many Latin-derived words. This has been associated with the Christianisation of Ireland from Britain.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4071", "revid": "14264656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4071", "title": "Bronski Beat", "text": "British synthpop band\nBronski Beat were a British synthpop band formed in 1983 in London, England. The initial lineup, which recorded the majority of their hits, consisted of Jimmy Somerville (vocals), Steve Bronski (keyboards, percussion) and Larry Steinbachek (keyboards, percussion). Simon Davolls contributed backing vocals to many songs. \nBronski Beat achieved success in the mid-1980s, particularly with the 1984 single \"Smalltown Boy\", from their debut album, \"The Age of Consent\". \"Smalltown Boy\" was their only US \"Billboard\" Hot 100 single. All members of the band were openly gay and their songs reflected this, often containing political commentary on gay issues. \nSomerville left Bronski Beat in 1985, and went on to have success as lead singer of the Communards and as a solo artist. He was replaced by vocalist John Foster, with whom the band continued to have hits in the UK and Europe through 1986. Foster left Bronski Beat after their second album, and the band were joined by Jonathan Hellyer before dissolving in 1995.\nSteve Bronski revived the band in 2016, recording new material with 1990s member Ian Donaldson. Steinbachek died later that year; Bronski died in 2021.\nHistory.\n1983\u20131985: Early years and \"The Age of Consent\".\nBronski Beat formed in 1983 when Jimmy Somerville, Steve Bronski (both from Glasgow) and Larry Steinbachek (from Southend, Essex) shared a three-bedroom flat at Lancaster House in Brixton, London. Steinbachek had heard Somerville singing during the making of \"\" and suggested they make some music. They first performed publicly at an arts festival, \"September in the Pink\". The trio were unhappy with the inoffensive nature of contemporary gay performers and sought to be more outspoken and political.\nBronski Beat signed a recording contract with London Records in 1984 after doing only nine live gigs. The band's debut single, \"Smalltown Boy\", about a gay teenager leaving his family and fleeing his home town, was a hit, peaking at No 3 in the UK Singles Chart, and topping charts in Belgium and the Netherlands. The single was accompanied by a promotional video directed by Bernard Rose, showing Somerville trying to befriend an attractive diver at a swimming pool, then being attacked by the diver's homophobic associates, being returned to his family by the police and having to leave home. (The police officer was played by Colin Bell, then the marketing manager of London Records.) \"Smalltown Boy\" reached 48 in the U.S. chart and peaked at 8 in Australia.\nThe follow-up single, \"Why?\", adopted a hi-NRG sound and was more lyrically focused on anti-gay prejudice. It also achieved Top 10 status in the UK, reaching 6, and was another Top 10 hit for the band in Australia, Switzerland, Germany, France and the Netherlands.\nAt the end of 1984, the trio released an album titled \"The Age of Consent\". The inner sleeve listed the varying ages of consent for consensual gay sex in different nations around the world. At the time, the age of consent for sexual acts between men in the UK was 21 compared with 16 for heterosexual acts, with several other countries having more liberal laws on gay sex. The album peaked at 4 in the UK Albums Chart, 36 in the U.S., and 12 in Australia.\nAround the same time, the band headlined \"Pits and Perverts\", a concert at the Electric Ballroom in London to raise funds for the Lesbians and Gays Support the Miners campaign. This event is featured in the film \"Pride\".\nThe third single, released before Christmas 1984, was a revival of \"It Ain't Necessarily So\", the George and Ira Gershwin classic (from \"Porgy and Bess\"). The song questions the accuracy of biblical tales. It also reached the UK Top 20.\nIn 1985, the trio joined up with Marc Almond to record a version of Donna Summer's \"I Feel Love\". The full version was actually a medley that also incorporated snippets of Summer's \"Love to Love You Baby\" and John Leyton's \"Johnny Remember Me\". It was a big success, reaching 3 in the UK and equalling the chart achievement of \"Smalltown Boy\". Although the original had been one of Marc Almond's all-time favourite songs, he had never read the lyrics and thus incorrectly sang \"What\u2019ll it be, what\u2019ll it be, you and me\" instead of \"Falling free, falling free, falling free\" on the finished record.\nThe band and their producer Mike Thorne had gone back into the studio in early 1985 to record a new single, \"Run from Love\", and PolyGram (London Records' parent company at that time) had pressed a number of promo singles and 12\" versions of the song and sent them to radio and record stores in the UK. However, the single was shelved as tensions in the band, both personal and political, resulted in Somerville leaving Bronski Beat in the summer of that year.\n\"Run from Love\" was subsequently released in remix form on the Bronski Beat album \"Hundreds &amp; Thousands\", a collection of mostly remixes (LP) and B-sides (as bonus tracks on the CD version) as well as the hit \"I Feel Love\". Somerville went on to form the Communards with Richard Coles while the remaining members of Bronski Beat searched for a new vocalist.\n1985\u20131995: Post-Jimmy Somerville phase.\nBronski Beat recruited John Foster as Somerville's replacement (Foster is credited as \"Jon Jon\"). A single, \"Hit That Perfect Beat\", was released in November 1985, reaching 3 in the UK. It repeated this success on the Australian chart and was also featured in the film \"Letter to Brezhnev\". A second single, \"C'mon C'mon\", also charted in the UK Top 20 and an album, \"Truthdare Doubledare\", released in May 1986, peaked at 18. The film \"Parting Glances\" (1986) included Bronski Beat songs \"Love and Money\", \"Smalltown Boy\" and \"Why?\". During this period, the band teamed up with producer Mark Cunningham on the first-ever BBC Children In Need single, a cover of David Bowie's \"Heroes\", released in 1986 under the name of The County Line.\nFoster left the band in 1987. Following Foster's departure, Bronski Beat began work on their next album, \"Out and About\". The tracks were recorded at Berry Street studios in London with engineer Brian Pugsley. Some of the song titles were \"The Final Spin\" and \"Peace and Love\". The latter track featured Strawberry Switchblade vocalist Rose McDowall and appeared on several internet sites in 2006. One of the other songs from the project called \"European Boy\" was recorded in 1987 by disco group Splash. The lead singer of Splash was former Tight Fit singer Steve Grant. Steinbachek and Bronski toured extensively with the new material with positive reviews, however the project was abandoned as the group was dropped by London Records. Also in 1987, Bronski Beat and Somerville performed at a reunion concert for \"International AIDS Day\", supported by New Order, at the Brixton Academy, London.\nIn 1989, Jonathan Hellyer became lead singer, and the band extensively toured the U.S. and Europe with back-up vocalist Annie Conway. They achieved one minor hit with the song \"Cha Cha Heels\", a one-off collaboration sung by American actress and singer Eartha Kitt, which peaked at 32 in the UK. The song was originally written for movie and recording star Divine, who was unable to record the song before his death in 1988. 1990\u201391 saw Bronski Beat release three further singles on the Zomba record label, \"I'm Gonna Run Away\", \"One More Chance\" and \"What More Can I Say\". The singles were produced by Mike Thorne.\nFoster and Bronski Beat teamed up again in 1994, and released a techno \"Tell Me Why '94\" and an acoustic \"Smalltown Boy '94\" on the German record label, ZYX Music. The album \"Rainbow Nation\" was released the following year with Hellyer returning as lead vocalist, as Foster had dropped out of the project and Ian Donaldson was brought on board to do keyboards and programming. After a few years of touring, Bronski Beat then dissolved, with Steve Bronski going on to become a producer for other artists and Ian Donaldson becoming a successful DJ (Sordid Soundz). Larry Steinbachek became the musical director for Michael Laub's theatre company, 'Remote Control Productions'.\n2007\u20132016: Steve Bronski solo activities, new version of Bronski Beat.\nIn 2007, Steve Bronski remixed the song \"Stranger to None\" by the UK alternative rock band, All Living Fear. Four different mixes were made, with one appearing on their retrospective album, \"Fifteen Years After\". Bronski also remixed the track \"Flowers in the Morning\" by Northern Irish electronic band Electrobronze in 2007, changing the style of the song from classical to Hi-NRG disco.\nIn 2015, Steve Bronski teamed up as a one-off with Jessica James (aka Barbara Bush) and said that she reminded him of Divine, because of her look and Eartha Kitt-like sound. The one-off project was to cover the track he made in 1989.\nIn 2016, Steve Bronski again teamed up with Ian Donaldson, with the aim of bringing Bronski Beat back, enlisting a new singer, Stephen Granville. In 2017, the new Bronski Beat released a reworked version of \"Age of Consent\" entitled \"Age of Reason\". \"Out &amp; About\", the unreleased Bronski Beat album from 1987, was released digitally via Steve Bronski's website. The album features the original tracks plus remixes by Bronski.\n2017-present: Deaths of Steinbachek and Bronski.\nOn 12 January 2017, it was revealed that Steinbachek had died the previous month after a short battle with cancer, with his family and friends at his bedside. He was 56. Bronski died on 7 December 2021, at the age of 61, in a Central London flat fire.\nMembers.\nThe original member set of Bronski Beat was Jimmy Somerville, Steve Bronski and Larry Steinbachek. Following Somerville leaving to form pop group the Communards with Richard Coles, he was replaced by John Foster and later by Jonathan Hellyer. The band set-up has seen a number of changes.\nFormer members.\nOriginal lineup:\nLater personnel:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4074", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4074", "title": "Barrel (disambiguation)", "text": "A barrel is a cylindrical container, traditionally made with wooden material.\nBarrel may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "4077", "revid": "7196877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4077", "title": "Binary prefix", "text": "Symbol placed before units of digital information to indicate multiplication by a power of two\nA binary prefix is a unit prefix for multiples of units. It is most often used in data processing, data transmission, and digital information, principally in association with the bit and the byte, to indicate multiplication by a power\u00a0of\u00a02. As shown in the table to the right there are two sets of symbols for binary prefixes, one set established by International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and several other standards and trade organizations using two-letter symbols, e.g. \"Mi\" indicating with a second set established by semiconductor industry convention using one-letter symbols, e.g., \"M\" also indicating .\nIn most contexts, industry uses the multipliers \"kilo\" (\"k\"), \"mega\" (\"M\"), \"giga\" (\"G\"), etc., in a manner consistent with their meaning in the International System of Units (SI), namely as powers of 1000. For example, a 500-gigabyte hard disk holds bytes, and a 1\u00a0Gbit/s (gigabit per second) Ethernet connection transfers data at nominal speed of bit/s. In contrast with the \"binary prefix\" usage, this use is described as a \"decimal prefix\", as 1000 is a power of 10 (103).\nThe computer industry has historically in citations of main memory (RAM) capacity used the units \"kilobyte\", \"megabyte\", and \"gigabyte\", and the corresponding symbols \"KB\", \"MB\", and \"GB\", in a binary sense: \"gigabyte\" customarily means bytes. As this is a power of 1024, and 1024 is a power of two (210), these three usages are referred to as binary prefixes; they were defined by the Joint Electron Device Engineering Council (JEDEC) for semiconductors and are used by some operating systems.\nThe use of the same unit prefixes with two different meanings has caused confusion. Starting around 1998, the IEC and several other standards and trade organizations attempted to address the ambiguity by publishing standards and recommendations for a set of binary prefixes that refer exclusively to powers of 1024. Accordingly, the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) requires that SI prefixes be used only in the decimal sense: kilobyte and megabyte denote one thousand bytes and one million bytes respectively (consistent with SI), while new terms such as kibibyte, mebibyte, and gibibyte, having the symbols KiB, MiB, and GiB, denote 1024 bytes, bytes, and bytes, respectively. In 2008, the IEC prefixes were incorporated into the standard alongside the decimal prefixes of the international standard system of units.\nIn response to litigation over the use of metric prefixes, the United States District Court for the Northern District of California includes a judicial notice that \"the U.S. Congress has deemed the decimal definition of gigabyte to be the 'preferred' one for the purposes of 'U.S. trade and commerce.'\"\nHistory.\nEarly prefixes.\nThe original metric system adopted by France in 1795 included two binary prefixes named \"double-\" (2\u00d7) and \"demi-\" (\u00d7). However, these were not retained when the SI prefixes were internationally adopted by the 11th CGPM conference in 1960.\nMain memory.\nEarly computers used one of two addressing methods to access the system memory; binary (base 2) or decimal (base 10).\nFor example, the IBM 701 (1952) used binary and could address 2048 words of 36 bits each, while the IBM 702 (1953) used decimal and could address ten thousand 7-bit words.\nBy the mid-1960s, binary addressing had become the standard architecture in most computer designs, and main memory sizes were most commonly powers of two. This is the most natural configuration for memory, as all combinations of their address lines map to a valid address, allowing easy aggregation into a larger block of memory with contiguous addresses.\nEarly computer system documentation would specify the memory size with an exact number such as 4096, 8192, or words of storage. These are all powers of two, and furthermore are small multiples of 210, or 1024. As storage capacities increased, several different methods were developed to abbreviate these quantities.\nThe method most commonly used today uses prefixes such as kilo, mega, giga, and corresponding symbols K, M, and G, which the computer industry originally adopted from the metric system. The prefixes \"kilo-\" and \"mega-\", meaning 1000 and respectively, were commonly used in the electronics industry before World War II. Along with \"giga-\" or G-, meaning , they are now known as SI prefixes after the International System of Units (SI), introduced in 1960 to formalize aspects of the metric system.\nThe International System of Units does not define units for digital information but notes that the SI prefixes may be applied outside the contexts where base units or derived units would be used. But as computer main memory in a\nbinary-addressed system is manufactured in sizes that were easily expressed as multiples of 1024, \"kilobyte\", when applied to computer memory, came to be used to mean 1024 bytes instead of 1000. This usage is not consistent with the SI. Compliance with the SI requires that the prefixes take their 1000-based meaning, and that they are not to be used as placeholders for other numbers, like 1024.\nThe use of K in the binary sense as in a \"32K core\" meaning 32 \u00d7 1024 words, i.e., words, can be found as early as 1959.\nGene Amdahl's seminal 1964 article on IBM System/360 used \"1K\" to mean 1024. This style was used by other computer vendors, the CDC 7600 \"System Description\" (1968) made extensive use of K as 1024. Thus the first binary prefix was born.\nAnother style was to truncate the last three digits and append K, essentially using K as a decimal prefix similar to SI, but always truncating to the next lower whole number instead of rounding to the nearest. The exact values words, words and words would then be described as \"32K\", \"65K\" and \"131K\". (If these values had been rounded to nearest they would have become 33K, 66K, and 131K, respectively.)\nThis style was used from about 1965 to 1975.\nThese two styles (K = 1024 and truncation) were used loosely around the same time, sometimes by the same company. In discussions of binary-addressed memories, the exact size was evident from context. (For memory sizes of \"41K\" and below, there is no difference between the two styles.) The HP 21MX real-time computer (1974) denoted (which is 192\u00d71024) as \"196K\" and as \"1M\",\nwhile the HP 3000 business computer (1973) could have \"64K\", \"96K\", or \"128K\" bytes of memory.\nThe \"truncation\" method gradually waned. Capitalization of the letter K became the \"de facto\" standard for binary notation, although this could not be extended to higher powers, and use of the lowercase k did persist. Nevertheless, the practice of using the SI-inspired \"kilo\" to indicate 1024 was later extended to \"megabyte\" meaning 10242 () bytes, and later \"gigabyte\" for 10243 () bytes. For example, a \"512 megabyte\" RAM module is 512 \u00d7 10242 bytes (512 \u00d7 , or ), rather than .\nThe symbols Kbit, Kbyte, Mbit and Mbyte started to be used as \"binary units\"\u2014\"bit\" or \"byte\" with a multiplier that is a power of 1024\u2014in the early 1970s. For a time, memory capacities were often expressed in K, even when M could have been used: The IBM System/370 Model 158 brochure (1972) had the following: \"Real storage capacity is available in 512K increments ranging from 512K to 2,048K bytes.\"\nMegabyte was used to describe the 22-bit addressing of DEC PDP-11/70 (1975)\nand gigabyte the 30-bit addressing DEC VAX-11/780 (1977).\nIn 1998, the International Electrotechnical Commission IEC introduced the binary prefixes kibi, mebi, gibi, etc., to mean 1024, 10242, 10243 etc., so that 1048576 bytes could be referred to unambiguously as 1 mebibyte. The IEC prefixes were defined for use alongside the International System of Quantities (ISQ) in 2009.\nDisk drives.\nThe disk drive industry has followed a different pattern. Disk drive capacity is generally specified with unit prefixes with decimal meaning, in accordance to SI practices. Unlike computer main memory, disk architecture or construction does not mandate or make it convenient to use binary multiples. Drives can have any practical number of platters or surfaces, and the count of tracks, as well as the count of sectors per track may vary greatly between designs.\nThe first commercially sold disk drive, the IBM 350, had fifty physical disk platters containing a total of sectors of 100 characters each, for a total quoted capacity of 5 million characters. It was introduced in September 1956.\nIn the 1960s most disk drives used IBM's variable block length format, called Count Key Data (CKD). Any block size could be specified up to the maximum track length. Since the block headers occupied space, the usable capacity of the drive was dependent on the block size. Blocks (\"records\" in IBM's terminology) of 88, 96, 880 and 960 were often used because they related to the fixed block size of 80- and 96-character punch cards. The drive capacity was usually stated under conditions of full track record blocking. For example, the 100-megabyte 3336 disk pack only achieved that capacity with a full track block size of bytes.\nFloppy disks for the IBM PC and compatibles quickly standardized on 512-byte sectors, so two sectors were easily referred to as \"1K\". The 3.5-inch \"360\u00a0KB\" and \"720\u00a0KB\" had 720 (single-sided) and 1440 sectors (double-sided) respectively. When the High Density \"1.44\u00a0MB\" floppies came along, with 2880 of these 512-byte sectors, that terminology represented a hybrid binary-decimal definition of \"1\u00a0MB\" = 210 \u00d7 103 = 1\u2009024\u2009000 bytes.\nIn contrast, hard disk drive manufacturers used \"megabytes\" or \"MB\", meaning 106 bytes, to characterize their products as early as 1974. By 1977, in its first edition, Disk/Trend, a leading hard disk drive industry marketing consultancy segmented the industry according to MBs (decimal sense) of capacity.\nOne of the earliest hard disk drives in personal computing history, the Seagate ST-412, was specified as \"Formatted: 10.0 Megabytes\". The drive contains four heads and active surfaces (tracks per cylinder), 306 cylinders. When formatted with a sector size of 256 bytes and 32 sectors/track it has a capacity of . This drive was one of several types installed in the IBM PC/XT and extensively advertised and reported as a \"10\u00a0MB\" (formatted) hard disk drive. The cylinder count of 306 is not conveniently close to any power of 1024; operating systems and programs using the customary binary prefixes show this as 9.5625\u00a0MB. Many later drives in the personal computer market used 17 sectors per track; still later, zone bit recording was introduced, causing the number of sectors per track to vary from the outer track to the inner.\nThe hard drive industry continues to use decimal prefixes for drive capacity, as well as for transfer rate. For example, a \"300\u00a0GB\" hard drive offers slightly more than , or , bytes, not 300 \u00d7 230 (which would be about ). Operating systems such as Microsoft Windows that display hard drive sizes using the customary binary prefix \"GB\" (as it is used for RAM) would display this as \"279.4\u00a0GB\" (meaning 279.4 \u00d7 10243 bytes, or 279.4 \u00d7). On the other hand, macOS has since version 10.6 shown hard drive size using decimal prefixes (thus matching the drive makers' packaging). (Previous versions of Mac OS X used binary prefixes.)\nDisk drive manufacturers sometimes use \"both\" IEC and SI prefixes with their standardized meanings. Seagate has specified data transfer rates in select manuals of some hard drives with both units, with the conversion between units clearly shown and the numeric values adjusted accordingly.\n\"Advanced Format\" drives uses the term \"4K sectors\", which it defines as having size of \"4096 (4K) bytes\".\nInformation transfer and clock rates.\nComputer clock frequencies are always quoted using SI prefixes in their decimal sense. For example, the internal clock frequency of the original IBM PC was 4.77\u00a0MHz, that is . Similarly, digital information transfer rates are quoted using decimal prefixes:\nHistorical standardization of dual definitions.\nBy the mid-1970s it was common to see K meaning 1024 and the occasional M meaning for words or bytes of main memory (RAM) while K and M were commonly used with their decimal meaning for disk storage. In the 1980s, as capacities of both types of devices increased, the SI prefix G, with SI meaning, was commonly applied to disk storage, while M in its binary meaning, became common for computer memory. In the 1990s, the prefix G, in its binary meaning, became commonly used for computer memory capacity. The first terabyte (SI prefix, bytes) hard disk drive was introduced in 2007.\nThe dual usage of the kilo (K), mega (M), and giga (G) prefixes as both powers of 1000 and powers of 1024 has been recorded in standards and dictionaries. For example, the obsolete standard ANSI/IEEE Std 1084-1986 defined dual uses for kilo and mega.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;kilo (K). (1) A prefix indicating 1000. (2) In statements involving size of computer storage, a prefix indicating 210, or 1024.\nmega (M). (1) A prefix indicating one million. (2) In statements involving size of computer storage, a prefix indicating 220, or 1048576. The binary units Kbyte and Mbyte were formally defined in the obsolete standard ANSI/IEEE Std 1212-1991.\nMany dictionaries have noted the practice of using customary prefixes to indicate binary multiples.\nOxford online dictionary historically defined, for example, megabyte as: \"Computing: a unit of information equal to one million or (strictly) bytes.\"\nThe units Kbyte, Mbyte, and Gbyte were found in the trade press and in IEEE journals. Gigabyte was formally defined in obsolete standard IEEE Std 610.10-1994 as either or 230\u00a0bytes.\nKilobyte, Kbyte, and KB were all defined in the obsolete standard IEEE 100\u20132000.\nThe hardware industry measures system memory (RAM) using the binary meaning while magnetic disk storage uses the SI definition. However, many exceptions exist. Labeling of one type of diskette uses the megabyte to denote 1024 \u00d7 1000 bytes. In the optical disks market, compact discs use \"MB\" to mean 10242 bytes while DVDs use \"GB\" to mean 10003 bytes.\nInconsistent use of units.\nDeviation between powers of 1024 and powers of 1000.\nComputer storage has become cheaper per unit and thereby larger, by many orders of magnitude since \"K\" was first used to mean 1024.\nBecause both the SI and \"binary\" meanings of kilo, mega, etc., are based on powers of 1000 or 1024 rather than simple multiples, the difference between 1M \"binary\" and 1M \"decimal\" is proportionally larger than that between 1K \"binary\" and 1k \"decimal\", and so on up the scale. The relative difference between the values in the binary and decimal interpretations increases, when using the SI prefixes as the base, from 2.4% for kilo to nearly 27% for the quetta prefix. Although the prefixes ronna and quetta have been defined, as of 2022 no names have been officially assigned to the corresponding binary prefixes. \nConsumer confusion.\nIn the early days of computers (roughly, prior to the advent of personal computers) there was little or no consumer confusion because of the technical sophistication of the buyers and their familiarity with the products. In addition, it was common for computer manufacturers to specify their products with capacities in full precision.\nIn the personal computing era, one source of consumer confusion is the difference in the way many operating systems display hard drive sizes, compared to the way hard drive manufacturers describe them. Hard drives are specified and sold using \"GB\" and \"TB\" in their decimal meaning: one billion and one trillion bytes. Many operating systems and other software, however, display hard drive and file sizes using \"MB\", \"GB\" or other SI-looking prefixes in their binary sense, just as they do for displays of RAM capacity. For example, many such systems display a hard drive marketed as \"1\u00a0TB\" as \"931\u00a0GB\". The earliest known presentation of hard disk drive capacity by an operating system using \"KB\" or \"MB\" in a binary sense is 1984; earlier operating systems generally presented the hard disk drive capacity as an exact number of bytes, with no prefix of any sort, for example, in the output of the DOS command 'CHKDSK'.\nLegal disputes.\nThe different interpretations of disk size prefixes has led to class action lawsuits against digital storage manufacturers. These cases involved both flash memory and hard disk drives.\nEarly cases.\nEarly cases (2004\u20132007) were settled prior to any court ruling with the manufacturers admitting no wrongdoing but agreeing to clarify the storage capacity of their products on the consumer packaging. Accordingly, many flash memory and hard disk manufacturers have disclosures on their packaging and web sites clarifying the formatted capacity of the devices or defining MB as 1\u00a0million bytes and 1\u00a0GB as 1\u00a0billion bytes.\n\"Willem Vroegh v. Eastman Kodak Company\".\nOn 20 February 2004, Willem Vroegh filed a lawsuit against Lexar Media, Dane\u2013Elec Memory, Fuji Photo Film USA, Eastman Kodak Company, Kingston Technology Company, Inc., Memorex Products, Inc.; PNY Technologies Inc., SanDisk Corporation, Verbatim Corporation, and Viking Interworks alleging that their descriptions of the capacity of their flash memory cards were false and misleading.\nVroegh claimed that a 256\u00a0MB Flash Memory Device had only 244\u00a0MB of accessible memory. \"Plaintiffs allege that Defendants marketed the memory capacity of their products by assuming that one megabyte equals one million bytes and one gigabyte equals one billion bytes.\" The plaintiffs wanted the defendants to use the customary values of 10242 for megabyte and 10243 for gigabyte. The plaintiffs acknowledged that the IEC and IEEE standards define a MB as one million bytes but stated that the industry has largely ignored the IEC standards.\nThe parties agreed that manufacturers could continue to use the decimal definition so long as the definition was added to the packaging and web sites. The consumers could apply for \"a discount of ten percent off a future online purchase from Defendants' Online Stores Flash Memory Device\".\n\"Orin Safier v. Western Digital Corporation\".\nOn 7 July 2005, an action entitled \"Orin Safier v. Western Digital Corporation, et al.\" was filed in the Superior Court for the City and County of San Francisco, Case No. CGC-05-442812. The case was subsequently moved to the Northern District of California, Case No. 05-03353 BZ.\nAlthough Western Digital maintained that their usage of units is consistent with \"the indisputably correct industry standard for measuring and describing storage capacity\", and that they \"cannot be expected to reform the software industry\", they agreed to settle in March 2006 with 14 June 2006 as the Final Approval hearing date.\nWestern Digital offered to compensate customers with a free download of backup and recovery software valued at US$30. They also paid $ in fees and expenses to San Francisco lawyers Adam Gutride and Seth Safier, who filed the suit. The settlement called for Western Digital to add a disclaimer to their later packaging and advertising.\n\"Cho v. Seagate Technology (US) Holdings, Inc.\".\nA lawsuit (\"Cho v. Seagate Technology (US) Holdings, Inc.\", San Francisco Superior Court, Case No. CGC-06-453195) was filed against Seagate Technology, alleging that Seagate overrepresented the amount of usable storage by 7% on hard drives sold between 22 March 2001 and 26 September 2007. The case was settled without Seagate admitting wrongdoing, but agreeing to supply those purchasers with free backup software or a 5% refund on the cost of the drives.\n\"Dinan et al. v. SanDisk LLC\".\nOn 22 January 2020, the district court of the Northern District of California ruled in favor of the defendant, SanDisk, upholding its use of \"GB\" to mean .\nUnique binary prefixes.\nEarly suggestions.\nWhile early computer scientists typically used k to mean 1000, some recognized the convenience that would result from working with multiples of 1024 and the confusion that resulted from using the same prefixes for two different meanings.\nSeveral proposals for unique binary prefixes were made in 1968. Donald Morrison proposed to use the Greek letter kappa (\u03ba) to denote 1024, \u03ba2 to denote 10242, and so on. (At the time, memory size was small, and only K was in widespread use.) Wallace Givens responded with a proposal to use bK as an abbreviation for 1024 and bK2 or bK2 for 10242, though he noted that neither the Greek letter nor lowercase letter b would be easy to reproduce on computer printers of the day. Bruce Alan Martin of Brookhaven National Laboratory further proposed that the prefixes be abandoned altogether, and the letter B be used for base-2 exponents, similar to E in decimal scientific notation, to create shorthands like 3B20 for 3 \u00d7 220, a convention still used on some calculators to present binary floating point-numbers today.\nNone of these gained much acceptance, and capitalization of the letter K became the \"de facto\" standard for indicating a factor of 1024 instead of 1000, although this could not be extended to higher powers.\nAs the discrepancy between the two systems increased in the higher-order powers, more proposals for unique prefixes were made. In 1996, Markus Kuhn proposed a system with \"di\" prefixes, like the \"dikilobyte\" (K2B or K2B). Donald Knuth, who uses decimal notation like 1\u00a0MB = 1000\u00a0kB, proposed that the powers of 1024 be designated as \"large kilobytes\" and \"large megabytes\", with abbreviations KKB and MMB. Double prefixes were already abolished from SI, however, having a multiplicative meaning (\"MMB\" would be equivalent to \"TB\"), and this proposed usage never gained any traction.\nIEC prefixes.\nThe set of binary prefixes that were eventually adopted, now referred to as the \"IEC prefixes\", were first proposed by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry's (IUPAC) Interdivisional Committee on Nomenclature and Symbols (IDCNS) in 1995. At that time, it was proposed that the terms kilobyte and megabyte be used only for 103 bytes and 106 bytes, respectively. The new prefixes \"kibi\" (kilobinary), \"mebi\" (megabinary), \"gibi\" (gigabinary) and \"tebi\" (terabinary) were also proposed at the time, and the proposed symbols for the prefixes were kb, Mb, Gb and Tb respectively, rather than Ki, Mi, Gi and Ti. The proposal was not accepted at the time.\nThe Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) began to collaborate with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) to find acceptable names for binary prefixes. IEC proposed \"kibi\", \"mebi\", \"gibi\" and \"tebi\", with the symbols Ki, Mi, Gi and Ti respectively, in 1996.\nThe names for the new prefixes are derived from the original SI prefixes combined with the term \"binary\", but contracted, by taking the first two letters of the SI prefix and \"bi\" from binary. The first letter of each such prefix is identical to the corresponding SI prefix, except that \"k\" is capitalised to \"K\".\nThe IEEE decided that their standards would use the prefixes \"kilo\", etc. with their metric definitions, but allowed the binary definitions to be used in an interim period as long as such usage was explicitly pointed out on a case-by-case basis.\nAdoption by IEC, NIST and ISO.\nIn January 1999, the IEC published the first international standard (IEC 60027-2 Amendment 2) with the new prefixes, extended up to \"pebi\" (Pi) and \"exbi\" (Ei).\nThe IEC 60027-2 Amendment 2 also states that the IEC position is the same as that of BIPM (the body that regulates the SI system); the SI prefixes retain their definitions in powers of 1000 and are never used to mean a power of 1024.\nIn usage, products and concepts typically described using powers of 1024 would continue to be, but with the new IEC prefixes. For example, a memory module of bytes (512 \u00d7) would be referred to as 512\u00a0MiB or 512 mebibytes instead of 512\u00a0MB or 512 megabytes. Conversely, since hard drives have historically been marketed using the SI convention that \"giga\" means , a \"500\u00a0GB\" hard drive would still be labeled as such. According to these recommendations, operating systems and other software would also use binary and SI prefixes in the same way, so the purchaser of a \"500\u00a0GB\" hard drive would find the operating system reporting either \"500\u00a0GB\" or \"466\u00a0GiB\", while bytes of RAM would be displayed as \"512\u00a0MiB\".\nThe second edition of the standard, published in 2000, defined them only up to \"exbi\", but in 2005, the third edition added prefixes \"zebi\" and \"yobi\", thus matching all then-defined SI prefixes with binary counterparts.\nThe harmonized ISO/IEC IEC 80000-13:2008 standard cancels and replaces subclauses 3.8 and 3.9 of IEC 60027-2:2005 (those defining prefixes for binary multiples). The only significant change is the addition of explicit definitions for some quantities. In 2009, the prefixes kibi-, mebi-, etc. were defined by ISO 80000-1 in their own right, independently of the kibibyte, mebibyte, and so on.\nThe BIPM standard JCGM 200:2012 \"International vocabulary of metrology \u2013 Basic and general concepts and associated terms (VIM), 3rd edition\" lists the IEC binary prefixes and states \"SI prefixes refer strictly to powers of 10, and should not be used for powers of 2. For example, 1 kilobit should not be used to represent bits (210 bits), which is 1 kibibit.\"\nThe additional decimal prefixes \"ronna-\" for 10009 and \"quetta-\" for 100010 were adopted by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) in 2022. The natural binary counterparts to \"ronna-\" and \"quetta-\" were suggested in a consultation paper of the International Committee for Weights and Measures' Consultative Committee for Units (CCU) as \"robi-\" (Ri, 10249) and \"quebi-\" (Qi, 102410). , no corresponding binary prefixes have been adopted by the IEC and ISO.\nOther standards bodies and organizations.\nThe IEC standard binary prefixes are now supported by other standardization bodies and technical organizations.\nThe United States National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) supports the ISO/IEC standards for\n\"Prefixes for binary multiples\" and has a web page documenting them, describing and justifying their use. NIST suggests that in English, the first syllable of the name of the binary-multiple prefix should be pronounced in the same way as the first syllable of the name of the corresponding SI prefix, and that the second syllable should be pronounced as \"bee\". NIST has stated the SI prefixes \"refer strictly to powers of 10\" and that the binary definitions \"should not be used\" for them.\nThe microelectronics industry standards body JEDEC describes the IEC prefixes in its online dictionary with a note: \"The definitions of kilo, giga, and mega based on powers of two are included only to reflect common usage.\" The JEDEC standards for semiconductor memory use the customary prefix symbols K, M and G in the binary sense.\nOn 19 March 2005, the IEEE standard IEEE 1541-2002 (\"Prefixes for Binary Multiples\") was elevated to a full-use standard by the IEEE Standards Association after a two-year trial period. However, as of \u00a02008[ [update]], the IEEE Publications division does not require the use of IEC prefixes in its major magazines such as \"Spectrum\" or \"Computer\". \nThe International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM), which maintains the International System of Units (SI), expressly prohibits the use of SI prefixes to denote binary multiples, and recommends the use of the IEC prefixes as an alternative since units of information are not included in SI.\nThe Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) prohibits the use of SI prefixes with anything but a power-of-1000 meaning, but does not recommend or otherwise cite the IEC binary prefixes.\nThe European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC) adopted the IEC-recommended binary prefixes via the harmonization document HD\u00a060027-2:2003-03. The European Union (EU) has required the use of the IEC binary prefixes since 2007.\nCurrent practice in information technology.\nMost computer hardware uses SI prefixes to state capacity and define other performance parameters such as data rate. Main and cache memories are notable exceptions.\nCapacities of main memory and cache memory are usually expressed with customary binary prefixes On the other hand, flash memory, like that found in solid state drives, mostly uses SI prefixes to state capacity.\nSome operating systems and other software continue to use the customary binary prefixes in displays of memory, disk storage capacity, and file size, but SI prefixes in other areas such as network communication speeds and processor speeds.\nIn the following subsections, unless otherwise noted, examples are first given using the common prefixes used in each case, and then followed by interpretation using other notation where appropriate.\nOperating systems.\nPrior to the release of Macintosh System Software (1984), file sizes were typically reported by the operating system without any prefixes. Today, most operating systems report file sizes with prefixes.\nSoftware.\nAs of February 2010[ [update]], most software did not distinguish symbols for binary and decimal prefixes. The IEC binary naming convention is used by some to make this distinction.\nOne of the stated goals of the introduction of the IEC prefixes was \"to preserve the SI prefixes as unambiguous decimal multipliers\". Programs such as fdisk/cfdisk, parted, and apt-get use SI prefixes with their decimal meaning.\nExample of the use of IEC binary prefixes in the Linux operating system displaying traffic volume on a network interface in kibibytes (KiB) and mebibytes (MiB), as obtained with the ifconfig utility:\nSoftware that uses IEC binary prefixes for powers of 1024 \"and\" uses standard SI prefixes for powers of 1000 includes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSoftware that uses standard SI prefixes for powers of 1000, and does not use any prefixes for powers of 1024, includes:\nSoftware that supports decimal prefixes for powers of 1000 \"and\" binary prefixes for powers of 1024 (but does not follow SI or IEC nomenclature for this) includes:\nComputer hardware.\nHardware types that use powers-of-1024 multipliers, such as memory, continue to be marketed with customary binary prefixes.\nComputer memory.\nMeasurements of most types of electronic memory such as RAM and ROM are given using customary binary prefixes (kilo, mega, and giga). This includes some flash memory, like EEPROMs. For example, a \"512-megabyte\" memory module is bytes (512 \u00d7 , or ).\nJEDEC Solid State Technology Association, the semiconductor engineering standardization body of the Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA), continues to include the customary binary definitions of kilo, mega and giga in their \"Terms, Definitions, and Letter Symbols\" document,\nand uses those definitions in later memory standards (See also JEDEC memory standards.)\nMany computer programming tasks reference memory in terms of powers of two because of the inherent binary design of current hardware addressing systems. For example, a 16-bit processor register can reference at most items (bytes, words, or other objects); this is conveniently expressed as \"64K\" items. An operating system might map memory as 4096-byte pages, in which case exactly 8192 pages could be allocated within bytes of memory: \"8K\" (8192) pages of \"4 kilobytes\" (4096 bytes) each within \"32 megabytes\" (32\u00a0MiB) of memory.\nHard disk drives.\nAll hard disk drive manufacturers state capacity using SI prefixes.\nFlash drives.\nUSB flash drives, flash-based memory cards like CompactFlash or Secure Digital, and flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs) use SI prefixes;\nfor example, a \"256 MB\" flash card provides at least 256 million bytes (), not 256\u00d71024\u00d71024 (). The flash memory chips inside these devices contain considerably more than the quoted capacities, but much like a traditional hard drive, some space is reserved for internal functions of the flash drive. These include wear leveling, error correction, sparing, and metadata needed by the device's internal firmware.\nFloppy drives.\nFloppy disks have existed in numerous physical and logical formats, and have been sized inconsistently. In part, this is because the end user capacity of a particular disk is a function of the controller hardware, so that the same disk could be formatted to a variety of capacities. In many cases, the media are marketed without any indication of the end user capacity, as for example, DSDD, meaning double-sided double-density.\nThe last widely adopted diskette was the 3.5-inch high density. This has a formatted capacity of bytes or 1440\u00a0KB (1440 \u00d7 1024, using \"KB\" in the customary binary sense). These are marketed as \"HD\", or \"1.44\u00a0MB\" or both. This usage creates a third definition of \"megabyte\" as 1000\u00d71024 bytes.\nWhen these disks were commonplace, most operating systems displayed the capacity using \"MB\" in the customary binary sense, resulting in a display of \"1.4\u00a0MB\" (). Some users have noticed the missing 0.04\u00a0MB and both Apple and Microsoft have support bulletins referring to them as 1.4\u00a0MB.\nThe earlier \"1200\u00a0KB\" (1200 \u00d7 1024 bytes) 5.25-inch diskette sold with the IBM PC AT was marketed as \"1.2\u00a0MB\" (). The largest 8-inch diskette formats could contain more than a megabyte, and the capacities of those devices were often irregularly specified in megabytes, also without controversy.\nOlder and smaller diskette formats were usually identified as an accurate number of (binary) KB, for example the Apple Disk II described as \"140KB\" had a 140 \u00d7 1024-byte capacity, and the original \"360KB\" double sided, double density disk drive used on the IBM PC had a 360 \u00d7 1024-byte capacity.\nIn many cases diskette hardware was marketed based on unformatted capacity, and the overhead required to format sectors on the media would reduce the nominal capacity as well (and this overhead typically varied based on the size of the formatted sectors), leading to more irregularities.\nOptical discs.\nThe capacities of most optical disc storage media like DVD, Blu-ray Disc, HD DVD and magneto-optical (MO) are given using SI decimal prefixes. A \"4.7\u00a0GB\" DVD has a nominal capacity of about 4.38\u00a0GiB. However, CD capacities are always given using customary binary prefixes. Thus a \"700-MB\" (or \"80-minute\") CD has a nominal capacity of about 700\u00a0MiB (approximately 730\u00a0MB).\nTape drives and media.\nTape drive and media manufacturers use SI decimal prefixes to identify capacity.\nData transmission and clock rates.\nCertain units are always used with SI decimal prefixes even in computing contexts.\nTwo examples are hertz (Hz), which is used to measure the clock rates of electronic components, and to bit/s and B/s, which are used to measure data transmission speed.\nBus clock speeds and therefore bandwidths are both quoted using SI decimal prefixes.\nUse by industry.\nIEC prefixes are used by Toshiba, IBM, HP to advertise or describe some of their products. According to one HP brochure, \"[t]o reduce confusion, vendors are pursuing one of two remedies: they are changing SI prefixes to the new binary prefixes, or they are recalculating the numbers as powers of ten.\" The IBM Data Center also uses IEC prefixes to reduce confusion. The IBM Style Guide reads To help avoid inaccuracy (especially with the larger prefixes) and potential ambiguity, the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) in 2000 adopted a set of prefixes specifically for binary multipliers (See IEC 60027-2). Their use is now supported by the United States National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and incorporated into ISO 80000. They are also required by EU law and in certain contexts in the US.\nHowever, most documentation and products in the industry continue to use SI prefixes when referring to binary multipliers. In product documentation, follow the same standard that is used in the product itself (for example, in the interface or firmware). Whether you choose to use IEC prefixes for powers of 2 and SI prefixes for powers of 10, or use SI prefixes for a dual purpose ... be consistent in your usage and explain to the user your adopted system. \nOther uses.\nThe international standard ISO 80000-1 defines the prefixes kibi-, mebi-, gibi- ... without limiting their application to information technology. Uses of binary prefixes for quantities other than bits or bytes include their use to indicate binary multiples of the frequency unit hertz (Hz), for example the kibihertz (symbol KiHz) is 1024 Hz.\nDefinitions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4078", "revid": "9719271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4078", "title": "National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum", "text": "Professional sports hall of fame in New York, U.S.\nThe National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum is a history museum and hall of fame in Cooperstown, New York, operated by private interests. It serves as the central point of the history of baseball in the United States and displays baseball-related artifacts and exhibits, honoring those who have excelled in playing, managing, and serving the sport. The Hall's motto is \"Preserving History, Honoring Excellence, Connecting Generations\". Cooperstown is often used as shorthand (or a metonym) for the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum.\nThe Hall of Fame was established in 1939 by Stephen Carlton Clark, an heir to the Singer Sewing Machine fortune. Clark sought to bring tourists to a city hurt by the Great Depression, which reduced the local tourist trade, and Prohibition, which devastated the local hops industry. Clark constructed the Hall of Fame's building, which was dedicated on June 12, 1939. (His granddaughter, Jane Forbes Clark, is the current chairman of the board of directors.) The erroneous claim that Civil War hero Abner Doubleday invented baseball in Cooperstown was instrumental in the early marketing of the Hall.\nAn expanded library and research facility opened in 1994. Dale Petroskey became the organization's president in 1999. In 2002, the Hall launched \"Baseball as America\", a traveling exhibit that toured ten American museums over six years. The Hall of Fame has since also sponsored educational programming on the Internet to bring the Hall of Fame to schoolchildren who might not visit. The Hall and Museum completed a series of renovations in spring 2005. The Hall of Fame also presents an annual exhibit at FanFest at the Major League Baseball All-Star Game.\nInductees.\nAmong baseball fans, \"Hall of Fame\" means not only the museum and facility in Cooperstown, New York, but the pantheon of players, managers, umpires, executives, and pioneers who have been inducted into the Hall. The first five men elected were Ty Cobb, Babe Ruth, Honus Wagner, Christy Mathewson and Walter Johnson, chosen in 1936; roughly 20 more were selected before the entire group was inducted at the Hall's 1939 opening. As of \u00a02022[ [update]], 340 people had been elected to the Hall of Fame, including 239 former Major League Baseball players, 39 Negro league baseball players and executives, 23 managers, 10 umpires, and 36 pioneers, executives, and organizers. One hundred eighteen members of the Hall of Fame have been inducted posthumously, including four who died after their selection was announced. Of the 39 Negro league members, 31 were inducted posthumously, including all 26 selected since the 1990s. The Hall of Fame includes one female member, Effa Manley.\nThe newest members, inducted on July 24, 2022, are players David Ortiz, Tony Oliva, Jim Kaat, Gil Hodges and Minnie Minoso; and executives Buck O'Neil and Bud Fowler. On July 23, 2023, the Hall will induct its newest class, consisting of players Fred McGriff and Scott Rolen.\nIn 2019, former Yankees closer Mariano Rivera became the first player to be elected unanimously. Derek Jeter, Marvin Miller, Ted Simmons, and Larry Walker were to be inducted in 2020, but their induction ceremony was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic until July 24, 2021. The ceremony was open to the public, as COVID restrictions had been lifted.\nSelection process.\nPlayers are currently inducted into the Hall of Fame through election by either the Baseball Writers' Association of America (or BBWAA), or the Veterans Committee, which now consists of four subcommittees, each of which considers and votes for candidates from a separate era of baseball. Five years after retirement, any player with 10 years of major league experience who passes a screening committee (which removes from consideration players of clearly lesser qualification) is eligible to be elected by BBWAA members with 10 years' membership or more who also have been actively covering MLB at any time in the 10 years preceding the election (the latter requirement was added for the 2016 election). From a final ballot typically including 25\u201340 candidates, each writer may vote for up to 10 players; until the late 1950s, voters were advised to cast votes for the maximum 10 candidates. Any player named on 75% or more of all ballots cast is elected. A player who is named on fewer than 5% of ballots is dropped from future elections. In some instances, the screening committee had restored their names to later ballots, but in the mid-1990s, dropped players were made permanently ineligible for Hall of Fame consideration, even by the Veterans Committee. A 2001 change in the election procedures restored the eligibility of these dropped players; while their names will not appear on future BBWAA ballots, they may be considered by the Veterans Committee. Players receiving 5% or more of the votes but fewer than 75% are reconsidered annually until a maximum of ten years of eligibility (lowered from fifteen years for the 2015 election).\nUnder special circumstances, certain players may be deemed eligible for induction even though they have not met all requirements. Addie Joss was elected in 1978, despite only playing nine seasons before he died of meningitis. Additionally, if an otherwise eligible player dies before his fifth year of retirement, then that player may be placed on the ballot at the first election at least six months after his death. Roberto Clemente set the precedent: the writers put him up for consideration after his death on New Year's Eve, 1972, and he was inducted in 1973.\nThe five-year waiting period was established in 1954 after an evolutionary process. In 1936 all players were eligible, including active ones. From the 1937 election until the 1945 election, there was no waiting period, so any retired player was eligible, but writers were discouraged from voting for current major leaguers. Since there was no formal rule preventing a writer from casting a ballot for an active player, the scribes did not always comply with the informal guideline; Joe DiMaggio received a vote in 1945, for example. From the 1946 election until the 1954 election, an official one-year waiting period was in effect. (DiMaggio, for example, retired after the 1951 season and was first eligible in the 1953 election.) The modern rule establishing a wait of five years was passed in 1954, although those who had already been eligible under the old rule were grandfathered into the ballot, thus permitting Joe DiMaggio to be elected within four years of his retirement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Lineup for Yesterday\"\n\"Z is for Zenith\"\"The summit of fame.\"\"These men are up there.\"\"These men are the game.\"\n \u2014 Ogden Nash, \"Sport\" magazine (January 1949) \nContrary to popular belief, no formal exception was made for Lou Gehrig (other than to hold a special one-man election for him): there was no waiting period at that time, and Gehrig met all other qualifications, so he would have been eligible for the next regular election after he retired during the 1939 season. However, the BBWAA decided to hold a special election at the 1939 Winter Meetings in Cincinnati, specifically to elect Gehrig (most likely because it was known that he was terminally ill, making it uncertain that he would live long enough to see another election). Nobody else was on that ballot, and the numerical results have never been made public. Since no elections were held in 1940 or 1941, the special election permitted Gehrig to enter the Hall while still alive.\nIf a player fails to be elected by the BBWAA within 10 years of his retirement from active play, he may be selected by the Veterans Committee. Following changes to the election process for that body made in 2010 and 2016, it is now responsible for electing all otherwise eligible candidates who are not eligible for the BBWAA ballot \u2014 both long-retired players and non-playing personnel (managers, umpires, and executives). From 2011 to 2016, each candidate could be considered once every three years; now, the frequency depends on the era in which an individual made his greatest contributions. A more complete discussion of the new process is available below.\nFrom 2008 to 2010, following changes made by the Hall in July 2007, the main Veterans Committee, then made up of living Hall of Famers, voted only on players whose careers began in 1943 or later. These changes also established three separate committees to select other figures:\nPlayers of the Negro leagues have also been considered at various times, beginning in 1971. In 2005, the Hall completed a study on African American players between the late 19th century and the integration of the major leagues in 1947, and conducted a special election for such players in February 2006; seventeen figures from the Negro leagues were chosen in that election, in addition to the eighteen previously selected. Following the 2010 changes, Negro leagues figures were primarily considered for induction alongside other figures from the 1871\u20131946 era, called the \"Pre-Integration Era\" by the Hall; since 2016, Negro leagues figures are primarily considered alongside other figures from what the Hall calls the \"Early Baseball\" era (1871\u20131949).\nPredictably, the selection process catalyzes endless debate among baseball fans over the merits of various candidates. Even players elected years ago remain the subjects of discussions as to whether they deserved election. For example, Bill James' 1994 book \"Whatever Happened to the Hall of Fame?\" goes into detail about who he believes does and does not belong in the Hall of Fame.\nNon-induction of banned players.\nThe selection rules for the Baseball Hall of Fame were modified to prevent the induction of anyone on Baseball's \"permanently ineligible\" list, such as Pete Rose or \"Shoeless Joe\" Jackson. Many others have been barred from participation in MLB, but none have Hall of Fame qualifications on the level of Jackson or Rose.\nJackson and Rose were both banned from MLB for life for actions related to gambling on their own teams\u2014Jackson was determined to have cooperated with those who conspired to intentionally lose the 1919 World Series, and for accepting payment for losing, and Rose voluntarily accepted a permanent spot on the ineligible list in return for MLB's promise to make no official finding in relation to alleged betting on the Cincinnati Reds when he was their manager in the 1980s. (Baseball's Rule 21, prominently posted in every clubhouse locker room, mandates permanent banishment from MLB for having a gambling interest of any sort on a game in which a player or manager is directly involved.) Rose later admitted that he bet on the Reds in his 2004 autobiography. Baseball fans are deeply split on the issue of whether these two should remain banned or have their punishment revoked. Writer Bill James, though he advocates Rose eventually making it into the Hall of Fame, compared the people who want to put Jackson in the Hall of Fame to \"those women who show up at murder trials wanting to marry the cute murderer\".\nChanges to Veterans Committee process.\nThe actions and composition of the Veterans Committee have been at times controversial, with occasional selections of contemporaries and teammates of the committee members over seemingly more worthy candidates.\nIn 2001, the Veterans Committee was reformed to comprise the living Hall of Fame members and other honorees. The revamped Committee held three elections, in 2003 and 2007, for both players and non-players, and in 2005 for players only. No individual was elected in that time, sparking criticism among some observers who expressed doubt whether the new Veterans Committee would ever elect a player. The Committee members, most of whom were Hall members, were accused of being reluctant to elect new candidates in the hope of heightening the value of their own selection. After no one was selected for the third consecutive election in 2007, Hall of Famer Mike Schmidt noted, \"The same thing happens every year. The current members want to preserve the prestige as much as possible, and are unwilling to open the doors.\" In 2007, the committee and its selection processes were again reorganized; the main committee then included all living members of the Hall, and voted on a reduced number of candidates from among players whose careers began in 1943 or later. Separate committees, including sportswriters and broadcasters, would select umpires, managers and executives, as well as players from earlier eras.\nIn the first election to be held under the 2007 revisions, two managers and three executives were elected in December 2007 as part of the 2008 election process. The next Veterans Committee elections for players were held in December 2008 as part of the 2009 election process; the main committee did not select a player, while the panel for pre\u2013World War II players elected Joe Gordon in its first and ultimately only vote. The main committee voted as part of the election process for inductions in odd-numbered years, while the pre-World War II panel would vote every five years, and the panel for umpires, managers, and executives voted as part of the election process for inductions in even-numbered years.\nFurther changes to the Veterans Committee process were announced by the Hall on July 26, 2010, effective with the 2011 election.\nAll individuals eligible for induction but not eligible for BBWAA consideration were considered on a single ballot, grouped by the following eras in which they made their greatest contributions:\nThe Hall used the BBWAA's Historical Overview Committee to formulate the ballots for each era, consisting of 12 individuals for the Expansion Era and 10 for the other eras. The Hall's board of directors selected a committee of 16 voters for each era, made up of Hall of Famers, executives, baseball historians, and media members. Each committee met and voted at the Baseball Winter Meetings once every three years. The Expansion Era committee held its first vote in 2010 for 2011 induction, with longtime general manager Pat Gillick becoming the first individual elected under the new procedure. The Golden Era committee voted in 2011 for the induction class of 2012, with Ron Santo becoming the first player elected under the new procedure. The Pre-Integration Era committee voted in 2012 for the induction class of 2013, electing three figures. Subsequent elections rotated among the three committees in that order through the 2016 election.\nIn July 2016, the Hall of Fame announced a restructuring of the timeframes to be considered, with a much greater emphasis on modern eras. Four new committees were established:\nAll committees' ballots now include 10 candidates. At least one committee is scheduled to convene each December as part of the election process for the following calendar year's induction ceremony. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the December 2020 meetings of the Early Baseball and Golden Days committees were postponed, apparently pushing back the rotation of all committee meetings by a year.\nThe eligibility criteria for Era Committee consideration differ between players, managers, and executives.\nPlayers and managers with multiple teams.\nWhile the text on a player's or manager's plaque lists all teams for which the inductee was a member in that specific role, inductees are usually depicted wearing the cap of a specific team, though in a few cases, like umpires, they wear caps without logos. (Executives are not depicted wearing caps.) Additionally, as of 2015, inductee biographies on the Hall's website for all players and managers, and executives who were associated with specific teams, list a \"primary team\", which does not necessarily match the cap logo. The Hall selects the logo \"based on where that player makes his most indelible mark.\"\nAlthough the Hall always made the final decision on which logo was shown, until 2001 the Hall deferred to the wishes of players or managers whose careers were linked with multiple teams. Some examples of inductees associated with multiple teams are the following:\nIn all of the above cases, the \"primary team\" is the team for which the inductee spent the largest portion of his career except for Ryan, whose primary team is listed as the Angels despite playing one fewer season for that team than for the Astros.\nIn 2001, the Hall of Fame decided to change the policy on cap logo selection, as a result of rumors that some teams were offering compensation, such as number retirement, money, or organizational jobs, in exchange for the cap designation. (For example, though Wade Boggs denied the claims, some media reports had said that his contract with the Tampa Bay Devil Rays required him to request depiction in the Hall of Fame as a Devil Ray.) The Hall decided that it would no longer defer to the inductee, though the player's wishes would be considered, when deciding on the logo to appear on the plaque. Newly elected members affected by the change include the following:\nThe museum.\nSam Crane (who had played a decade in 19th century baseball before becoming a manager and sportswriter) had first approached the idea of making a memorial to the great players of the past in what was believed to have been the birthplace of baseball: Cooperstown, New York, but the idea did not muster much momentum until after his death in 1925. In 1934, the idea for establishing a Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum was devised by several individuals, such as Ford Frick (president of the National League) and Alexander Cleland, a Scottish immigrant who decided to serve as the first executive secretary for the Museum for the next seven years that worked with the interests of the Village and Major League Baseball. Stephen Carlton Clark (a Cooperstown native) paid for the construction of the museum, which was planned to open in 1939 to mark the \"Centennial of Baseball\", which included renovations to Doubleday Field. William Beattie served as the first curator of the museum.\nAccording to the Hall of Fame, approximately 260,000 visitors enter the museum each year, and the running total has surpassed 17\u00a0million. These visitors see only a fraction of its 40,000 artifacts, 3\u00a0million library items (such as newspaper clippings and photos) and 140,000 baseball cards.\nThe Hall has seen a noticeable decrease in attendance in recent years. A 2013 story on ESPN.com about the village of Cooperstown and its relation to the game partially linked the reduced attendance with Cooperstown Dreams Park, a youth baseball complex about away in the town of Hartwick. The 22 fields at Dreams Park currently draw 17,000 players each summer for a week of intensive play; while the complex includes housing for the players, their parents and grandparents must stay elsewhere. According to the story,\nPrior to Dreams Park, a room might be filled for a week by several sets of tourists. Now, that room will be taken by just one family for the week, and that family may only go into Cooperstown and the Hall of Fame once. While there are other contributing factors (the recession and high gas prices among them), the Hall's attendance has tumbled since Dreams Park opened. The Hall drew 383,000 visitors in 1999. It drew 262,000 last year.\nNotable events.\n1982 unauthorized sales.\nA controversy erupted in 1982, when it emerged that some historic items given to the Hall had been sold on the collectibles market. The items had been lent to the Baseball Commissioner's office, gotten mixed up with other property owned by the Commissioner's office and employees of the office, and moved to the garage of Joe Reichler, an assistant to Commissioner Bowie Kuhn, who sold the items to resolve his personal financial difficulties. Under pressure from the New York Attorney General, the Commissioner's Office made reparations, but the negative publicity damaged the Hall of Fame's reputation, and made it more difficult for it to solicit donations.\n2014 commemorative coins.\nIn 2012, Congress passed and President Barack Obama signed a law ordering the United States Mint to produce and sell commemorative, non-circulating coins to benefit the private, non-profit Hall. The bill, , was introduced in the United States House of Representatives by Rep. Richard Hanna, a Republican from New York, and passed the House on October 26, 2011. The coins, which depict baseball gloves and balls, are the first concave designs produced by the Mint. The mintage included 50,000 gold coins, 400,000 silver coins, and 750,000 clad (nickel-copper) coins. The Mint released them on March 27, 2014, and the gold and silver editions quickly sold out. The Hall receives money from surcharges included in the sale price: a total of $9.5\u00a0million if all the coins are sold.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
