{"id": "10704", "revid": "1152700228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10704", "title": "Transport in the Faroe Islands", "text": "Internal transport system of the Faroe Islands\nThe Faroe Islands is served by an internal transport system based on roads, ferries, and helicopters. As of the 1970s, the majority of the population centres of the Faroe Islands have been joined to a single road network, connected by bridges and tunnels.\nInternational transport, both for passengers and freight, remains difficult due to high costs, long distances, and bad weather, especially during the winter. Exporting domestically produced goods is thus expensive; this limits the development of a commodity-based economy.\nHistory.\nThe general history of the Faroese transportation system can be divided into four periods:\nBefore 1900.\nDuring this first period, transportation was rather primitive; it consisted of row boats, walking, and, in certain places, horse transport (for the upper class). Boats were used for transport between villages, even on the same island, as land transport was difficult due to the steep mountains.\n1900 to the end of World War II.\nThe second period commenced in the late-19th century, when ferry connections began to emerge. The ferries were largely private initiatives, but they increasingly came to be operated by the public sector. This was supplemented by an emerging culture of automobiles. After World War\u00a0II, a large part of the Faroe Islands was accessible via ferries and automobiles; private buses and taxis operated as well.\nThe end of World War II to the 1970s.\nThe third period was characterized by modernization. The introduction of the car ferry made it possible to drive between the various city centres of the country. It became possible to drive from the capital T\u00f3rshavn to V\u00e1gur and Tv\u00f8royri in the south, to Fuglafj\u00f8r\u00f0ur and Klaksv\u00edk in the north, and to the airport at S\u00f8rv\u00e1gur in the west. V\u00e1gar Airport was built by the British during World War\u00a0II; it was reopened as a civilian international airport in\u00a01963. Additionally, the road network was further developed. Tunnels to distant valleys and firths such as Hvalba, Sandv\u00edk, and Nor\u00f0depil were constructed in the 1960s.\n1970s onwards.\nThe fourth period saw the emergence of a \"mainland\" thanks to tunnels and bridges. In\u00a01973 the Streymin Bridge, the first bridge between two Faroese islands, was established between Nor\u00f0sk\u00e1li on Eysturoy and Nesv\u00edk on Streymoy; in\u00a01976 the new tunnel between Nor\u00f0sk\u00e1li and Eysturoy was completed. The Faroes' two largest islands were connected into what is now referred to as \"Meginlandi\u00f0\", the Mainland. In\u00a01975 the causeway between Vi\u00f0oy and Bor\u00f0oy was constructed, in\u00a01986 a similar one between Bor\u00f0oy and Kunoy was established, and in\u00a01992 the capital T\u00f3rshavn was granted a first-class connection to the northern parts of the islands, creating the infrastructural prerequisites for a mobile society on the mainland.\nThe newest developments of the Faroese transportation network are the sub-sea tunnels. In\u00a02002 the tunnel between Streymoy and V\u00e1gar\u2014the latter is the airport island\u2014was finished, and in\u00a02006 the Nor\u00f0oyatunnilin between Eysturoy and Bor\u00f0oy was finished. A toll, payable at petrol stations, of 170\u00a0DKK (130\u00a0DKK in June 2013) is charged to drive through these two tunnels; the others are free. Now more than 85% of the Faroese population is accessible by automobile. On 19 December 2020 the Eysturoyartunnilin between Streymoy and Eysturoy opened for traffic.\nFuture.\nIn early 2014 all political parties of the L\u00f8gting agreed to the construction of two tunnels: Eysturoyartunnilin, a tunnel connecting Eysturoy and Streymoy, which was completed in 2020, and Sandoyartunnilin, a tunnel connecting Streymoy and Sandoy, will be completed by 2023. The combined cost of the project is estimated at almost 3 billion DKK, and will be the most expensive construction project in Faroese history. Eysturoyartunnilin has the world's first under-sea roundabout. Its three tubes are 7.1\u00a0km, 2.1\u00a0km and 1.8\u00a0km long, linked together by the roundabout. Sandoyartunnilin will be 10.6\u00a0km long.\nThere have been talks about a possible tunnel between Sandoy and Su\u00f0uroy. The tunnel would be around 20\u201325\u00a0km long. If completed this would mean that 99% of the Faroes would be connected by road.\nRailways.\nThere are no passenger railways on the Faroe Islands due to the difficult landscape, small population, and relatively short distances.\nTwo railways have operated on the islands. A tunnel and rail system supplied a NATO radar installation, now decommissioned, which previously existed on a mountaintop in the southern part of Streymoy Island. The Gj\u00f3gv incline railway operates a freight service between the harbour and the village of Gj\u00f3gv on Eysturoy island.\nRoads.\nRoads have become the main method of transportation on the islands, replacing boats. In 2021, there were 16,289 petrol cars, 9,795 diesel cars, and 567 electric cars. \nGoogle Street View became available for some roads in November 2017, supplied by residents and sheep rather than Google cars.\nHighways.\n\"total:\" \n\"national highways:\" \n\"local roads:\" \nBus services.\nThe national bus network (\"Bygdalei\u00f0ir\", Village routes) is operated by Strandfaraskip Landsins operating the characteristic blue buses. Most buses are modern and were built by the Volvo company. The principal route is T\u00f3rshavn-Klaksv\u00edk (via the Nor\u00f0oyatunnilin tunnel and Streymin Bridge). Although individual buses are generally owned by individuals or small companies, the timetables, fares, and levels of service are set by Strandfaraskip Landsins and the government.\nThe municipalities of T\u00f3rshavn, Klaksv\u00edk, Eysturkommuna and Sunda operate their own free-of-charge local services, usually referred to as \"Busslei\u00f0in\". T\u00f3rshavn's Busslei\u00f0in has five routes and is operated by the T\u00f3rshavn municipality. Like Bygdalei\u00f0ir, the actual buses are privately owned, but contracted to Busslei\u00f0in. Klaksv\u00edk's service commenced in 2014.\nSea.\nMerchant marine.\n\"total:\" 6\u00a0ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT) (1999 est.)\n\"ships by type:\"\n* cargo ship 2,\n* petroleum tanker 1,\n* refrigerated cargo ship 1,\n* roll-on/roll-off 1,\n* short-sea passenger 1.\nFerries.\nThe Faroese ferry company Strandfaraskip Landsins operates a network of ferries, in addition to the rural blue buses, called Bygdalei\u00f0ir (Villagelines). Their largest vessel is the \"Smyril\", a roll-on/roll-off ferry which maintains the link between T\u00f3rshavn and the southern island, Su\u00f0uroy. This vessel entered service in\u00a02005. Another ferry, \"Teistin\", a roll-on-off ferry, maintains the link between the island of Sandoy and Streymoy; the ferry port on Streymoy is at Gamlar\u00e6tt near Kirkjub\u00f8ur and Velbasta\u00f0ur on the south-west coast of Streymoy. A sub-sea tunnel is under construction between Sandoy and Streymoy, it will open in 2023 according to the plan. After that there will not be need of a ferry between the two islands. The proposed Su\u00f0uroyartunnilin would also remove the ferry services to Sk\u00favoy and Su\u00f0uroy.\nSince the early 1980s, Smyril Line has operated a regular international passenger, car and freight service using a large, modern, multipurpose ferry, the \"Norr\u00f6na\". The weekly service links the Faroe Islands with Sey\u00f0isfj\u00f6r\u00f0ur, Iceland, and Hirtshals, Denmark.\nAir.\nAtlantic Airways is the national airline of the Faroe Islands, and has its operating base at V\u00e1gar Airport. It operates regular flights to Iceland, Denmark, Norway, and Scotland while there are also seasonal flights connecting the Faroe Islands with destinations including Barcelona, Mallorca, Lisbon. and Stewart International Airport (KSWF), New Windsor, NY.\nOriginally state-owned, the airline has been partially privatised. The Government has plans to continue selling its remaining share in the airline. As a private company, Atlantic Airways continues to provide the Faroe Islands search and rescue capability, under contract to the government.\nAirports.\nThe Faroe Islands has only one commercial airport. V\u00e1gar Airport is located close to the village of S\u00f8rv\u00e1gur, on the island of V\u00e1gar. It has a paved 1,799 m / 5,902\u00a0ft runway, and was originally built by British Royal Engineers during the Second World War. The main airlines operating regular scheduled flights are Atlantic Airways and Scandinavian Airlines. Other airlines operate charter flights.\nHeliports.\nHelicopters provide domestic scheduled transportation, medical evacuation, and search &amp; rescue activities.\nThere are public (passenger and freight) heliports at Fro\u00f0ba, Hattarv\u00edk, Kirkja, Klaksv\u00edk, Mykines, Sk\u00favoy, St\u00f3ra D\u00edmun, Sv\u00ednoy, and T\u00f3rshavn (Bo\u00f0anes). There are air ambulance heliports at Skopun and T\u00f3rshavn (hospital).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10705", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10705", "title": "Military of the Faroe Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "10707", "revid": "34027301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10707", "title": "Fiji", "text": "Country in Melanesia, Oceania\nFiji ( , ; , ]; Fiji Hindi: \u092b\u093c\u093f\u091c\u0940, \"Fij\u012b\"), officially the Republic of Fiji, is an island country in Melanesia, part of Oceania in the South Pacific Ocean. It lies about north-northeast of New Zealand. Fiji consists of an archipelago of more than 330 islands\u2014of which about 110 are permanently inhabited\u2014and more than 500 islets, amounting to a total land area of about . The most outlying island group is Ono-i-Lau. About 87% of the total population of 924,610 live on the two major islands, Viti Levu and Vanua Levu. About three-quarters of Fijians live on Viti Levu's coasts: either in the capital city of Suva; or in smaller urban centres such as Nadi\u2014where tourism is the major local industry; or in Lautoka, where the sugar-cane industry is dominant. The interior of Viti Levu is sparsely inhabited because of its terrain.\nThe majority of Fiji's islands were formed by volcanic activity starting around 150\u00a0million years ago. Some geothermal activity still occurs today on the islands of Vanua Levu and Taveuni. The geothermal systems on Viti Levu are non-volcanic in origin and have low-temperature surface discharges (of between roughly ).\nHumans have lived in Fiji since the second millennium BCE\u2014first Austronesians and later Melanesians, with some Polynesian influences. Europeans first visited Fiji in the 17th century. In 1874, after a brief period in which Fiji was an independent kingdom, the British established the Colony of Fiji. Fiji operated as a Crown colony until 1970, when it gained independence and became known as the Dominion of Fiji. In 1987, following a series of coups d'\u00e9tat, the military government that had taken power declared it a republic. In a 2006 coup, Commodore Frank Bainimarama seized power. In 2009, the Fijian High Court ruled that the military leadership was unlawful. At that point, President Ratu Josefa Iloilo, whom the military had retained as the nominal head of state, formally abrogated the 1997 Constitution and re-appointed Bainimarama as interim prime minister. Later in 2009, Ratu Epeli Nailatikau succeeded Iloilo as president. On 17 September 2014, after years of delays, a democratic election took place. Bainimarama's FijiFirst party won 59.2% of the vote, and international observers deemed the election credible.\nFiji has one of the most developed economies in the Pacific through its abundant forest, mineral, and fish resources. The currency is the Fijian dollar, with the main sources of foreign exchange being the tourist industry, remittances from Fijians working abroad, bottled water exports, and sugar cane. The Ministry of Local Government and Urban Development supervises Fiji's local government, which takes the form of city and town councils.\nEtymology.\nThe name of Fiji's main island, Viti Levu, served as the origin of the name \"Fiji\", though the common English pronunciation is based on that of Fiji's island neighbours in Tonga. An official account of the emergence of the name states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFijians first impressed themselves on European consciousness through the writings of the members of the expeditions of Cook who met them in Tonga. They were described as formidable warriors and ferocious cannibals, builders of the finest vessels in the Pacific, but not great sailors. They inspired awe amongst the Tongans, and all their Manufactures, especially bark cloth and clubs, were highly valued and much in demand. They called their home Viti, but the Tongans called it Fisi, and it was by this foreign pronunciation, Fiji, first promulgated by Captain James Cook, that these islands are now known.\n\"Feejee\", the Anglicised spelling of the Tongan pronunciation, occurred in accounts and other writings by missionaries and other travellers visiting Fiji until the late-19th century.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nPottery art from Fijian towns shows that Fiji was settled by Austronesian peoples by at least 3500 to 1000\u00a0BCE, with Melanesians following around a thousand years later, although there are still many open questions about the specific dates and patterns of human migration. It is believed that either the Lapita people or the ancestors of the Polynesians settled the islands first, but not much is known of what became of them after the Melanesians arrived; the old culture may have had some influence on the new one, and archaeological evidence shows that some of the migrants moved on to Samoa, Tonga and even Hawai'i. Archeological evidence also shows signs of human settlement on Moturiki Island beginning at least by 600 BCE and possibly as far back as 900 BCE. Although some aspects of Fijian culture are similar to the Melanesian culture of the western Pacific, Fijian culture has a stronger connection to the older Polynesian cultures. The evidence is clear that there was trade between Fiji and neighbouring archipelagos long before Europeans made contact with Fiji.\nIn the 10th century, the Tu'i Tonga Empire was established in Tonga, and Fiji came within its sphere of influence. The Tongan influence brought Polynesian customs and language into Fiji. That empire began to decline in the 13th century.\nFiji has long had permanent settlements, but its peoples also have a history of mobility. Over the centuries, unique Fijian cultural practices developed. Fijians constructed large, elegant watercraft, with rigged sails called \"drua\" and exported some to Tonga. Fijians also developed a distinctive style of village architecture, consisting of communal and individual \"bure\" and \"vale\" housing, and an advanced system of ramparts and moats that were usually constructed around the more important settlements. Pigs were domesticated for food, and a variety of agricultural endeavors, such as banana plantations, existed from an early stage. Villages were supplied with water brought in by constructed wooden aqueducts. Fijians lived in societies led by chiefs, elders and notable warriors. Spiritual leaders, often called \"bete\", were also important cultural figures, and the production and consumption of \"yaqona\" was part of their ceremonial and community rites. Fijians developed a monetary system where the polished teeth of the sperm whale, called \"tambua\", became an active currency. A type of writing existed which can be seen today in various petroglyphs around the islands. Fijians developed a refined \"masi\" cloth textile industry, and used the cloth they produced to make sails and clothes such as the \"malo\" and the \"liku\". As with most other ancient human civilisations, warfare or preparation for warfare was an important part of everyday life in pre-colonial Fiji. The Fijians were noted for their distinctive use of weapons, especially war clubs. Fijians used many different types of clubs that can be broadly divided into two groups, two handed clubs and small specialised throwing clubs called \"ula\".\nWith the arrival of Europeans in the 17th century, and European colonization in the late 19th century, many elements of Fijian culture were either repressed or modified to ensure European \u2013 specifically, British \u2013 control. This was especially the case with respect to traditional Fijian spiritual beliefs. Early colonists and missionaries pointed to the practice of cannibalism in Fiji as providing a moral imperative justifying colonization. Europeans labelled many native Fijian customs as debased or primitive, enabling many colonists to see Fiji as a \"paradise wasted on savage cannibals\". Authors such as Deryck Scarr have perpetuated 19th century claims of \"freshly killed corpses piled up for eating\" and ceremonial mass human sacrifice on the construction of new houses and boats. In fact, during colonial times, Fiji was known as \"the Cannibal Isles\". Modern archaeological research conducted on Fijian sites has shown that Fijians did in fact practice cannibalism, which has helped modern scholars to assess the accuracy of some of these colonial European accounts. Studies conducted by scholars including Degusta, Cochrane, and Jones provide evidence of burnt or cut human skeletons, suggesting that cannibalism was practised in Fiji. However, these archaeological accounts indicate that cannibalistic practices were likely more intermittent and less ubiquitous than European settlers had implied; it appears that the cannibalism may more often have been nonviolent and ritualistic.\nEarly interaction with Europeans.\nDutch explorer Abel Tasman was the first known European visitor to Fiji, sighting the northern island of Vanua Levu and the North Taveuni archipelago in 1643 while looking for the Great Southern Continent.\nJames Cook, the British navigator, visited one of the southern Lau islands in 1774. It was not until 1789, however, that the islands were charted and plotted, when William Bligh, the castaway captain of , passed Ovalau and sailed between the main islands of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu en route to Batavia, in what is now Indonesia. Bligh Water, the strait between the two main islands, is named after him and for a time, the Fiji Islands were known as the \"Bligh Islands\".\nThe first Europeans to maintain substantial contact with the Fijians were sandalwood merchants, whalers and \"beche-de-mer\" (sea cucumber) traders. The first whaling vessel known to have visited was the \"Ann and Hope\" in 1799, and she was followed by many others in the 19th century. These ships came for drinking water, food and firewood and, later, for men to help man their ships. Some of the Europeans who came to Fiji in this period were accepted by the locals and were allowed to stay as residents.\nBy the 1820s, Levuka was established as the first European-style town in Fiji, on the island of Ovalau. The market for \"beche-de-mer\" in China was lucrative, and British and American merchants set up processing stations on various islands. Local Fijians were utilised to collect, prepare and pack the product which would then be shipped to Asia. A good cargo would result in a half-yearly profit of around $25,000 for the dealer. The Fijian workers were often given firearms and ammunition as an exchange for their labour, and by the end of the 1820s most of the Fijian chiefs had muskets and many were skilled at using them. Some Fijian chiefs soon felt confident enough with their new weapons to forcibly obtain more destructive weaponry from the Europeans. In 1834, men from Viwa and Bau were able to take control of the French ship \"L'amiable Josephine\" and use its cannon against their enemies on the Rewa River, although they later ran it aground.\nChristian missionaries like David Cargill also arrived in the 1830s from recently converted regions such as Tonga and Tahiti, and by 1840 the European settlement at Levuka had grown to about 40 houses with former whaler David Whippey being a notable resident. The religious conversion of the Fijians was a gradual process which was observed first-hand by Captain Charles Wilkes of the United States Exploring Expedition. Wilkes wrote that \"all the chiefs seemed to look upon Christianity as a change in which they had much to lose and little to gain\". Christianised Fijians, in addition to forsaking their spiritual beliefs, were pressured into cutting their hair short, adopting the sulu form of dress from Tonga and fundamentally changing their marriage and funeral traditions. This process of enforced cultural change was called \"lotu\". Intensification of conflict between the cultures increased, and Wilkes was involved in organising a large punitive expedition against the people of Malolo. He ordered an attack with rockets which acted as makeshift incendiary devices. The village, with the occupants trapped inside, quickly became an inferno with Wilkes noting that the \"shouts of men were intermingled with the cries and shrieks of the women and children\" as they burnt to death. Wilkes demanded the survivors should \"sue for mercy\" and if not \"they must expect to be exterminated\". Around 57 to 87 Maloloan people were killed in this encounter.\nCakobau and the wars against Christian infiltration.\nThe 1840s was a time of conflict where various Fiji clans attempted to assert dominance over each other. Eventually, a warlord named Seru Epenisa Cakobau of Bau Island was able to become a powerful influence in the region. His father was Ratu Tanoa Visawaqa, the Vunivalu (a chiefly title meaning warlord\",\" often translated also as paramount chief) who had previously subdued much of western Fiji. Cakobau, following on from his father, became so dominant that he was able to expel the Europeans from Levuka for five years over a dispute about their giving of weapons to his local enemies. In the early 1850s, Cakobau went one step further and declared war on all Christians. His plans were thwarted after the missionaries in Fiji received support from the already converted Tongans and the presence of a British warship. The Tongan Prince Enele Ma\u02bbafu, a Christian, had established himself on the island of Lakeba in 1848, forcibly converting the local people to the Methodist Church. Cakobau and other chiefs in the west of Fiji regarded Ma\u02bbafu as a threat to their power and resisted his attempts to expand Tonga's dominion. Cakobau's influence, however, began to wane, and his heavy imposition of taxes on other Fijian chiefs, who saw him at best as first among equals, caused them to defect from him.\nAround this time the United States also became interested in asserting their power in the region, and they threatened intervention following a number of incidents involving their consul in the Fiji islands, John Brown Williams. In 1849, Williams had his trading store looted following an accidental fire, caused by stray cannon fire during a Fourth of July celebration, and in 1853 the European settlement of Levuka was burnt to the ground. Williams blamed Cakobau for both these incidents, and the U.S. representative wanted Cakobau's capital at Bau destroyed in retaliation. A naval blockade was instead set up around the island which put further pressure on Cakobau to give up on his warfare against the foreigners and their Christian allies. Finally, on 30 April 1854, Cakobau offered his \"soro\" (supplication) and yielded to these forces. He underwent the \"lotu\" and converted to Christianity. The traditional Fijian temples in Bau were destroyed, and the sacred \"nokonoko\" trees were cut down. Cakobau and his remaining men were then compelled to join with the Tongans, backed by the Americans and British, to subjugate the remaining chiefs in the region who still refused to convert. These chiefs were soon defeated with Qaraniqio of the Rewa being poisoned and Ratu Mara of Kaba being hanged in 1855. After these wars, most regions of Fiji, except for the interior highland areas, had been forced into giving up much of their traditional systems and were now vassals of Western interest. Cakobau was retained as a largely symbolic representative of a few Fijian peoples and was allowed to take the ironic and self proclaimed title of \"Tui Viti\" (\"King of Fiji\"), but the overarching control now lay with foreign powers.\nCotton, confederacies and the Kai Colo.\nThe rising price of cotton in the wake of the American Civil War (1861\u20131865) caused an influx of hundreds of settlers to Fiji in the 1860s from Australia and the United States in order to obtain land and grow cotton. Since there was still a lack of functioning government in Fiji, these planters were often able to get the land in violent or fraudulent ways such as exchanging weapons or alcohol with Fijians who may or may not have been the true owners. Although this made for cheap land acquisition, competing land claims between the planters became problematic with no unified government to resolve the disputes. In 1865, the settlers proposed a confederacy of the seven main native kingdoms in Fiji to establish some sort of government. This was initially successful, and Cakobau was elected as the first president of the confederacy.\nWith the demand for land high, the white planters started to push into the hilly interior of Viti Levu. This put them into direct confrontation with the Kai Colo, which was a general term to describe the various Fijian clans resident to these inland districts. The Kai Colo were still living a mostly traditional lifestyle, they were not Christianised, and they were not under the rule of Cakobau or the confederacy. In 1867, a travelling missionary named Thomas Baker was killed by Kai Colo in the mountains at the headwaters of the Sigatoka River. The acting British consul, John Bates Thurston, demanded that Cakobau lead a force of Fijians from coastal areas to suppress the Kai Colo. Cakobau eventually led a campaign into the mountains but suffered a humiliating loss with 61 of his fighters being killed. Settlers also came into conflict with the local eastern Kai Colo people called the Wainimala. Thurston called in the Australia Station section of the Royal Navy for assistance. The Navy duly sent Commander Rowley Lambert and to conduct a punitive mission against the Wainimala. An armed force of 87 men shelled and burnt the village of Deoka, and a skirmish ensued which resulted in the deaths of over 40 Wainimala.\nKingdom of Fiji (1871\u20131874).\nAfter the collapse of the confederacy, Enele Ma\u02bbafu established a stable administration in the Lau Islands and the Tongans. Other foreign powers such as the United States were considering the possibility of annexing Fiji. This situation was not appealing to many settlers, almost all of whom were British subjects from Australia. Britain, however, refused to annex the country, and a compromise was needed.\nIn June 1871, George Austin Woods, an ex-lieutenant of the Royal Navy, managed to influence Cakobau and organise a group of like-minded settlers and chiefs into forming a governing administration. Cakobau was declared the monarch (\"Tui Viti\") and the Kingdom of Fiji was established. Most Fijian chiefs agreed to participate, and even Ma'afu chose to recognise Cakobau and participate in the constitutional monarchy. However, many of the settlers had come from Australia, where negotiation with the indigenous people almost universally involved forced coercion. As a result, several aggressive, racially motivated opposition groups, such as the British Subjects Mutual Protection Society, sprouted up. One group called themselves the Ku Klux Klan in a homage to the white supremacist group in America. However, when respected individuals such as Charles St Julian, Robert Sherson Swanston and John Bates Thurston were appointed by Cakobau, a degree of authority was established.\nWith the rapid increase in white settlers into the country, the desire for land acquisition also intensified. Once again, conflict with the Kai Colo in the interior of Viti Levu ensued. In 1871, the killing of two settlers near the Ba River in the northwest of the island prompted a large punitive expedition of white farmers, imported slave labourers, and coastal Fijians to be organised. This group of around 400 armed vigilantes, including veterans of the U.S. Civil War, had a battle with the Kai Colo near the village of Cubu, in which both sides had to withdraw. The village was destroyed, and the Kai Colo, despite being armed with muskets, received numerous casualties. The Kai Colo responded by making frequent raids on the settlements of the whites and Christian Fijians throughout the district of Ba. Likewise, in the east of the island on the upper reaches of the Rewa River, villages were burnt, and many Kai Colo were shot by the vigilante settler squad called the Rewa Rifles.\nAlthough the Cakobau government did not approve of the settlers taking justice into their own hands, it did want the Kai Colo subjugated and their land sold. The solution was to form an army. Robert S. Swanston, the minister for Native Affairs in the Kingdom, organised the training and arming of suitable Fijian volunteers and prisoners to become soldiers in what was variably called the King's Troops or the Native Regiment. In a similar system to the Native Police that was present in the colonies of Australia, two white settlers, James Harding and W. Fitzgerald, were appointed as the head officers of this paramilitary brigade. The formation of this force did not sit well with many of the white plantation owners as they did not trust an army of Fijians to protect their interests.\nThe situation intensified further in early 1873 when the Burns family was killed by a Kai Colo raid in the Ba River area. The Cakobau government deployed 50 King's Troopers to the region under the command of Major Fitzgerald to restore order. The local whites refused their posting, and deployment of another 50 troops under Captain Harding was sent to emphasise the government's authority. To prove the worth of the Native Regiment, this augmented force went into the interior and massacred about 170 Kai Colo people at Na Korowaiwai. Upon returning to the coast, the force was met by the white settlers who still saw the government troops as a threat. A skirmish between the government's troops and the white settlers' brigade was only prevented by the intervention of Captain William Cox Chapman of , who detained the leaders of the locals, forcing the group to disband. The authority of the King's Troops and the Cakobau government to crush the Kai Colo was now total.\nFrom March to October 1873, a force of about 200 King's Troops under the general administration of Swanston with around 1,000 coastal Fijian and white volunteer auxiliaries, led a campaign throughout the highlands of Viti Levu to annihilate the Kai Colo. Major Fitzgerald and Major H.C. Thurston (the brother of John Bates Thurston) led a two pronged attack throughout the region. The combined forces of the different clans of the Kai Colo made a stand at the village of Na Culi. The Kai Colo were defeated with dynamite and fire being used to flush them out from their defensive positions amongst the mountain caves. Many Kai Colo were killed, and one of the main leaders of the hill clans, Ratu Dradra, was forced to surrender with around 2,000 men, women and children being taken prisoner and sent to the coast. In the months after this defeat, the only main resistance was from the clans around the village of Nibutautau. Major Thurston crushed this resistance in the two months following the battle at Na Culi. Villages were burnt, Kai Colo were killed, and a further large number of prisoners were taken. About 1,000 of the prisoners (men, women and children) were sent to Levuka where some were hanged and the rest were sold into slavery and forced to work on various plantations throughout the islands.\nBlackbirding and slavery in Fiji.\nThe blackbirding era began in Fiji in 1865 when the first New Hebridean and Solomon Islands labourers were transported there to work on cotton plantations. The American Civil War had cut off the supply of cotton to the international market when the Union blockaded Confederate ports. Cotton cultivation was potentially an extremely profitable business. Thousands of European planters flocked to Fiji to establish plantations but found the natives unwilling to adapt to their plans. They sought labour from the Melanesian islands. On 5 July 1865 Ben Pease received the first licence to provide 40 labourers from the New Hebrides to Fiji.\nThe British and Queensland governments tried to regulate this recruiting and transport of labour. Melanesian labourers were to be recruited for a term of three years, paid three pounds per year, issued basic clothing, and given access to the company store for supplies. Most Melanesians were recruited by deceit, usually being enticed aboard ships with gifts, and then locked up. In 1875, the chief medical officer in Fiji, Sir William MacGregor, listed a mortality rate of 540 out of every 1,000 labourers. After the expiry of the three-year contract, the government required captains to transport the labourers back to their villages, but most ship captains dropped them off at the first island they sighted off the Fiji waters. The British sent warships to enforce the law (Pacific Islanders' Protection Act of 1872), but only a small proportion of the culprits were prosecuted.\nA notorious incident of the blackbirding trade was the 1871 voyage of the brig \"Carl\", organised by Dr. James Patrick Murray to recruit labourers to work in the plantations of Fiji. Murray had his men reverse their collars and carry black books, to appear as church missionaries. When islanders were enticed to a religious service, Murray and his men would produce guns and force the islanders onto boats. During the voyage Murray shot about 60 islanders. He was never brought to trial for his actions, as he was given immunity in return for giving evidence against his crew members. The captain of the \"Carl\", Joseph Armstrong, was later sentenced to death.\nIn addition to the blackbirded labour from other Pacific islands, thousands of people indigenous to the Fijian archipelago were sold into slavery on the plantations. As the white settler backed Cakobau government, and later the British colonial government, subjugated areas in Fiji under its power, the resultant prisoners of war were regularly sold at auction to the planters. This provided a source of revenue for the government and also dispersed the rebels to different, often isolated islands where the plantations were located. The land that was occupied by these people before they became slaves was then also sold for additional revenue. An example of this is the Lovoni people of Ovalau, who after being defeated in a war with the Cakobau government in 1871, were rounded up and sold to the settlers at \u00a36 per head. Two thousand Lovoni men, women and children were sold, and their period of slavery lasted five years. Likewise, after the Kai Colo wars in 1873, thousands of people from the hill tribes of Viti Levu were sent to Levuka and sold into slavery. Warnings from the Royal Navy stationed in the area that buying these people was illegal were largely given without enforcement, and the British consul in Fiji, Edward Bernard Marsh, regularly turned a blind eye to this type of labour trade.\nColonisation.\nDespite achieving military victories over the Kai Colo, the Cakobau government was faced with problems of legitimacy and economic viability. Indigenous Fijians and white settlers refused to pay taxes, and the cotton price had collapsed. With these major issues in mind, John Bates Thurston approached the British government, at Cakobau's request, with another offer to cede the islands. The newly elected Tory British government under Benjamin Disraeli encouraged expansion of the empire and was therefore much more sympathetic to annexing Fiji than it had been previously. The murder of Bishop John Patteson of the Melanesian Mission at Nukapu in the Reef Islands had provoked public outrage, which was compounded by the massacre by crew members of more than 150 Fijians on board the brig \"Carl.\" Two British commissioners were sent to Fiji to investigate the possibility of an annexation. The question was complicated by maneuverings for power between Cakobau and his old rival, Ma'afu, with both men vacillating for many months. On 21 March 1874, Cakobau made a final offer, which the British accepted. On 23 September, Sir Hercules Robinson, soon to be appointed the British Governor of Fiji, arrived on HMS \"Dido\" and received Cakobau with a royal 21-gun salute. After some vacillation, Cakobau agreed to renounce his \"Tui Viti\" title, retaining the title of \"Vunivalu\", or Protector. The formal cession took place on 10 October 1874, when Cakobau, Ma'afu, and some of the senior chiefs of Fiji signed two copies of the Deed of Cession. Thus the Colony of Fiji was founded; 96 years of British rule followed.\nMeasles epidemic of 1875.\nTo celebrate the annexation of Fiji, Hercules Robinson, who was Governor of New South Wales at the time, took Cakobau and his two sons to Sydney. There was a measles outbreak in that city and the three Fijians all came down with the disease. On returning to Fiji, the colonial administrators decided not to quarantine the ship on which the convalescents travelled. This was despite the British having a very extensive knowledge of the devastating effect of infectious disease on an unexposed population. In 1875\u201376 the resulting epidemic of measles killed over 40,000 Fijians, about one-third of the Fijian population. Some Fijians allege that this failure of quarantine was a deliberate action to introduce the disease into the country. Historians have found no such evidence; the disease spread before the new British governor and colonial medical officers had arrived, and no quarantine rules existed under the outgoing regime.\nSir Arthur Gordon and the \"Little War\".\nRobinson was replaced as Governor of Fiji in June 1875 by Sir Arthur Hamilton Gordon. Gordon was immediately faced with an insurgency of the Qalimari and Kai Colo people. In early 1875, colonial administrator Edgar Leopold Layard had met with thousands of highland clans at Navuso to formalise their subjugation to British rule and Christianity. Layard and his delegation managed to spread the measles epidemic to the highlanders, causing mass deaths in this population. As a result, anger at the British colonists flared throughout the region, and a widespread uprising quickly took hold. Villages along the Sigatoka River and in the highlands above this area refused British control, and Gordon was tasked with quashing this rebellion.\nIn what Gordon termed the \"Little War\", the suppression of this uprising took the form of two co-ordinated military campaigns in the western half of Viti Levu. The first was conducted by Gordon's second cousin, Arthur John Lewis Gordon, against the Qalimari insurgents along the Sigatoka River. The second campaign was led by Louis Knollys against the Kai Colo in the mountains to the north of the river. Governor Gordon invoked a type of martial law in the area where Arthur John Lewis Gordon and Knollys had absolute power to conduct their missions outside of any restrictions of legislation. The two groups of rebels were kept isolated from each other by a force led by Walter Carew and George Le Hunte who were stationed at Nasaucoko. Carew also ensured the rebellion did not spread east by securing the loyalty of the Wainimala people of the eastern highlands. The war involved the use of the soldiers of the old Native Regiment of Cakobau supported by around 1,500 Christian Fijian volunteers from other areas of Viti Levu. The colonial New Zealand Government provided most of the advanced weapons for the army including 100 Snider rifles.\nThe campaign along the Sigatoka River was conducted under a scorched earth policy whereby numerous rebel villages were burnt and their fields ransacked. After the capture and destruction of the main fortified towns of Koroivatuma, Bukutia and Matanavatu, the Qalimari surrendered \"en masse\". Those not killed in the fighting were taken prisoner and sent to the coastal town of Cuvu. This included 827 men, women and children as well as Mudu, the leader of the insurgents. The women and children were distributed to places like Nadi and Nadroga. Of the men, 15 were sentenced to death at a hastily conducted trial at Sigatoka. Governor Gordon was present, but chose to leave the judicial responsibility to his relative, Arthur John Lewis Gordon. Four were hanged and ten, including Mudu, were shot with one prisoner managing to escape. By the end of proceedings the governor noted that \"my feet were literally stained with the blood that I had shed\".\nThe northern campaign against the Kai Colo in the highlands was similar but involved removing the rebels from large, well protected caves in the region. Knollys managed to clear the caves \"after some considerable time and large expenditure of ammunition\". The occupants of these caves included whole communities, and as a result many men, women and children were either killed or wounded in these operations. The rest were taken prisoner and sent to the towns on the northern coast. The chief medical officer in British Fiji, William MacGregor, also took part both in killing Kai Colo and tending to their wounded. After the caves were taken, the Kai Colo surrendered and their leader, Bisiki, was captured. Various trials were held, mostly at Nasaucoko under Le Hunte, and 32 men were either hanged or shot including Bisiki, who was killed trying to escape.\nBy the end of October 1876, the \"Little War\" was over, and Gordon had succeeded in vanquishing the rebels in the interior of Viti Levu. Remaining insurgents were sent into exile with hard labour for up to 10 years. Some non-combatants were allowed to return to rebuild their villages, but many areas in the highlands were ordered by Gordon to remain depopulated and in ruins. Gordon also constructed a military fortress, Fort Canarvon, at the headwaters of the Sigatoka River where a large contingent of soldiers were based to maintain British control. He renamed the Native Regiment, the Armed Native Constabulary to lessen its appearance of being a military force.\nTo further consolidate social control throughout the colony, Governor Gordon introduced a system of appointed chiefs and village constables in the various districts to both enact his orders and report any disobedience from the populace. Gordon adopted the chiefly titles \"Roko\" and \"Buli\" to describe these deputies and established a Great Council of Chiefs which was directly subject to his authority as Supreme Chief. This body remained in existence until being suspended by the military-backed interim government in 2007 and only abolished in 2012.\nGordon also extinguished the ability of Fijians to own, buy or sell land as individuals, the control being transferred to colonial authorities.\nIndian indenture system in Fiji.\nGordon decided in 1878 to import indentured labourers from India to work on the sugarcane fields that had taken the place of the cotton plantations. The 463 Indians arrived on 14 May 1879 \u2013 the first of some 61,000 that were to come before the scheme ended in 1916. The plan involved bringing the Indian workers to Fiji on a five-year contract, after which they could return to India at their own expense; if they chose to renew their contract for a second five-year term, they would be given the option of returning to India at the government's expense, or remaining in Fiji. The great majority chose to stay. The Queensland Act, which regulated indentured labour in Queensland, was made law in Fiji also.\nBetween 1879 and 1916, tens of thousands of Indians moved to Fiji to work as indentured labourers, especially on sugarcane plantations. Given the steady influx of ships carrying indentured Indians to Fiji up until 1916, repatriated Indians generally boarded these same ships on their return voyage. The total number of repatriates under the Fiji indenture system is recorded as 39,261, while the number of arrivals is said to have been 60,553. Because the return figure includes children born in Fiji, many of the indentured Indians never returned to India.\nTuka rebellions.\nWith almost all aspects of indigenous Fijian social life being controlled by the British colonial authorities, a number of charismatic individuals preaching dissent and return to pre-colonial culture were able to forge a following amongst the disenfranchised. These movements were called Tuka, which roughly translates as \"those who stand up\". The first Tuka movement was led by Ndoongumoy, better known as Navosavakandua, which means \"he who speaks only once\". He told his followers that if they returned to traditional ways and worshipped traditional deities such as Degei and Rokola, their current condition would be transformed, with the whites and their puppet Fijian chiefs being subservient to them. Navosavakandua was previously exiled from the Viti Levu highlands in 1878 for disturbing the peace, and the British quickly arrested him and his followers after this open display of rebellion. He was again exiled, this time to Rotuma where he died soon after his 10-year sentence ended.\nOther Tuka organisations, however, soon appeared. The British colonial administration ruthlessly suppressed both the leaders and followers, with figureheads such as Sailose being banished to an asylum for 12 years. In 1891, entire populations of villages who were sympathetic to the Tuka ideology were deported as punishment. Three years later in the highlands of Vanua Levu, where locals had re-engaged in traditional religion, Governor Thurston ordered in the Armed Native Constabulary to destroy the towns and the religious relics. Leaders were jailed and villagers exiled or forced to amalgamate into government-run communities. Later, in 1914, Apolosi Nawai came to the forefront of Fijian Tuka resistance by founding Viti Kabani, a co-operative company that would legally monopolise the agricultural sector and boycott European planters. The British and their proxy Council of Chiefs were not able to prevent the Viti Kabani's rise, and again the colonists were forced to send in the Armed Native Constabulary. Apolosi and his followers were arrested in 1915, and the company collapsed in 1917. Over the next 30 years, Apolosi was re-arrested, jailed and exiled, with the British viewing him as a threat right up to his death in 1946.\nWorld War I and II.\nFiji was only peripherally involved in World War I. One memorable incident occurred in September 1917 when Count Felix von Luckner arrived at Wakaya Island, off the eastern coast of Viti Levu, after his raider, , had run aground in the Cook Islands following the shelling of Papeete in the French colony of Tahiti. On 21 September, the district police inspector took a number of Fijians to Wakaya, and von Luckner, not realising that they were unarmed, unwittingly surrendered.\nCiting unwillingness to exploit the Fijian people, the colonial authorities did not permit Fijians to enlist. One Fijian of chiefly rank, a great-grandson of Cakobau, joined the French Foreign Legion and received France's highest military decoration, the Croix de Guerre. After going on to complete a law degree at Oxford University, this same chief returned to Fiji in 1921 as both a war hero and the country's first-ever university graduate. In the years that followed, Ratu Sir Lala Sukuna, as he was later known, established himself as the most powerful chief in Fiji and forged embryonic institutions for what would later become the modern Fijian nation.\nBy the time of World War II, the United Kingdom had reversed its policy of not enlisting natives, and many thousands of Fijians volunteered for the Fiji Infantry Regiment, which was under the command of Ratu Sir Edward Cakobau, another great-grandson of Cakobau. The regiment was attached to New Zealand and Australian army units during the war. Because of its central location, Fiji was selected as a training base for the Allies. An airstrip was built at Nadi (later to become an international airport), and gun emplacements studded the coast. Fijians gained a reputation for bravery in the Solomon Islands campaign, with one war correspondent describing their ambush tactics as \"death with velvet gloves\". Corporal Sefanaia Sukanaivalu, of Yucata, was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross, as a result of his bravery in the Battle of Bougainville.\nResponsible government and independence.\nA constitutional conference was held in London in July 1965 to discuss constitutional changes with a view to introducing responsible government. Indo-Fijians, led by A. D. Patel, demanded the immediate introduction of full self-government, with a fully elected legislature, to be elected by universal suffrage on a common voters' roll. These demands were vigorously rejected by the ethnic Fijian delegation, who still feared loss of control over natively owned land and resources should an Indo-Fijian dominated government come to power. The British made it clear, however, that they were determined to bring Fiji to self-government and eventual independence. Realizing that they had no choice, Fiji's chiefs decided to negotiate for the best deal they could get.\nA series of compromises led to the establishment of a cabinet system of government in 1967, with Ratu Kamisese Mara as the first Chief Minister. Ongoing negotiations between Mara and Sidiq Koya, who had taken over the leadership of the mainly Indo-Fijian National Federation Party on Patel's death in 1969, led to a second constitutional conference in London, in April 1970, at which Fiji's Legislative Council agreed on a compromise electoral formula and a timetable for independence as a fully sovereign and independent nation within the Commonwealth. The Legislative Council would be replaced with a bicameral Parliament, with a Senate dominated by Fijian chiefs and a popularly elected House of Representatives. In the 52-member House, Native Fijians and Indo-Fijians would each be allocated 22 seats, of which 12 would represent communal constituencies comprising voters registered on strictly ethnic roles, and another 10 representing national constituencies to which members were allocated by ethnicity but elected by universal suffrage. A further 8 seats were reserved for \"general electors\" \u2013 Europeans, Chinese, Banaban Islanders, and other minorities; 3 of these were \"communal\" and 5 \"national\". With this compromise, it was agreed that Fiji would become independent.\nThe British flag, the Union Jack, was lowered for the last time at sunset on 9 October 1970 in the capital Suva. The Fijian flag was raised after dawn on the morning of 10 October 1970; the country had officially become independent at midnight.\nIndependence.\n1987 coups d'\u00e9tat.\nThe British granted Fiji independence in 1970. Democratic rule was interrupted by two military coups in 1987 precipitated by a growing perception that the government was dominated by the Indo-Fijian (Indian) community. The second 1987 coup saw both the Fijian monarchy and the Governor General replaced by a non-executive president and the name of the country changed from \"Dominion of Fiji\" to \"Republic of Fiji\" and then in 1997 to \"Republic of the Fiji Islands\". The two coups and the accompanying civil unrest contributed to heavy Indo-Fijian emigration; the resulting population loss resulted in economic difficulties and ensured that Melanesians became the majority.\nIn 1990, the new constitution institutionalised ethnic Fijian domination of the political system. The Group Against Racial Discrimination (GARD) was formed to oppose the unilaterally imposed constitution and to restore the 1970 constitution. In 1992 Sitiveni Rabuka, the Lieutenant Colonel who had carried out the 1987 coup, became Prime Minister following elections held under the new constitution. Three years later, Rabuka established the Constitutional Review Commission, which in 1997 wrote a new constitution which was supported by most leaders of the indigenous Fijian and Indo-Fijian communities. Fiji was re-admitted to the Commonwealth of Nations.\n2000 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nIn 2000, a coup was instigated by George Speight, which effectively toppled the government of Mahendra Chaudhry, who in 1997 had become the country's first Indo-Fijian Prime Minister following the adoption of the new constitution. Commodore Frank Bainimarama assumed executive power after the resignation, possibly forced, of President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara. Later in 2000, Fiji was rocked by two mutinies when rebel soldiers went on a rampage at Suva's Queen Elizabeth Barracks. The High Court ordered the reinstatement of the constitution, and in September 2001, to restore democracy, a general election was held which was won by interim Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase's Soqosoqo Duavata ni Lewenivanua party.\nIn 2005, the Qarase government amid much controversy proposed a Reconciliation and Unity Commission with power to recommend compensation for victims of the 2000 coup and amnesty for its perpetrators. However, the military, especially the nation's top military commander, Frank Bainimarama, strongly opposed this bill. Bainimarama agreed with detractors who said that to grant amnesty to supporters of the present government who had played a role in the violent coup was a sham. His attack on the legislation, which continued unremittingly throughout May and into June and July, further strained his already tense relationship with the government.\n2006 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nIn late November and early December 2006, Bainimarama was instrumental in the 2006 Fijian coup d'\u00e9tat. Bainimarama handed down a list of demands to Qarase after a bill was put forward to parliament, part of which would have offered pardons to participants in the 2000 coup attempt. He gave Qarase an ultimatum date of 4 December to accede to these demands or to resign from his post. Qarase adamantly refused either to concede or resign, and on 5 December President Ratu Josefa Iloilo signed a legal order dissolving the parliament after meeting with Bainimarama.\nCiting corruption in the government, Bainimarama staged a military takeover on 5 December 2006 against the prime minister that he had installed after a 2000 coup. The commodore took over the powers of the presidency and dissolved the parliament, paving the way for the military to continue the takeover. The coup was the culmination of weeks of speculation following conflict between the elected prime minister, Laisenia Qarase, and Bainimarama. Bainimarama had repeatedly issued demands and deadlines to the prime minister. A particular issue was previously pending legislation to pardon those involved in the 2000 coup. Bainimarama named Jona Senilagakali as caretaker prime minister. The next week Bainimarama said he would ask the Great Council of Chiefs to restore executive powers to the president, Ratu Josefa Iloilo.\nOn 4 January 2007, the military announced that it was restoring executive power to Iloilo, who made a broadcast endorsing the actions of the military. The next day, Iloilo named Bainimarama as the interim prime minister, indicating that the military was still effectively in control. In the wake of the takeover, reports emerged of alleged intimidation of some of those critical of the interim regime.\n2009 transfer of power.\nIn April 2009, the Fiji Court of Appeal overturned the High Court decision that Bainimarama's takeover of Qarase's government was lawful and declared the interim government to be illegal. Bainimarama agreed to step down as interim prime minister immediately, along with his government, and President Iloilo was to appoint a new prime minister. President Iloilo abrogated the constitution, and removed all office holders under the constitution including all judges and the governor of the Central Bank. In his own words, he \"appoint[ed] [him]self as the Head of the State of Fiji under a new legal order\". He then reappointed Bainimarama under his \"New Order\" as interim prime minister and imposed a \"Public Emergency Regulation\" limiting internal travel and allowing press censorship.\nOn 2 May 2009, Fiji became the first nation ever to have been suspended from participation in the Pacific Islands Forum, for its failure to hold democratic elections by the date promised. Nevertheless, it remains a member of the Forum.\nOn 1 September 2009, Fiji was suspended from the Commonwealth of Nations. The action was taken because Bainimarama failed to hold elections by 2010 as the Commonwealth of Nations had demanded after the 2006 coup. Bainimarama stated a need for more time to end a voting system that heavily favoured ethnic Fijians at the expense of the multi-ethnic minorities. Critics claimed that he had suspended the constitution and was responsible for human rights violations by arresting and detaining opponents.\nIn his 2010 New Year's address, Bainimarama announced the lifting of the Public Emergency Regulations (PER). However, the PER was not rescinded until January 2012, and the Suva Philosophy Club was the first organisation to reorganise and convene public meetings. The PER had been put in place in April 2009 when the former constitution was abrogated. The PER had allowed restrictions on speech, public gatherings, and censorship of news media and had given security forces added powers. He also announced a nationwide consultation process leading to a new constitution under which the 2014 elections were held.\nThe official name of the country was reverted back to \"Republic of Fiji\" in February 2011.\nSince 2014.\nOn 14 March 2014, the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group voted to change Fiji's full suspension from the Commonwealth of Nations to a suspension from the councils of the Commonwealth, allowing them to participate in a number of Commonwealth activities, including the 2014 Commonwealth Games. The suspension was lifted in September 2014.\nThe FijiFirst party, led by Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama, won outright majority in the country's 51-seat parliament both in 2014 election and narrowly in 2018 election. In October 2021, Tui Macuata Ratu Wiliame Katonivere was elected the new President of Fiji by the parliament.\nOn 24 December 2022, Sitiveni Rabuka, the head of the People's Alliance (PAP), became Fiji's 12th prime minister, succeeding Bainimarama, following the December 2022 general election.\nGeography.\nFiji lies approximately southwest of Hawaii and roughly from Sydney, Australia. Fiji is the hub of the Southwest Pacific, midway between Vanuatu and Tonga. The archipelago is located between 176\u00b0 53\u2032 east and 178\u00b0 12\u2032 west. The archipelago is roughly and less than 2 percent is dry land. The 180\u00b0 meridian runs through Taveuni, but the International Date Line is bent to give uniform time (UTC+12) to all of the Fiji group. With the exception of Rotuma, the Fiji group lies between 15\u00b0 42\u2032 and 20\u00b0 02\u2032 south. Rotuma is located north of the group, from Suva, 12\u00b0 30\u2032 south of the equator.\nFiji covers a total area of some of which around 10% is land. Fiji consists of 332 islands (of which 106 are inhabited) and 522 smaller islets. The two most important islands are Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, which account for about three-quarters of the total land area of the country. The islands are mountainous, with peaks up to 1,324 metres (4,341\u00a0ft), and covered with thick tropical forests.\nThe highest point is Mount Tomanivi on Viti Levu. Viti Levu hosts the capital city of Suva and is home to nearly three-quarters of the population. Other important towns include Nadi (the location of the international airport), and Lautoka, Fiji's second largest city with large sugar cane mills and a seaport.\nThe main towns on Vanua Levu are Labasa and Savusavu. Other islands and island groups include Taveuni and Kadavu (the third and fourth largest islands, respectively), the Mamanuca Group (just off Nadi) and Yasawa Group, which are popular tourist destinations, the Lomaiviti Group, off Suva, and the remote Lau Group. Rotuma has special administrative status in Fiji. Ceva-i-Ra, an uninhabited reef, is located about southwest of the main archipelago.\nFiji contains two ecoregions: Fiji tropical moist forests and Fiji tropical dry forests. It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.35/10, ranking it 24th globally out of 172 countries.\nClimate.\nThe climate in Fiji is tropical marine and warm year round with minimal extremes. The warm season is from November to April, and the cooler season lasts from May to October. Temperatures in the cool season average . Rainfall is variable, with the warm season experiencing heavier rainfall, especially inland. For the larger islands, rainfall is heavier on the southeast portions of the islands than on the northwest portions, with consequences for agriculture in those areas. Winds are moderate, though cyclones occur about once annually (10\u201312 times per decade).\nClimate change in Fiji is an exceptionally pressing issue for the country - as an island nation, Fiji is particularly vulnerable to rising sea levels, coastal erosion and extreme weather. These changes, along with temperature rise, will displace Fijian communities and will prove disruptive to the national economy - tourism, agriculture and fisheries, the largest contributors to the nation's GDP, will be severely impacted by climate change causing increases in poverty and food insecurity. As a party to both the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Climate Agreement, Fiji hopes to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 which, along with national policies, will help to mitigate the impacts of climate change.\nGovernment and politics.\nPolitics in Fiji normally take place in the framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic wherein the Prime Minister of Fiji is the head of government and the President the Head of State, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government, legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Fiji, and the judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nA general election took place on 17 September 2014. Bainimarama's FijiFirst party won with 59.2% of the vote, and the election was deemed credible by a group of international observers from Australia, India and Indonesia.\nIn the 2018 election FijiFirst won with 50.02 per cent of the total votes cast. It held its outright majority in the parliament, winning 27 of the 51 seats. The Social Democratic Liberal Party (SODELPA) came in second with 39.85 per cent of the vote.\nIn the 2022 election FijiFirst lost its parliamentary majority. Sitiveni Rabuka of People's Alliance party, with the backing of the Social Liberal Democratic party (Sodelpa), became Fiji's new Prime Minister to succeed Frank Bainimarama.\nArmed forces and law enforcement.\nThe military consists of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces with a total manpower of 3,500 active soldiers and 6,000 reservists, and includes a Navy unit of 300 personnel. The land force comprises the Fiji Infantry Regiment (regular and territorial force organised into six light infantry battalions), Fiji Engineer Regiment, Logistic Support Unit and Force Training Group. Relative to its size, Fiji has fairly large armed forces and has been a major contributor to UN peacekeeping missions in various parts of the world. In addition, a significant number of former military personnel have served in the lucrative security sector in Iraq following the 2003 U.S.-led invasion.\nThe law enforcement branch is composed of the Fiji Police Force and Fiji Corrections Service.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFiji is divided into four major divisions which are further divided into 14 provinces. They are:\nFiji was divided into three confederacies or governments during the reign of Seru Epenisa Cakobau, though these are not considered political divisions, they are still considered important in the social divisions of the indigenous Fijians:\nEconomy.\nEndowed with forest, mineral, and fish resources, Fiji is one of the most developed of the Pacific island economies, though still with a large subsistence sector. Some progress was experienced by this sector when Marion M. Ganey introduced credit unions to the islands in the 1950s. Natural resources include timber, fish, gold, copper, offshore oil, and hydropower. Fiji experienced a period of rapid growth in the 1960s and 1970s but stagnated in the 1980s. The coups of 1987 caused further contraction.\nEconomic liberalisation in the years following the coups created a boom in the garment industry and a steady growth rate despite growing uncertainty regarding land tenure in the sugar industry. The expiration of leases for sugar cane farmers (along with reduced farm and factory efficiency) has led to a decline in sugar production despite subsidies for sugar provided by the EU. Fiji's gold mining industry is based in Vatukoula.\nUrbanisation and expansion in the service sector have contributed to recent GDP growth. Sugar exports and a rapidly growing tourist industry\u00a0\u2013 with tourists numbering 430,800 in 2003 and increasing in the subsequent years\u00a0\u2013 are the major sources of foreign exchange. Fiji is highly dependent on tourism for revenue. Sugar processing makes up one-third of industrial activity. Long-term problems include low investment and uncertain property rights.\nThe South Pacific Stock Exchange (SPSE) is the only licensed securities exchange in Fiji and is based in Suva. Its vision is to become a regional exchange.\nTourism.\nFiji has a significant amount of tourism with the popular regions being Nadi, the Coral Coast, Denarau Island, and Mamanuca Islands. The biggest sources of international visitors by country are Australia, New Zealand and the United States. Fiji has a significant number of soft coral reefs, and scuba diving is a common tourist activity. Fiji's main attractions to tourists are primarily white sandy beaches and aesthetically pleasing islands with all-year tropical weather. In general, Fiji is a mid-range priced holiday/vacation destination with most of the accommodations in this range. It also has a variety of world-class five-star resorts and hotels. More budget resorts are being opened in remote areas, which will provide more tourism opportunities. CNN named Fiji's Laucala Island Resort as one of the fifteen world's most beautiful island hotels.\nOfficial statistics show that in 2012, 75% of visitors stated that they came for a holiday/vacation. Honeymoons are very popular as are romantic getaways in general. There are also family-friendly resorts with facilities for young children including kids' clubs and nanny options. Fiji has several popular tourism destinations. The Botanical Gardens of Thursten in Suva, Sigatoka Sand Dunes, and Colo-I-Suva Forest Park are three options on the mainland (Viti Levu). A major attraction on the outer islands is scuba diving.\nAccording to the Fiji Bureau of Statistics, most visitors arriving to Fiji on a short-term basis are from the following countries or regions of residence:\nFiji has also served as a location for various Hollywood movies starting from the \"Mr Robinson Crusoe\" in 1932 to \"The Blue Lagoon\" (1980) starring Brooke Shields and \"Return to the Blue Lagoon\" (1991) with Milla Jovovich. Other popular movies shot in Fiji include \"Cast Away\" (2000) and \"\" (2004).\nThe U.S. version of the reality television show \"Survivor\" has filmed all of its semiannual seasons in the Mamanuca Islands since its in 2016. Typically, two 39-day competitions will be filmed back to back, with the first season airing in the fall of that year, and the second airing in the spring of the following year. This marks the longest consecutive period that \"Survivor\" has filmed in one location. Before the airing of the 35th season (\")\", host Jeff Probst said in an interview with \"Entertainment Weekly\" that the Mamanucas are the optimal location for the show and he would like to stay there permanently.\nTransport.\nThe Nadi International Airport is located north of central Nadi and is the largest Fijian hub. Nausori International Airport is about northeast of downtown Suva and serves mostly domestic traffic with flights from Australia and New Zealand. The main airport in the second largest island of Vanua Levu is Labasa Airport located at Waiqele, southwest of Labasa Town. The largest aircraft handled by Labasa Airport is the ATR 72. Airports Fiji Limited (AFL) is responsible for the operation of 15 public airports in the Fiji Islands. These include two international airports: Nadi international Airport, Fiji's main international gateway, and Nausori Airport, Fiji's domestic hub, and 13 outer island airports. Fiji's main airline is Fiji Airways. \nFiji's larger islands have extensive bus routes that are affordable and consistent in service. There are bus stops, and in rural areas buses are often simply hailed as they approach. Buses are the principal form of public transport and passenger movement between the towns on the main islands. Buses also serve on inter-island ferries. Bus fares and routes are regulated by the Land Transport Authority (LTA). Bus and taxi drivers hold Public Service Licenses issued by the LTA. Taxis are licensed by the LTA and operate widely all over the country. Apart from urban, town-based taxis, there are others that are licensed to serve rural or semi-rural areas.\nInter-island ferries provide services between Fiji's principal islands, and large vessels operate roll-on-roll-off services such as Patterson Brothers Shipping Company LTD, transporting vehicles and large amounts of cargo between the main island of Viti Levu and Vanua Levu, and other smaller islands.\nScience and technology.\nFiji is the only developing Pacific Island country with recent data for gross domestic expenditure on research and development (GERD), with the exception of Papua New Guinea. The national Bureau of Statistics cites a GERD/GDP ratio of 0.15% in 2012. Private-sector research and development (R&amp;D) is negligible. Government investment in research and development tends to favour agriculture. In 2007, agriculture and primary production accounted for just under half of government expenditure on R&amp;D, according to the Fijian National Bureau of Statistics. This share had risen to almost 60% by 2012. However, scientists publish much more in the field of geosciences and health than in agriculture. The rise in government spending on agricultural research has come to the detriment of research in education, which dropped to 35% of total research spending between 2007 and 2012. Government expenditure on health research has remained fairly constant, at about 5% of total government research spending, according to the Fijian National Bureau of Statistics.\nThe Fijian Ministry of Health is seeking to develop endogenous research capacity through the \"Fiji Journal of Public Health\", which it launched in 2012. A new set of guidelines are now in place to help build endogenous capacity in health research through training and access to new technology.\nFiji is also planning to diversify its energy sector through the use of science and technology. In 2015, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community observed that \"while Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Samoa are leading the way with large-scale hydropower projects, there is enormous potential to expand the deployment of other renewable energy options such as solar, wind, geothermal and ocean-based energy sources.\"\nIn 2014, the Centre of Renewable Energy became operational at the University of Fiji, with the assistance of the Renewable Energy in Pacific Island Countries Developing Skills and Capacity programme (EPIC) funded by the European Union. From 2013 to 2017, the European Union funded the EPIC programme, which developed two master's programmes in renewable energy management, one at the University of Papua New Guinea and the other at the University of Fiji, both accredited in 2016. In Fiji, 45 students have enrolled for the master's degree since the launch of the programme and a further 21 students have undertaken a related diploma programme introduced in 2019.\nIn 2020, the Regional Pacific Nationally Determined Contributions Hub Office in Fiji was launched to support climate change mitigation and adaptation. Pacific authors on the frontlines of climate change remain underrepresented in the scientific literature on the impact of disasters and on climate resilience strategies.\nSociety.\nDemographics.\nThe 2017 census found that the population of Fiji was 884,887, compared to the population of 837,271 in the 2007 census. The population density at the time of the 2007 census was 45.8 inhabitants per square kilometre. The life expectancy in Fiji was 72.1 years. Since the 1930s the population of Fiji has increased at a rate of 1.1% per year. The median age of the population was 29.9, and the gender ratio was 1.03 males per 1 female.\nEthnic groups.\nThe population of Fiji is mostly made up of native Fijians, who are Melanesians (54.3%), although many also have Polynesian ancestry; and Indo-Fijians (38.1%), descendants of Indian contract labourers brought to the islands by the British colonial powers in the 19th century. The percentage of the population of Indo-Fijian descent has declined significantly over the last two decades through migration for various reasons. Indo-Fijians suffered reprisals for a period after the coup of 2000. Relationships between ethnic Fijians and Indo-Fijians in the political arena have often been strained, and the tension between the two communities has dominated politics in the islands for the past generation. The level of political tension varies among different regions of the country.\nAbout 1.2% of the population is Rotuman \u2013 natives of Rotuma Island, whose culture has more in common with countries such as Tonga or Samoa than with the rest of Fiji. There are also small but economically significant groups of Europeans, Chinese, and other Pacific island minorities.\nThe membership of other ethnic groups is about 4.5%. 3,000 people or 0.3% of the people living in Fiji are from Australia.\nThe concept of family and community is of great importance to Fijian culture. Within the indigenous communities many members of the extended family will adopt particular titles and roles of direct guardians. Kinship is determined through a child's lineage to a particular spiritual leader, so that a clan is based on traditional customary ties as opposed to actual biological links. These clans, based on the spiritual leader, are known as a matangali. Within the matangali are a number of smaller collectives, known as the mbito. The descent is patrilineal, and all the status is derived from the father's side.\nDemonym.\nConstitutionally, citizens of Fiji were previously referred to as \"Fiji Islanders\" though the term \"Fiji Nationals\" was used for official purposes. However, the current constitution refers to all Fijian citizens as \"Fijians\". In August 2008, shortly before the proposed People's Charter for Change, Peace and Progress was due to be released to the public, it was announced that it recommended a change in the name of Fiji's citizens. If the proposal were adopted, all citizens of Fiji, whatever their ethnicity, would be called \"Fijians\". The proposal would change the English name of indigenous Fijians from \"Fijians\" to \"itaukei\", the Fijian language endonym for indigenous Fijians. Deposed Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase reacted by stating that the name \"Fijian\" belonged exclusively to indigenous Fijians, and that he would oppose any change in legislation enabling non-indigenous Fijians to use it. The Methodist Church, to which a large majority of indigenous Fijians belong, also reacted strongly to the proposal, stating that allowing any Fiji citizen to call themselves \"Fijian\" would be \"daylight robbery\" inflicted on the indigenous population.\nIn an address to the nation during the constitutional crisis of April 2009, military leader and interim Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama, who has been at the forefront of the attempt to change the definition of \"Fijian\", stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know we all have our different ethnicities, our different cultures and we should, we must, celebrate our diversity and richness. However, at the same time we are all Fijians. We are all equal citizens. We must all be loyal to Fiji; we must be patriotic; we must put Fiji first.\nIn May 2010, Attorney-General Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum reiterated that the term \"Fijian\" should apply to all Fiji nationals, but the statement was again met with protest. A spokesperson for the Viti Landowners and Resource Owners Association claimed that even fourth-generation descendants of migrants did not fully understand \"what it takes to be a Fijian\", and added that the term refers to a legal standing, since legislation affords specific rights to \"Fijians\" (meaning, in legislation, indigenous Fijians).\nLanguages.\nFiji has three official languages under the 1997 constitution (and not revoked by the 2013 Constitution): English, Fijian (iTaukei) and Fiji Hindi. Fijian is an Austronesian language of the Malayo-Polynesian family spoken in Fiji. It has 350,000 native speakers, and another 200,000 speak it as a second language.\nThere are many dialects of the language across the Fiji Islands, which may be classified in two major branches\u2014eastern and western. Missionaries in the 1840s chose an eastern dialect, the speech of Bau Island to be the written standard of the Fijian language. Bau Island was home to Seru Epenisa Cakobau, the chief who eventually became the self-proclaimed King of Fiji.\nFiji Hindi, also known as Fijian Baat or Fijian Hindustani, is the language spoken by most Fijian citizens of Indian descent. It is derived mainly from the Awadhi and Bhojpuri varieties of Hindi. It has also borrowed a large number of words from Fijian and English. The relation between Fiji Hindi and Standard Hindi is similar to the relation between Afrikaans and Dutch. Indian indentured labourers were initially brought to Fiji mainly from districts of eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, North-West Frontier and South India such as from Andhra and Tamil Nadu. They spoke numerous, mainly Hindi, dialects and languages depending on their district of origin.\nEnglish, a remnant of British colonial rule over the islands, was the sole official language until 1997 and is widely used in government, business and education as a lingua franca.\nReligion.\nReligion in Fiji (2007)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Christian\n (64.4%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Hindu\n (27.9%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Muslim\n (6.3%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Sikh\n (0.3%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Other or none (1.1%)\nAccording to the 2007 census, 64.4% of the population at the time was Christian, while 27.9% was Hindu, 6.3% Muslim, 0.8% non-religious, 0.3% Sikh, and the remaining 0.3% belonged to other religions.\nAmong Christians, 54% were counted as Methodist, followed by 14.2% Catholic, 8.9% Assemblies of God, 6.0% Seventh-day Adventist, 1.2% Anglican with the remaining 16.1% belonging to other denominations.\nThe largest Christian denomination is the Methodist Church of Fiji and Rotuma. With 34.6% of the population (including almost two-thirds of ethnic Fijians), the proportion of the population adhering to Methodism is higher in Fiji than in any other nation. Roman Catholics in Fiji are headed by the Metropolitan Archdiocese of Suva, whose province also includes the dioceses of Rarotonga (on the Cook Islands, for those and Niue, both New Zealand-associated countries) and Tarawa and Nauru (with see at Tarawa on Kiribati, also for Nauru) and the Mission sui iuris of Tokelau (New Zealand).\nThe Assemblies of God and the Seventh-day Adventist denominations are significantly represented. Fiji is the base for the Anglican Diocese of Polynesia (part of the Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia).These and other denominations have small numbers of Indo-Fijian members; Christians of all kinds comprised 6.1% of the Indo-Fijian population in the 1996 census. Hindus in Fiji mostly belong to the Sanatan sect (74.3% of all Hindus) or else are unspecified (22%). Muslims in Fiji are mostly Sunni (96.4%).\nEducation.\nFiji has a high literacy rate (91.6 percent), and although there is no compulsory education, more than 85 percent of the children between the ages of 6 and 13 attend primary school. Schooling is free and provided by both public and church-run schools. Generally, the Fijian and Hindu children attend separate schools, reflecting the political split that exists in the nation.\nPrimary education.\nIn Fiji, the role of government in education is to provide an environment in which children realise their full potential, and school is free from age 6 to 14. The primary school system consists of eight years of schooling and is attended by children from the ages of 6 to 14 years. Upon completion of primary school, a certificate is awarded and the student is eligible to take the secondary school examination.\nSecondary education.\nHigh school education may continue for a total of five years following an entry examination. Students either leave after three years with a Fiji school leaving certificate, or remain on to complete their final two years and qualify for tertiary education. Entry into the secondary school system, which is a total of five years, is determined by a competitive examination. Students passing the exam then follow a three-year course that leads to the Fiji School Leaving Certificate and the opportunity to attend senior secondary school. At the end of this level, they may take the Form VII examination, which covers four or five subjects. Successful completion of this process gains students access to higher education.\nTertiary education.\nThe University of the South Pacific, called the crossroads of the South Pacific because it serves ten English-speaking territories in the South Pacific, is the major provider of higher education. Admission to the university requires a secondary school diploma, and all students must take a one-year foundation course at the university regardless of their major. Financing for the university is derived from school fees, funds from the Fiji government and other territories, and aid from Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom. In addition to the university, Fiji also has teacher-training colleges, as well as medical, technological, and agricultural schools. Primary school teachers are trained for two years, whereas secondary school teachers train for three years; they then have the option to receive a diploma in education or read for a bachelor's degree in arts or science and continue for an additional year to earn a postgraduate certificate of education.\nThe Fiji Polytechnic School offers training in various trades, apprenticeship courses, and other courses that lead to diplomas in engineering, hotel catering, and business studies. Some of the course offerings can also lead to several City and Guilds of London Institute Examinations. In addition to the traditional educational system, Fiji also offers the opportunity to obtain an education through distance learning. The University Extension Service provides centres and a network of terminals in most regional areas. For students taking non-credit courses, no formal qualifications are necessary. However, students who enroll in the credit courses may be awarded the appropriate degree or certificate upon successful completion of their studies through the extension services.\nCulture.\nWhile indigenous Fijian culture and traditions are very vibrant and are integral components of everyday life for the majority of Fiji's population, Fijian society has evolved over the past century with the introduction of traditions such as Indian and Chinese as well as significant influences from Europe and Fiji's Pacific neighbours, particularly Tonga and Samoa. Thus, the various cultures of Fiji have come together to create a unique multicultural national identity.\nFiji's culture was showcased at the World Exposition held in Vancouver, Canada, in 1986 and more recently at the Shanghai World Expo 2010, along with other Pacific countries in the Pacific Pavilion.\nSport.\nSports are very popular in Fiji, particularly sports involving physical contact. Fiji's national sport is Rugby sevens. Cricket is a minor sport in Fiji. Cricket Fiji is an associate member of the International Cricket Council (\"ICC\"). Netball is the most popular women's participation sport in Fiji. The national team has been internationally competitive, at Netball World Cup competitions reaching 6th position in 1999, its highest level to date. The team won gold medals at the 2007 and 2015 Pacific Games.\nBecause of the success of Fiji's national basketball teams, the popularity of basketball has experienced rapid growth in recent years. In the past, the country only had few basketball courts, which severely limited Fijians who desired to practice the sport more frequently. Through recent efforts by the national federation Basketball Fiji and with the support of the Australian government, many schools have been able to construct courts and provide their students with basketball equipment.\nRugby union.\nRugby Union is the most-popular team sport played in Fiji. The Fiji national sevens side is a popular and successful international rugby sevens team and has won the Hong Kong Sevens a record eighteen times since its inception in 1976. Fiji has also won the Rugby World Cup Sevens twice \u2013 in 1997 and 2005. The Fiji national rugby union sevens team is the reigning Sevens World Series Champions in World Rugby. In 2016, they won Fiji's first ever Olympic medal in the Rugby sevens at the Summer Olympics, winning gold by defeating Great Britain 43\u20137 in the final.\nThe national rugby union team is a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance formerly along with Samoa and Tonga. In 2009, Samoa announced their departure from the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, leaving just Fiji and Tonga in the union. Fiji is currently ranked eleventh in the world by the IRB (as of 28\u00a0December\u00a02015[ [update]]). The national rugby union team has competed at five Rugby World Cup competitions, the first being in 1987, where they reached the quarter-finals. The team again qualified in the 2007 Rugby World Cup when they upset Wales 38\u201334 to progress to the quarter-finals where they lost to the eventual Rugby World Cup winners, South Africa.\nFiji competes in the Pacific Tri-Nations and the IRB Pacific Nations Cup. The sport is governed by the Fiji Rugby Union which is a member of the Pacific Islands Rugby Alliance, and contributes to the Pacific Islanders rugby union team. At the club level there are the Skipper Cup and Farebrother Trophy Challenge.\nRugby league.\nThe Fiji national rugby league team, nicknamed the Bati (pronounced [m\u02c8bat\u0283i]), represents Fiji in the sport of rugby league football and has been participating in international competition since 1992. It has competed in the Rugby League World Cup on three occasions, with their best results coming when they made consecutive semi-final appearances in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup, 2013 Rugby League World Cup and 2019 Rugby League World Cup. The team also competes in the Pacific Cup.\nAssociation football.\nAssociation football was traditionally a minor sport in Fiji, popular largely amongst the Indo-Fijian community, but with international funding from FIFA and sound local management over the past decade, the sport has grown in popularity in the wider Fijian community. It is now the second most-popular sport in Fiji, after rugby for men and after netball for women.\nThe Fiji Football Association is a member of the Oceania Football Confederation. The national football team defeated New Zealand 2\u20130 in the 2008 OFC Nations Cup, on their way to a joint-record third-place finish. However, they have never reached a FIFA World Cup to date. Fiji won the Pacific Games football tournament in 1991 and 2003. Fiji qualified for the 2016 Summer Olympics men's tournament for the first time in history.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10709", "revid": "44920675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10709", "title": "Geography of Finland", "text": "Overview of the geography of Finland\nThe geography of Finland is characterized by its northern position, its ubiquitous landscapes of intermingled boreal forests and lakes, and its low population density. Finland can be divided into three areas: archipelagoes and coastal lowlands, a slightly higher central lake plateau and uplands to north and northeast. Bordering the Baltic Sea, Gulf of Bothnia, and Gulf of Finland, as well as Sweden, Norway, and Russia, Finland is the northernmost country in the European Union. Most of the population and agricultural resources are concentrated in the south. Northern and eastern Finland are sparsely populated containing vast wilderness areas. Taiga forest is the dominant vegetation type.\nSize and external boundaries.\nFinland's total area is . Of this area 10% is water, 69% forest, 8% cultivated land and 13% other. Finland is the eighth largest country in Europe after Russia, France, Ukraine, Spain, Sweden, Norway and Germany.\nAs a whole, the shape of Finland's boundaries resembles a figure of a one-armed human. In Finnish, parallels are drawn between the figure and the national personification of Finland \u2013 Finnish Maiden (\"Suomi-neito\") \u2013 and the country as a whole can be referred in the Finnish language by her name. Even in official context the area around Enonteki\u00f6 in northwestern part of the country between Sweden and Norway can be referred to as the \"Arm\" (\"k\u00e4sivarsi\"). After the Continuation War Finland lost major land areas to Russia in the Moscow Armistice of 1944, and the figure was said to have lost the other of her arms, as well as a hem of her \"skirt\".\nRelief and geology.\nGeology.\nThe bedrock of Finland belong to the Baltic Shield and was formed by a succession of orogenies in Precambrian time. The oldest rocks of Finland, those of Archean age, are found in the east and north. These rocks are chiefly granitoids and migmatitic gneiss. Rocks in central and western Finland originated or came to place during the Svecokarelian orogeny. Following this last orogeny Rapakivi granites intruded various locations of Finland during the Mesoproterozoic and Neoproterozoic, specially at \u00c5land and the southeast. So-called Jotnian sediments occur usually together with Rapakivi granites. The youngest rocks in Finland are those found in the northwestern arm which belong to Scandinavian Caledonides that assembled in Paleozoic times. During the Caledonian orogeny Finland was likely a sunken foreland basin covered by sediments, subsequent uplift and erosion would have eroded all of these sediments.\nRelief and hydrography.\nAbout one third of Finland lies below 100 m, and about two thirds lies under 200 m. Finland can be divided into three topographical areas; the coastal landscapes, the interior lake plateau also known as Finnish lake district and Upland Finland. The coastal landscapes are made up mostly of plains below 20 m. These plains tilt gently towards the sea so that where its irregularities surpasses sea-level groups of islands like the Kvarken Archipelago or the \u00c5land Islands are found. \u00c5land is connected to the Finnish mainland by a shallow submarine plateau that does not exceed 20 m in depth. Next to the Gulf of Bothnia the landscape of Finland is extremely flat with height differences no larger than 50 m. This region called the Ostrobothnian Plain extends inland about 100\u00a0km and constitute the largest plain in the Nordic countries.\nThe interior lake plateau is dominated by undulating hilly terrain with valley to top height differences of 100 or less and occasionally up to 200 m. Only the area around the lakes Pielinen and P\u00e4ij\u00e4nne stand with a subtly more pronounced relief. The relief of the interior lake plateau bears some resemblance to the Swedish Norrland terrain. Upland Finland and areas higher than 200 m are found mostly in the north and east of the country. A limited number of hills and mountains exceed 500 m in height in these regions. Inselberg plains are common in the northern half of the country. In the far north hills reach 200 to 400 m and the landscape is a f\u00f6rfj\u00e4ll (fore-fell). Only the extreme northwest contains a more dramatic mountain landscape.\nThe subdued landscape of Finland is the result of protracted erosion that has leveled down ancient mountain massifs into near-flat landforms called peneplains. The last major leveling event resulted in the formation of the Sub-Cambrian peneplain in Late Neoproterozoic time. While Finland has remained very close to sea-level since the formation of this last peneplain some further relief was formed by a slight uplift resulting in the carving of valleys by rivers. The slight uplift also means that at parts the uplifted peneplain can be traced as summit accordances. The Quaternary ice ages resulted in the erosion of weak rock and loose materials by glaciers. When the ice masses retreated eroded depressions turned into lakes. Fractures in Finland's bedrock were particularly affected by weathering and erosion, leaving as result trace straight sea and lake inlets.\nExcept a few rivers along the coasts most rivers in Finland drain at some stage into one or more lakes. The drainage basins drain into various directions. Much of Finland drains into the Gulf of Bothnia including the country's largest and longest rivers, Kokem\u00e4enjoki and Kemijoki respectively. Finland's largest lake drains by Vuoksi River into Lake Ladoga in Russia. Upland Finland in the east drains east across Russian Republic of Karelia into the White Sea. In the northeast Lake Inari discharges by Paatsjoki into Barents Sea in the Arctic.\nQuaternary glaciation.\nThe ice sheet that covered Finland intermittently during the Quaternary grew out from the Scandinavian Mountains. During the last deglaciation the first parts of Finland to become ice-free, the southeastern coast, did so slightly prior to the Younger Dryas cold-spell 12,700 years before present (BP). The retreat of the ice cover occurred simultaneously from the north-east, the east and southeast. The retreat was fastest from the southeast resulting in the lower course of Tornio being the last part of Finland to be deglaciated. Finally by 10,100 years BP the ice cover had all but left Finland to concentrate in Sweden and Norway before fading away.\nAs the ice sheet became thinner and retreated the land begun to rise by effect of isostacy. Much of Finland was under water when the ice retreated and was gradually uplifted in a process that continues today. Albeit not all areas were drowned at the same time it is estimated at time or another about 62% has been under water. Depending on location in Finland the ancient shoreline reached different maximum heights. In southern Finland 150 to 160 m, in central Finland about 200 m and in eastern Finland up to 220 m.\nClimate.\nLatitude is the principal influence on Finland's climate. Because of Finland's northern location, winter is the longest season. Only in the south coast is summer as long as winter. On the average, winter lasts from early December to mid March in the archipelago and the southwestern coast and from early October to early May in Lapland. This means that southern portions of the country are snow-covered about three months of the year and the northern, about seven months. The long winter causes about half of the annual of precipitation in the north to fall as snow. Precipitation in the south amounts to about annually. Like that of the north, it occurs all through the year, though not so much of it is snow.\nThe Atlantic Ocean to the west and the Eurasian continent to the east interact to modify the climate of the country. The warm waters of the Gulf Stream and the North Atlantic Drift Current, which warm Norway and Sweden, also warm Finland. Westerly winds bring the warm air currents into the Baltic areas and to the country's shores, moderating winter temperatures, especially in the south. These winds, because of clouds associated with weather systems accompanying the westerlies, also decrease the amount of sunshine received during the summer. By contrast, the continental high pressure system situated over the Eurasian continent counteracts the maritime influences, occasionally causing severe winters and high temperatures in the summer.\nThe highest ever recorded temperature is (Liperi, 29 July 2010). The lowest, (Kittil\u00e4, 28 January 1999). The annual middle temperature is relatively high in the southwestern part of the country (), with quite mild winters and warm summers, and low in the northeastern part of Lapland ().\nTemperature extremes for every month:\nExtreme highs:\nExtreme lows:\nArea and boundaries.\nArea:\n\"total:\"\n\"land:\"\n\"water:\"\nArea \u2013 comparative:\nslightly smaller than Germany, Montana, and Newfoundland and Labrador\nLand boundaries:\n\"total:\"\n\"border countries:\"\nNorway , Sweden , Russia \nCoastline:\nMaritime claims:\n\"Territorial sea:\"\n, in the Gulf of Finland; there is a stretch of international waters between Finnish and Estonian claims; Bogsk\u00e4r has separate internal waters and 3 nmi of territorial waters\n\"Contiguous zone:\"\n\"Exclusive economic zone:\"\n\"Continental shelf:\"\n depth or to the depth of exploitation\nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\"\nBaltic Sea 0\u00a0m\n\"highest point:\"\nHaltitunturi \nResources and land use.\nNatural resources:\ntimber, iron ore, copper, lead, zinc, chromite, nickel, gold, silver, limestone\nLand use:\n\"agricultural land:\" 7.5% (2018 est.)\n\"arable land:\" 7.4% (2018 est.)\n\"permanent crops:\" 0% (2018 est.)\n\"permanent pasture:\" 0.1% (2018 est.)\n\"forest:\" 72.9% (2018 est.)\n\"other:\" 19.6% (2018 est.)\nIrrigated land:\n690\u00a0km2 (2012)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n110 billion\u00a0m3 (2017 est.)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\n\"municipal:\" 400 million\u00a0m3 (2017 est.)\n\"industrial:\" 1.417 billion\u00a0m3 (2017 est.)\n\"agricultural:\" 50 million\u00a0m3 (2017 est.)\nEnvironmental concerns.\nNatural hazards:\nCold periods in winter pose a threat to the unprepared.\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues:\nAir pollution from manufacturing and power plants contributing to acid rain; water pollution from industrial wastes, agricultural chemicals; habitat loss threatens wildlife populations.\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nAir Pollution, Air Pollution-Heavy Metals, Air Pollution-Multi-effect Protocol, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants (signed 2001, ratified 2002), Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protection, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol (signed May 1998, ratified together with 14 other EU countries May 31, 2002), Climate Change-Paris Agreement, Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping-London Convention, Marine Dumping-London Protocol, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 2006, Wetlands, Whaling.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10710", "revid": "37231014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10710", "title": "Demographics of Finland", "text": "Finland has a population of over 5.53 million people and an average population density of . This makes it the third most sparsely populated country in Europe, after Iceland and Norway. Population distribution is very uneven: the population is concentrated on the small southwestern coastal plain. About 85% live in towns and cities, with 1.5 million living in the Greater Helsinki area. In Arctic Lapland, on the other hand, there are only .\nFinland is a relatively ethnically homogeneous country. The dominant ethnicity is Finnish but there are also notable historic minorities of Finland-Swedes, Sami and Roma people. As a result of recent immigration there are now also large groups of ethnic Russians, Estonians, Iraqis and Somalis in the country. 7.9% of the population is born abroad and 5.2% are foreign citizens. The official languages are Finnish and Swedish, the latter being the native language of about 5.2% of the Finnish population. From the 13th to the early 19th century Finland was a part of Sweden.\nWith 68.7% of Finns in its congregation, the Lutheran Church is the largest religious group in the country. Two million people with roots in Finland live abroad. In a 2017 survey, 10% of residents of Finland said that they would prefer to live abroad.\nHistory.\nThe earliest inhabitants of most of the land area that makes up today's Finland and Scandinavia were in all likehood hunter-gatherers whose closest successors in modern terms would probably be the Sami people (formerly known as the Lapps). There are around 10,000 of them living in Finland today and they are recognised as a minority and speak three distinct languages: Northern Sami, Inari Sami and Skolt Sami. They have been living north of the Arctic Circle for more than 7,000 years now, but today are a 5% minority in their native Lapland Province. During the late 19th and 20th century there was significant emigration, particularly from rural areas to Sweden and North America, while most immigrants into Finland itself come from other European countries.\nPopulation.\nIn 2022 there is an estimated 5,601,547 people in Finland.\nDemographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2019.\nGeographic distribution and population density.\nThe geographical center of population (Weber point) of the Finnish population is currently located in Hauho, in the village of Sappee, now part of the town of H\u00e4meenlinna. The coordinates of this point are 61' 17\" N, 25' 07\" E.\nUrbanization\nurban population: 85.4% of total population (2018)\nrate of urbanization: 0.42% annual rate of change (2015\u201320 est.)\nFamilies.\nThe profound demographic and economic changes that occurred in Finland after World War II affected the Finnish family. Families became smaller, dropping from an average of 3.6 persons in 1950 to an average of 2.7 by 1975. Family composition did not change much in that quarter of a century, however, and in 1975 the percentage of families that consisted of a man and a woman was 24.4; of a couple and children, 61.9; of a woman with offspring, 11.8; of a man and offspring, 1.9. These percentages are not markedly different from those of 1950. Change was seen in the number of children per family, which fell from an average of 2.24 in 1950 to an average of 1.7 in the mid-1980s, and large families were rare. Only 2 percent of families had four or more children, while 51 percent had one child; 38 percent, two children; and 9 percent, three children. The number of Finns under the age of 18 dropped from 1.5 million in 1960 to 1.2 million in 1980.\nFertility.\nPeople of foreign background have more babies in Finland in 2021 than of Finnish roots. Based on the ancestry, the total fertility rate of men and women in Finland in 2021, was the highest among women of foreign background born abroad (1.7), followed by women of foreign background born in Finland (1.65), making an average of 1.45 fertility rate of women in Finland. Women of Finnish background, have a fertility rate of a little above 1.4.\nAs per men, the total fertility rate was a little above 1.3 with men of Finnish background being a little below the average level. On the other hand, the fertility rates of men of foreign backgrounds and those with foreign backgrounds and born abroad, had approximately a 1.45 fertility rate, respectively.\nThe most common background countries for women with a foreign background who gave birth from 2018 to 2021 were countries of the former Soviet Union, Somalia and Iraq.\nHistorical fertility rates.\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.\nThe rate of fertility in Finland was greater than in neighbouring countries throughout the 20th century. After 2010, it has been dropping dramatically, although other Nordic countries had no such trend until recently. It's a modern phenomenon that Sweden and Finland are both social oriented countries, having almost the same income, but only Finland is faced with a natural population decline (excluding immigration). However, since 2020, there is evidence of fertility recovery as births increased by around 1,000 (around 7%) in the first quarter of 2021.\nMother's mean age at first birth\n28.8 years (2015 est.)\nAge.\nThe Finnish population is ageing.\nAge structure\n\"0-14 years:\" 16.44% (male 467,598 /female 445,186)\n\"15-24 years:\" 11.21% (male 317,500 /female 303,326)\n\"25-54 years:\" 37.64% (male 1,064,751 /female 1,019,748)\n\"55-64 years:\" 13.19% (male 359,434 /female 370,993)\n\"65 years and over:\" 21.51% (male 519,775 /female 671,353) (2018 est.)\nMedian age\ntotal: 42.6 years. Country comparison to the world: 27th\nmale: 41 years\nfemale: 44.3 years (2018 est.)\nLife expectancy and mortality.\nSources: Our World In Data and the United Nations.\n1950\u20132015\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nInfant mortality rate\ntotal: 2.5 deaths/1,000 live births Country comparison to the world: 220th\nmale: 2.7 deaths/1,000 live births\nfemale: 2.4 deaths/1,000 live births (2017 est.)\nVital statistics from 1900.\nData according to Statistics Finland, which collects the official statistics for Finland.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2021): \nSocial issues.\nMarriage.\nAttitudes toward marriage have changed substantially since World War II. Most obvious was the declining marriage rate, which dropped from 8.5 marriages per 1,000 Finns in 1950 to 5.8, in 1984, a decline great enough to mean a drop also in absolute numbers. In 1950 there were 34,000 marriages, while in 1984 only 28,500 were registered, despite a growth in population of 800,000. An explanation for the decline was that there was an unprecedented number of unmarried couples. Since the late 1960s, the practice of cohabitation had become increasingly common, so much so that by the late 1970s most marriages in urban areas grew out of what Finns called \"open unions.\" In the 1980s, it was estimated that about 8 percent of couples who lived together, approximately 200,000 people, did so without benefit of marriage. Partners of such unions usually married because of the arrival of offspring or the acquisition of property. A result of the frequency of cohabitation was that marriages were postponed, and the average age for marriage, which had been falling, began to rise in the 1970s. By 1982 the average marriage age was 24.8 years for women and 26.8 years for men, several years higher for both sexes than had been true a decade earlier.\nThe overwhelming majority of Finns did marry, however. About 90 percent of the women had been married by the age of forty, and spinsterhood was rare. A shortage of women in rural regions, however, meant that some farmers were forced into bachelorhood.\nWhile the number of marriages was declining, divorce became more common, increasing 250 percent between 1950 and 1980. In 1952 there were 3,500 divorces. The 1960s saw a steady increase in this rate, which averaged about 5,000 divorces a year. A high of 10,191 was reached in 1979; afterwards the divorce rate stabilized at about 9,500 per year during the first half of the 1980s.\nA number of factors caused the increased frequency of divorce. One was that an increasingly secularized society viewed marriage, more often than before, as an arrangement that could be ended if it did not satisfy its partners. Another reason was that a gradually expanding welfare system could manage an ever-greater portion of the family's traditional tasks, and it made couples less dependent on the institution of marriage. Government provisions for parental leave, child allowances, child care programs, and much improved health and pension plans meant that the family was no longer essential for the care of children and aged relatives. A further cause for weakened family and marital ties was seen in the unsettling effects of the Great Migration and in the economic transformation Finland experienced during the 1960s and the 1970s. The rupture of established social patterns brought uncertainty and an increased potential for conflict into personal relationships.\ntotal: 20.1%. Country comparison to the world: 65th\nmale: 21.8%\nfemale: 18.6% (2016 est.)\nEducation.\nThe literacy rate of Finland is 99% of the country.\nLanguages.\nFinnish and Swedish are defined as languages of the state. Swedish is an official municipal language in municipalities with significant Swedish-speaking populations. The three Sami languages (North Sami, Inari Sami, Skolt Sami) are official in certain municipalities of Lapland.\nFinnish people \u2014 Finns \u2014 speak Finnish, which is the dominant language and is spoken almost everywhere in the country or Swedish which is the second official language and the only official language in \u00c5land.\nPopulation of mainland Finland (excluding \u00c5land) according to language, 1990\u20132020:\nMigration.\nFinland had a net migration rate of 2.8 people per 1000 in 2018.\nEmigration.\nMany Finnish natives have emigrated abroad, sometimes escaping war, e.g. to Sweden, sometimes for economical reasons, e.g. to the United States and Canada. Current numbers of emigration are not well discussed in public, but many Finns have opted to move abroad.\nA total of 245,864 Finnish citizens emigrated abroad between 1990 and 2017. The most popular destinations have been Sweden (76,269), United Kingdom (21,939), United States (18,943), Norway (16,971), Germany (16,694), Spain (14,209) and Denmark (9,626).\nExternal migration.\nDemographic movement in Finland did not end with the appearance of immigrants from Sweden in the Middle Ages. Finns who left to work in Swedish mines in the 16th century began a national tradition, which continued up through the 1970s, of settling in their neighboring country. During the period of tsarist rule, some 100,000 Finns went to Russia, mainly to the St. Petersburg area. Emigration on a large scale began in the second half of the 19th century when Finns, along with millions of other Europeans, set out for the United States and Canada. By 1980 Finland had lost an estimated 400,000 of its citizens to these two countries.\nA great number of Finns emigrated to Sweden after World War II, drawn by that country's prosperity and proximity. Emigration began slowly, but, during the 1960s and the second half of the 1970s, tens of thousands left each year for their western neighbor. The peak emigration year was 1970, when 41,000 Finns settled in Sweden, which caused Finland's population actually to fall that year. Because many of the migrants later returned to Finland, definite figures cannot be calculated, but all told, an estimated 250,000 to 300,000 Finns became permanent residents of Sweden in the postwar period. The overall youthfulness of these emigrants meant that the quality of the work force available to Finnish employers was diminished and that the national birth rate slowed. At one point, every eighth Finnish child was born in Sweden. Finland's Swedish-speaking minority was hard hit by this westward migration; its numbers dropped from 350,000 to about 300,000 between 1950 and 1980. By the 1980s, a strong Finnish economy had brought an end to large-scale migration to Sweden. In fact, the overall population flow was reversed because each year several thousand more Finns returned from Sweden than left for it.\nInternal migration.\nHowever significant the long-term effects of external migration on Finnish society may have been, migration within the country had a greater impact\u2014especially the migration which took place between the end of World War II and the mid-1970s, when half the population moved from one part of the country to another. Before World War II, internal migration had first been a centuries-long process of forming settlements ever farther to the north. Later, however, beginning in the second half of the 19th century with the coming of Finland's tardy industrialization, there was a slow movement from rural regions toward areas in the south where employment could be found.\nPostwar internal migration began with the resettlement within Finland of virtually all the inhabitants of the parts of Karelia ceded to the Soviet Union. Somewhat more than 400,000 persons, more than 10 percent of the nation's population, found new homes elsewhere in Finland, often in the less settled regions of the east and the north. In these regions, new land, which they cleared for farming, was provided for the refugees; in more populated areas, property was requisitioned. The sudden influx of these settlers was successfully dealt with in just a few years. One of the effects of rural resettlement was an increase in the number of farms during the postwar years, a unique occurrence for industrialized nations of this period.\nIt was, however, the postwar economic transformation that caused an even larger movement of people within Finland, a movement known to Finns as the Great Migration. It was a massive population shift from rural areas, especially those of eastern and northeastern Finland, to the urban, industrialized south. People left rural regions because the mechanization of agriculture and the forestry industry had eliminated jobs. The displaced work force went to areas where employment in the expanding industrial and service sectors was available. This movement began in the 1950s, but it was most intense during the 1960s and the first half of the 1970s, assuming proportions that in relative terms were unprecedented for a country outside the Third World. The Great Migration left behind rural areas of abandoned farms with reduced and aging populations, and it allowed the creation of a densely populated postindustrial society in the country's south.\nThe extent of the demographic shift to the south can be shown by the following figures. Between 1951 and 1975, the population registered an increase of 655,000. During this period, the small province of Uusimaa increased its population by 412,000, growing from 670,000 to 1,092,000; three-quarters of this growth was caused by settlers from other provinces. The population increase experienced by four other southern provinces, the \u00c5land Islands, Turku ja Pori, H\u00e4me, and Kymi, taken together with that of Uusimaa amounted to 97 percent of the country's total population increase for these years. The population increase of the central and the northern provinces accounted for the remaining 3 percent. Provinces that experienced an actual population loss during these years were in the east and the northeast-Pohjois-Karjala, Mikkeli, and Kuopio.\nOne way of visualizing the shift to the south would be to draw a line, bowing slightly to the north, between the port cities of Kotka on the Gulf of Finland and Kaskinen on the Gulf of Bothnia. In 1975 the territory to the south of this line would have contained half of Finland's population. Ten years earlier, such a line, drawn farther to the north to mark off perhaps 20 percent more area, would have encompassed half the population. One hundred years earlier, half the population would have been distributed throughout more than twice as much territory. Another indication of the extent to which Finns were located in the south was that by 1980, approximately 90 percent of them lived in the southernmost 41 percent of Finland.\nImmigration.\nOrigin and persons with a foreign background.\nNo official statistics are kept on ethnicities. However, statistics of the Finnish population according to a residents parents country of birth (foreign background/origin statistics) are available. According to international census recommendations an ethnic group is defined by the perception of its members of historical and regional or national origin, and data or ethnic status should always be based on a person's own statement. Because the census in Finland is based on registries, Finland can not produce official statistics about ethnic groups.\nForeign-born residents.\nAt the end of 2021, there were 442,290 foreign-born residents in Finland, corresponding to 8.0% of the total population.\nThe largest groups were:\nReligion.\nEvangelical Lutheran church is the largest church in Finland, 68.7% of population were its members in the end of year 2019. Christian Orthodox are the second largest registered group, 1.1% were members of the Finnish Orthodox Church (plus 1.5% orthodox immigrants). The number of Lutherans has decreased gradually from 98% in year 1900, 95% in year 1950 and 85% in year 2000. In end of 2019, 1.7% of population was in other religious groups, and 28.5% in census register or of unknown religious status.\nPentecostalism has approximately 50,000 members in Finland. Traditionally, it has acted as societies and is thus not visible in statistics of churches.\nThere were an estimated 102,000 Muslims in Finland in 2017.\nLiteracy.\nDefined as the proportion of people age 15 and over who can read and write, the literacy of the total Finnish population is 100% (2000 est.).\nIn a study published in March 2016, Finland was ranked the world's most literate nation among 61 countries, where enough data were available. The research considered among other things literacy achievement tests, numbers of libraries and newspapers, years of schooling and computer availability.\nIn 2010 Yle reported that 85\u201390% of Somali immigrants are illiterate when they arrive.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10711", "revid": "39166520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10711", "title": "Politics of Finland", "text": "Political system of Finland\nThe politics of Finland take place within the framework of a parliamentary representative democracy. Finland is a republic whose head of state is President Sauli Niinist\u00f6, who leads the nation's foreign policy and is the supreme commander of the Finnish Defence Forces. Finland's head of government is Prime Minister Sanna Marin, who leads the nation's executive branch, called the Finnish Government. Legislative power is vested in the Parliament of Finland (, ), and the Government has limited rights to amend or extend legislation. The Constitution of Finland vests power to both the President and Government: the President has veto power over parliamentary decisions, although this power can be overruled by a majority vote in the Parliament.\nThe judiciary is independent of the executive and legislative branches. The judiciary consists of two systems: regular courts and administrative courts. The judiciary's two systems are headed by the Supreme Court and the Supreme Administrative Court, respectively. Administrative courts process cases in which official decisions are contested. There is no constitutional court in Finland: the constitutionality of a law can be contested only as applied to an individual court case.\nThe citizens of Finland enjoy many individual and political freedoms, and suffrage is universal at the age of 18; Finnish women became the first in the world to have unrestricted rights both to vote and to run for public office.\nThe country's population is ethnically homogeneous with no sizable immigrant population. Few tensions exist between the Finnish-speaking majority and the Swedish-speaking minority, although in certain circles there is an unending debate about the status of the Swedish language.\nFinland's labor agreements are based on collective bargaining. Bargaining is highly centralized, and often the government participates to coordinate fiscal policy. Finland has universal validity of collective labour agreements and often, but not always, the trade unions, employers, and the Government reach a national income policy agreement. Significant Finnish trade unions include SAK, STTK, AKAVA, and EK.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Finland a \"full democracy\" in .\nHistory.\nAutonomous but under Russian rule.\nA Finnish political identity and distinctively Finnish politics first developed under the Russian rule in the country from 1809 to 1917. During the era Finland had an autonomous position within the Russian Empire with its own legislative powers. However, all bills had to be signed into law by the Russian Emperor who was the Grand Duke of Finland. Also, military power was firmly in Russian hands. Previously Finland had been a part of Sweden and did not have any political institutions of its own, rather people of Finnish ethnicity participated in Swedish politics.\nIndependence and civil war.\nThe Finnish Senate issued a declaration of independence on 6 December 1917, after Russia's second revolution in October 1917. The Council of People's Commissars of Soviet Russia, chaired by Lenin, recognized Finland's independence on 31 December 1917, and soon after that many other states followed.\nOn 28 January 1918, a civil war broke out that ended in the victory of German-backed Whites against Bolsheviks-backed Reds. In the same year the volunteers made some armed expeditions into Soviet Russia, including Karelia, and also Estonia. The Finnish Civil War was part of the First World War. The war was fought between the Finnish Senate, i.e. the forces led by the government, and the Finnish People's Delegation, from 27 January to 16 May 1918. The Senate forces were called Whites and the People's Delegation forces Reds.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, Finland fought three wars: the Winter War, the Continuation War and the Lapland War.\nAccording to the ceasefire agreement, in addition to the territorial losses following the Winter War, Finland had to hand over Petsamo and lease Porkkala as a base for 50 years. War reparations were set at USD 300 million. The terms of the ceasefire agreement were finally confirmed in the 1947 Paris Peace Treaty.\nUrho Kekkonen's rule.\nAfter the wars, Finland became a Nordic welfare state.\nAt the beginning of 1973, Kekkonen was exceptionally elected president without elections or candidates, which today is considered by some to be the nadir of Finnish democracy and marked the beginning of the final era for Kekkonen.\nIntegration to the West.\nIn 1982, Mauno Koivisto was elected president, promising to reduce the powers of the president and increase those of the prime minister.\nThe convergence of Finland and the European Community began in the autumn of 1989 with the decision to join the European Economic Area (EEA).\nFollowing a positive vote in Parliament, Finland's application for EC membership was submitted on 18 March 1992, and membership negotiations began on 1 February 1993 at the same time as with Sweden and Austria.\nFinland joined the European Union in 1995. In 2002, the euro replaced the markka as Finland's official currency.\nConstitution.\nThe current version of the constitution of Finland was written on 1 March 2000. The first iteration of the constitution was adopted on 17 July 1919. The original comprised four constitutional laws and several amendments, which the latter replaced.\nAccording to the constitution, the legislative powers are exercised by the Parliament, the governmental powers are exercised by the President of the Republic and the Government, and the judicial powers are exercised by government-independent courts of law. The Supreme Court may request legislation that interprets or modifies existing laws. Judges are appointed by the President.\nThe constitution of Finland and its place in the judicial system are unusual in that there is no constitutional court and the Supreme Court does not have the explicit right to declare a law unconstitutional. In principle, the constitutionality of laws in Finland is verified by a simple vote by Parliament (see \"parliamentary sovereignty\"). However, the Parliament's Constitutional Law Committee reviews any doubtful bills and recommends changes, if needed. In practice, the Constitutional Law Committee fulfils the duties of a constitutional court. A Finnish peculiarity is the possibility of making exceptions to the constitution in ordinary laws that are enacted in the same procedure as constitutional amendments. An example of such a law is the State of Preparedness Act, which gives the Government certain exceptional powers in cases of national emergency. As these powers, which correspond to US executive orders, affect constitutional basic rights, the law was enacted in the same manner as a constitutional amendment. However, it can be repealed in the same manner as an ordinary law. In addition to preview by the Constitutional Law Committee, all Finnish courts are obligated to give precedence to the constitution when there is an obvious conflict between the constitution and a regular law. Such a case is, however, very rare.\nSome matters are decided by the President of Finland, the Head of State, in plenary meetings with the government, echoing the constitutional history of a privy council. The President is otherwise not present in the government, but decides on issues such as personal appointments and pardons on the advice of the relevant minister. In the ministries, matters of secondary importance are decided by individual ministers, advised by the minister's State Secretary. The Prime Minister and the other ministers in the government are responsible for their actions in office to the Parliament.\nExecutive branch.\nFinland has a parliamentary system, even if the President of Finland is formally responsible for foreign policy. Most executive power lies in the cabinet (the Finnish Government) headed by the prime minister. Responsibility for forming the cabinet out of several political parties and negotiating its platform is granted to the leader of the party gaining largest support in the elections for the parliament. This person also becomes prime minister of the cabinet. Any minister and the cabinet as a whole, however, must have continuing trust of the parliament and may be voted out, resign or be replaced. The Government is made up of the prime minister and the ministers for the various departments of the central government as well as an \"ex officio\" member, the Chancellor of Justice.\nIn the official usage, the \"cabinet\" (\"valtioneuvosto\") are the ministers including the prime minister and the Chancellor of Justice, while the \"government\" (\"hallitus\") is the cabinet presided by the president. In the popular usage, \"hallitus\" (with the president) may also refer to \"valtioneuvosto\" (without the president).\nPresident.\nThough Finland has a primarily parliamentary system, the President has some notable powers. The foreign policy is led by the President in co-operation with the government, and the same applies to matters concerning national security. The main executive power lies in the cabinet, which is headed by the Prime Minister. Before the 2000 constitutional rewrite, the President enjoyed more governing power.\nElected for a six-year term, the president:\nGovernment.\nThe Government is made up of the Prime Minister and other ministers for the various ministries of the central government as well as an \"ex officio\" member, the Chancellor of Justice. Ministers are not obliged to be members of Parliament and need not be formally identified with any political party.\nThe Government produces most of the material that the Parliament deals with, such as proposals for new laws or legislative reforms, and the annual budget. The ministers each direct their ministries with relative independence. The current cabinet has 19 ministers in 12 ministries. The number of ministers can be decided by the Government.\nThe Prime Minister's Office and eleven other ministries make up the Government of Finland.\nThe head of government is the Prime Minister, currently Sanna Marin. The Prime Minister designate is subject to election by the Parliament and subsequent appointment by the President of Finland. All the ministers shall be Finnish citizens, known to be honest and competent.\nMinistries.\nThe ministries function as administrative and political experts and prepare Government decisions within their mandates. They also represent their relevant administrative sectors in domestic and international cooperation.\nNew laws are drafted in ministries. There is a tradition of substantial ministerial independence in law drafting. The drafts are then reviewed by government and parliament before enactment. The final legislative power is vested in Parliament, in conjunction with the President of the Republic, according to the Finnish Constitution.\nThere are 12 ministries in Finland. As the government tends to have more ministers than ministries, some ministries, such as the Ministry of Finance, are associated with multiple ministers.\nParliament.\nThe 200-member unicameral Parliament of Finland (\"Eduskunta\" (Finnish), \"Riksdag\" (Swedish)) is the supreme legislative authority in Finland. The parliament may alter the Constitution of Finland, bring about the resignation of the Government, and override presidential vetoes. Its acts are not subject to judicial review. Legislation may be initiated by the Government, or one of the members of Parliament, who are elected for a four-year term on the basis of proportional representation through open list multi-member districts. Persons 18 or older, except military personnel on active duty and a few high judicial officials, are eligible for election. The regular parliamentary term is four years; however, the president may dissolve the eduskunta and order new elections at the request of the prime minister and after consulting the speaker of parliament.\nThe parliament has, since equal and common suffrage was introduced in 1906, been dominated by secular Conservatives, the Centre Party (former Agrarian Union), and Social Democrats. Nevertheless, none of these has held a single-party majority, with the notable exception of 1916 elections where Social Democrats gained 103 of the 200 seats. After 1944, Communists were a factor to consider for a few decades, and the Finnish People's Democratic League, formed by Communists and others to the left of Social Democrats, was the largest party after 1958 elections. Support for Communists decreased sharply in the early 1980s, while later in the same decade environmentalists formed the Green League, which is now one of the largest parties. The Swedish People's Party represents the Finland-Swedes, especially in language politics. The relative strengths of the parties vary only slightly in the elections due to the proportional election from multi-member districts, but there are some visible long-term trends.\nThere is no constitutional court; matters concerning constitutional rights or constitutional law are processed by the Constitutional Committee of the Parliament (\"perustuslakivaliokunta\"). Additionally, the Constitutional Committee has the sole power to refer a case to the High Court of Impeachment (\"valtakunnanoikeus\") and to authorize police investigations for this purpose.\nIn addition to the parliament, the Cabinet and President may produce regulations (\"asetus\") through a rulemaking process. These give more specific instructions on how to apply statutes, which often explicitly delegate regulation of specific details to the government. Regulations must be based on existing law, and they can clarify and specify, but not contradict the statute. Furthermore, the rights of an individual must always be based on a statute, not a regulation. Often the statute and the regulation come in similarly named pairs. For example, the law on primary education lists the subjects to be taught, and the regulation specifies the required number of teaching hours. Most of regulations are given by the Cabinet, but the President may give regulations concerning national security. Before 2000, the President had the right to enact regulations on matters not governed by parliamentary law, but this power was removed, and existing regulations were converted into regular statutes by the Parliament.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nFinland's proportional representation system encourages a multitude of political parties and since about 1980 the trend has been that the same coalition rules for the whole period between elections.\nFinland elects on national level a head of state\u2014the president\u2014and a legislature. The president is elected for a six-year term by the people. The Parliament has 200 members, elected for a four-year term by proportional representation in multi-seat constituencies. Finland has a multi-party system, with multiple strong parties, in which no one party often has a chance of gaining power alone, and parties must work with each other to form coalition governments.\nIn addition to the presidential and parliamentary elections, there are European Parliament elections every five years, and local municipal elections (held simultaneously in every municipality) every four years.\nJudiciary.\nFinland has a civil law system, which is based on Swedish law, with the judiciary exercising limited powers. Proceedings are inquisitorial, where judges preside, conduct finding of fact, adjudication and giving of sanctions such as sentences; no juries are used. In e.g. criminal and family-related proceedings in local courts, the panel of judges may include both lay judges and professional judges, while all appeals courts and administrative courts consist only of professional judges. Precedent is not binding, with the exception of Supreme Court and Supreme Administrative Court decisions.\nThe judicial system of Finland is divided between courts with regular civil and criminal jurisdiction and administrative courts with responsibility for litigation between the individuals and the administrative organs of the state and the communities. Finnish law is codified and its court system consists of local courts, regional appellate courts, and the Supreme Court. The administrative branch of justice consists of administrative courts and the Supreme Administrative Court. The administrative process has more popularity as it is cheaper and has lower financial risk to the person making claims. In addition to the regular courts, there are a few special courts in certain branches of administration. There is also a High Court of Impeachment for criminal charges (for an offence in office) against the President of the Republic, the justices of the supreme courts, members of the Government, the Chancellor of Justice and the Ombudsman of Parliament.\nAlthough there is no writ of habeas corpus or bail, the maximum period of pre-trial detention has been reduced to four days. For further detention, a court must order the imprisonment. One does not have the right for one phonecall: the police officer leading the investigation may inform relatives or similar if the investigation permits. However, a lawyer can be invited. Search warrants are not strictly needed, and are usually issued by a police officer. Wiretapping does need a court order.\nFinland has a civil law (Roman law) system with an inquisitorial procedure. In accordance with the separation of powers, the \"trias politica\" principle, courts of law are independent of other administration. They base their decisions solely on the law in force. Criminal cases, civil cases and petitionary matters are dealt in 27 district courts, and then, if the decision is not satisfactory to the involved parties, can be applied in six Courts of Appeal. The Supreme Court of Finland serves as the court of last instance. Appeals against decisions by authorities are considered in six regional administrative courts, with the Supreme Administrative Court of Finland as the court of last instance. The President appoints all professional judges for life. Municipal councils appoint lay judges to district courts.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFinland is divided into 313 democratically independent municipalities, which are grouped into 70 sub-regions.\nAs the highest-level division, Finland is divided into 19 counties.\nA municipality in Finland can choose to call itself either a \"city\" or \"municipality\". A municipality is governed by a municipal council (or a city council) elected by proportional representation once every four years. Democratic decision-making takes place on either the municipal or national level with few exceptions.\nUntil 2009, the state organization was divided into six provinces. However, the provinces were abolished altogether in 2010. Today, state local presence on mainland Finland is provided by 6 regional state administrative agencies (\"aluehallintovirasto\", \"avi\"), and 15 Centres for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment (\"elinkeino-, liikenne- ja ymp\u00e4rist\u00f6keskus\", \"ely-keskus\"). Regional state administrative agencies have mostly law enforcement, rescue and judicial duties: police, fire and rescue, emergency readiness, basic services, environmental permits and enforcement and occupational health and safety protection. The Centres implement labor and industrial policy, provide employment and immigration services, and promote culture; maintain highways, other transport networks and infrastructure; and protect, monitor and manage the environment, land use and water resources.\n\u00c5land is located near the 60th parallel between Sweden and Finland. It enjoys local autonomy by virtue of an international convention of 1921, implemented most recently by the Act on \u00c5land Self-Government of 1951. The islands are further distinguished by the fact that they are entirely Swedish-speaking. Government is vested in the provincial council, which consists of 30 delegates elected directly by \u00c5land's citizens.\nRegional and local administration.\nFinland is divided between six Regional State Administrative Agencies, which are responsible for basic public services and legal permits, such as rescue services and environmental permits. The 15 Centres for Economic Development, Transport and the Environment (ELY Centres) are responsible for the regional implementation and development tasks of the central government.\nThe basic units for organising government and public services in Finland are the municipalities. As of 2017, there are 311 municipalities, which incorporate the entire country.\nIndirect public administration.\nIndirect public administration supplements and supports the authorities in managing the tasks of the welfare society. It comprises organisations which are not authorities, but which carry out public tasks or execute public powers. Examples of this are issuing hunting licences or carrying out motor vehicle inspection.\nForeign relations.\nAfter the second world war, Paasikivi\u2013Kekkonen doctrine was the foreign policy doctrine which aimed at Finland's survival as an independent sovereign, democratic, and capitalist country in the immediate proximity of the Soviet Union. After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Finland freed itself from the last restrictions imposed on it by the Paris peace treaties of 1947. The Finnish-Soviet Agreement of Friendship, Co-operation, and Mutual Assistance (and the restrictions included therein) was annulled but Finland recognised the Russian Federation as the successor of the USSR and was quick to draft bilateral treaties of goodwill as well as reallocating Soviet debts.\nFinland deepened her participation in the European integration by joining the European Union with Sweden and Austria in 1995. It could be perhaps said that the country's policy of neutrality has been moderated to \"military non-alignment\" with an emphasis on maintaining a competent independent defence. Peacekeeping under the auspices of the United Nations is the only real extra-national military responsibility which Finland undertakes.\nFinland is highly dependent on foreign trade and actively participates in international cooperation. Finland is a member of the European Union, United Nations and World Bank Group and in many of their member organizations.\nFinland-Russia relations have been under pressure with annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, which Finland considers illegal. Together with the rest of the European Union, Finland enforces sanctions against Russia that followed. Still, economic relations have not entirely deteriorated: 11.2% of imports to Finland are from Russia, and 5.7% of exports from Finland are to Russia, and cooperation between Finnish and Russian authorities continues.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10712", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10712", "title": "Economy of Finland", "text": "National economy of Finland\nThe economy of Finland is a highly industrialised, mixed economy with a per capita output similar to that of western European economies such as France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. The largest sector of Finland's economy is its service sector; which contributes 72.7% to the country's gross domestic product (GDP), followed by manufacturing and refining at 31.4%, and Finland's the country's primary sector at 2.9%.\nFinland's key economic sector is manufacturing. The largest industries are electronics (21.6% - very old data), machinery, vehicles and other engineered metal products (21.1%), forest industry (13.1%), and chemicals (10.9%). Finland has timber and several mineral and freshwater resources. Forestry, paper factories, and the agricultural sector (on which taxpayers spend around 2 billion euro annually) are politically sensitive to rural residents. The Greater Helsinki area generates around a third of GDP.\nIn a 2004 OECD comparison, high-technology manufacturing in Finland ranked second largest in the world, after Ireland. Investment was below the expected levels. The overall short-term outlook was good and GDP growth has been above many of its peers in the European Union. Finland has the 4th largest knowledge economy in Europe, behind Sweden, Denmark and the UK. The economy of Finland tops the ranking of the Global Information Technology 2014 report by the World Economic Forum for concerted output between the business sector, the scholarly production and the governmental assistance on information and communications technology.\nFinland is highly integrated in the global economy, and international trade represents a third of the GDP. Trade with the European Union represents 60% of the country's total trade. The largest trade flows are with Germany, Russia, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States, the Netherlands and China. The trade policy is managed by the European Union, where Finland has traditionally been among the free trade supporters, except for agriculture. Finland is the only Nordic country to have joined the Eurozone; Denmark and Sweden have retained their traditional currencies, whereas Iceland and Norway are not members of the EU at all.\nHistory.\nBeing geographically distant from Western and Central Europe in relation to other Nordic countries, Finland struggled behind in terms of industrialization apart from the production of paper, which partially replaced the export of timber solely as a raw material towards the end of the nineteenth century. But as a relatively poor country, it was vulnerable to shocks to the economy such as the great famine of 1867\u20131868, which killed around 15% of the country's population. Until the 1930s, the Finnish economy was predominantly agrarian and, as late as in the 1950s, more than half the population and 40% of output were still in the primary sector.\nAfter World War II.\nProperty rights were strong. While nationalization committees were set up in France and the United Kingdom, Finland avoided nationalizations. Finnish industry recovered quickly after Second World War. By the end of 1946 industrial output surpassed pre-war numbers. In the immediate post-war period of 1946 to 1951, industry continued to grow rapidly. Many factors contributed to the rapid industrial growth such as war reparations which were largely paid in manufactured products, devaluation of currency in 1945 and 1949, which made dollar rise by 70% against Finish markka and thus boosted exports to the West as well as rebuilding the country which increased demand for industrial products. In 1951, the Korean War boosted exports. Finland practiced an active exchange rate policy and devaluation was used several times to raise the competitiveness of exporting industries.\nBetween 1950 and 1975, Finland's industry was at the mercy of international economic trends. The fast industrial growth in 1953-1955 was followed by a period of more moderate growth which started in 1956. The causes for the deceleration of growth were the general strike of 1956, as well as weakened export trends and easing of the strict regulation of Finland's foreign trade in 1957, which compelled industry to compete against ever toughening international challengers. An economic recession brought industrial output down by 3.4% in 1958. Industry, however, recovered quickly during the international economic boom that followed the recession. One reason for this was the devaluation of the Finnish markka which increased the value of the US dollar up by 39% against the Finnish markka.\nInternational economy was stable in the 1960s. This trend can be seen in Finland as well, where steady growth of industrial output throughout the decade was recorded.\nAfter failed experiments with protectionism, Finland eased restrictions and concluded a free trade agreement with the European Community in 1973, making its markets more competitive. Finland's industrial output declined in 1975. The decline was caused by the free trade agreement that has been made between Finland and the European Community in 1973. The agreement subjected Finnish industry to ever toughening international competition and a strong contraction duly followed in Finland's exports to the West. In 1976 and 1977 growth of industrial output was almost zero, but in 1978 it swung back towards strong growth again. In 1978 and 1979 industrial output grew at above average rate. The stimuli for this were three devaluations of Finnish markka, which lowered value of the markka by a total of 19%. Impacts from the Oil Crisis on Finnish industry were also alleviated by Finland's bilateral trade with the Soviet Union.\nLocal education markets expanded and an increasing number of Finns also went abroad to study in the United States or Western Europe, bringing back advanced skills. There was a quite common, but pragmatic-minded, credit and investment cooperation by state and corporations, though it was considered with suspicion. Support for capitalism was widespread. On the other hand, communists (Finnish People's Democratic League) have received the most votes (23.2%) in 1958 parliamentary elections. Savings rate hovered among the world's highest, at around 8% until the 1980s. In the beginning of the 1970s, Finland's GDP per capita reached the level of Japan and the UK. Finland's economic development shared many aspects with export-led Asian countries. The official policy of neutrality enabled Finland to trade both with Western and Comecon markets. Significant bilateral trade was conducted with the Soviet Union, but this did not grow into a dependence.\nLiberalization.\nLike other Nordic countries, Finland has liberalized its system of economic regulation since late 1980s. Financial and product market regulations were modified. Some state enterprises were privatized and some tax rates were altered.\nIn 1991, the Finnish economy fell into a severe recession. This was caused by a combination of economic overheating (largely due to a change in the banking laws in 1986 which made credit much more accessible), depressed markets with key trading partners (particularly the Swedish and Soviet markets) as well as local markets, slow growth with other trading partners, and the disappearance of the Soviet bilateral trade. Stock market and housing prices declined by 50%. The growth in the 1980s was based on debt, and when the defaults began rolling in, GDP declined by 13% and unemployment increased from a virtual full employment to one fifth of the workforce. The crisis was amplified by trade unions' initial opposition to any reforms. Politicians struggled to cut spending and the public debt doubled to around 60% of GDP. Much of the economic growth in the 1980s was based on debt financing, and the debt defaults led to a savings and loan crisis. A total of over 10 billion euros were used to bail out failing banks, which led to banking sector consolidation.\nAfter devaluations, the depression bottomed out in 1993.\nEuropean Union.\nFinland joined the European Union in 1995. The central bank was given an inflation-targeting mandate until Finland joined the euro zone. The growth rate has since been one of the highest of OECD countries and Finland has topped many indicators of national performance.\nFinland was one of the 11 countries joining the third phase of the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union, adopting the euro as the country's currency, on 1 January 1999. The national currency markka (FIM) was withdrawn from circulation and replaced by the euro (EUR) at the beginning of 2002.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017. Inflation under 2% is in green. Estimates begin after 2021.\nAgriculture.\nFinland's climate and soils make growing crops a particular challenge. The country lies between 60\u00b0 and 70\u00b0 north latitude - as far north as Alaska - and has severe winters and relatively short growing seasons that are sometimes interrupted by frosts. However, because the Gulf Stream and the North Atlantic Drift Current moderate the climate, and because of the relatively low elevation of the land area, Finland contains half of the world's arable land north of 60\u00b0 north latitude. In response to the climate, farmers have relied on quick-ripening and frost-resistant varieties of crops. Most farmland had originally been either forest or swamp, and the soil had usually required treatment with lime and years of cultivation to neutralise excess acid and to develop fertility. Irrigation was generally not necessary, but drainage systems were often needed to remove excess water.\nUntil the late nineteenth century, Finland's isolation required that most farmers concentrate on producing grains to meet the country's basic food needs. In the fall, farmers planted rye; in the spring, southern and central farmers started oats, while northern farmers seeded barley. Farms also grew small quantities of potatoes, other root crops, and legumes. Nevertheless, the total area under cultivation was still small. Cattle grazed in the summer and consumed hay in the winter. Essentially self-sufficient, Finland engaged in very limited agricultural trade.\nThis traditional, almost autarkic, production pattern shifted sharply during the late nineteenth century, when inexpensive imported grain from Russia and the United States competed effectively with local grain. At the same time, rising domestic and foreign demand for dairy products and the availability of low-cost imported cattle feed made dairy and meat production much more profitable. These changes in market conditions induced Finland's farmers to switch from growing staple grains to producing meat and dairy products, setting a pattern that persisted into the late 1980s.\nIn response to the agricultural depression of the 1930s, the government encouraged domestic production by imposing tariffs on agricultural imports. This policy enjoyed some success: the total area under cultivation increased, and farm incomes fell less sharply in Finland than in most other countries. Barriers to grain imports stimulated a return to mixed farming, and by 1938 Finland's farmers were able to meet roughly 90% of the domestic demand for grain.\nThe disruptions caused by the Winter War and the Continuation War caused further food shortages, especially when Finland ceded territory, including about one-tenth of its farmland, to the Soviet Union. The experiences of the depression and the war years persuaded the Finns to secure independent food supplies to prevent shortages in future conflicts.\nAfter the war, the first challenge was to resettle displaced farmers. Most refugee farmers were given farms that included some buildings and land that had already been in production, but some had to make do with \"cold farms,\" that is, land not in production that usually had to be cleared or drained before crops could be sown. The government sponsored large-scale clearing and draining operations that expanded the area suitable for farming. As a result of the resettlement and land-clearing programs, the area under cultivation expanded by about 450,000 hectares, reaching about 2.4 million hectares by the early 1960s. Finland thus came to farm more land than ever before, an unusual development in a country that was simultaneously experiencing rapid industrial growth.\nDuring this period of expansion, farmers introduced modern production practices. The widespread use of modern inputs\u2014chemical fertilisers and insecticides, agricultural machinery, and improved seed varieties\u2014sharply improved crop yields. Yet the modernisation process again made farm production dependent on supplies from abroad, this time on imports of petroleum and fertilisers. By 1984 domestic sources of energy covered only about 20% of farm needs, while in 1950 domestic sources had supplied 70% of them. In the aftermath of the oil price increases of the early 1970s, farmers began to return to local energy sources such as firewood. The existence of many farms that were too small to allow efficient use of tractors also limited mechanisation. Another weak point was the existence of many fields with open drainage ditches needing regular maintenance; in the mid-1980s, experts estimated that half of the cropland needed improved drainage works. At that time, about 1 million hectares had underground drainage, and agricultural authorities planned to help install such works on another million hectares. Despite these shortcomings, Finland's agriculture was efficient and productive\u2014at least when compared with farming in other European countries.\nForestry.\nForests play a key role in the country's economy, making it one of the world's leading wood producers and providing raw materials at competitive prices for the crucial wood processing industries. As in agriculture, the government has long played a leading role in forestry, regulating tree cutting, sponsoring technical improvements, and establishing long-term plans to ensure that the country's forests continue to supply the wood-processing industries.\nFinland's wet climate and rocky soils are ideal for forests. Tree stands do well throughout the country, except in some areas north of the Arctic Circle. In 1980 the forested area totaled about 19.8 million hectares, providing 4 hectares of forest per capita\u2014far above the European average of about 0.5 hectares. The proportion of forest land varied considerably from region to region. In the central lake plateau and in the eastern and northern provinces, forests covered up to 80% of the land area, but in areas with better conditions for agriculture, especially in the southwest, forests accounted for only 50 to 60% of the territory. The main commercial tree species\u2014pine, spruce, and birch\u2014supplied raw material to the sawmill, pulp, and paper industries. The forests also produced sizable aspen and elder crops.\nThe heavy winter snows and the network of waterways were used to move logs to the mills. Loggers were able to drag cut trees over the winter snow to the roads or water bodies. In the southwest, the sledding season lasted about 100 days per year; the season was even longer to the north and the east. The country's network of lakes and rivers facilitated log floating, a cheap and rapid means of transport. Each spring, crews floated the logs downstream to collection points; tugs towed log bundles down rivers and across lakes to processing centers. The waterway system covered much of the country, and by the 1980s Finland had extended roadways and railroads to areas not served by waterways, effectively opening up all of the country's forest reserves to commercial use.\nForestry and farming were closely linked. During the twentieth century, government land redistribution programmes had made forest ownership widespread, allotting forestland to most farms. In the 1980s, private farmers controlled 35% of the country's forests; other persons held 27%; the government, 24%; private corporations, 9%; and municipalities and other public bodies, 5%. The forestlands owned by farmers and by other people\u2014some 350,000 plots\u2014were the best, producing 75 to 80% of the wood consumed by industry; the state owned much of the poorer land, especially that in the north.\nThe ties between forestry and farming were mutually beneficial. Farmers supplemented their incomes with earnings from selling their wood, caring for forests, or logging; forestry made many otherwise marginal farms viable. At the same time, farming communities maintained roads and other infrastructure in rural areas, and they provided workers for forest operations. Indeed, without the farming communities in sparsely populated areas, it would have been much more difficult to continue intensive logging operations and reforestation in many prime forest areas.\nThe Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry has carried out forest inventories and drawn up silvicultural plans. According to surveys, between 1945 and the late 1970s foresters had cut trees faster than the forests could regenerate them. Nevertheless, between the early 1950s and 1981, Finland was able to boost the total area of its forests by some 2.7 million hectares and to increase forest stands under 40 years of age by some 3.2 million hectares. Beginning in 1965, the country instituted plans that called for expanding forest cultivation, draining peatland and waterlogged areas, and replacing slow-growing trees with faster-growing varieties. By the mid-1980s, the Finns had drained 5.5 million hectares, fertilized 2.8 million hectares, and cultivated 3.6 million hectares. Thinning increased the share of trees that would produce suitable lumber, while improved tree varieties increased productivity by as much as 30%.\nComprehensive silvicultural programmes had made it possible for the Finns simultaneously to increase forest output and to add to the amount and value of the growing stock. By the mid-1980s, Finland's forests produced nearly 70 million cubic meters of new wood each year, considerably more than was being cut. During the postwar period, the annual cut increased by about 120% to about 50 million cubic meters. Wood burning fell to one-fifth the level of the immediate postwar years, freeing up wood supplies for the wood-processing industries, which consumed between 40 million and 45 million cubic meters per year. Indeed, industry demand was so great that Finland needed to import 5 million to 6 million cubic meters of wood each year.\nTo maintain the country's comparative advantage in forest products, Finnish authorities moved to raise lumber output toward the country's ecological limits. In 1984 the government published the Forest 2000 plan, drawn up by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. The plan aimed at increasing forest harvests by about 3% per year, while conserving forestland for recreation and other uses. It also called for enlarging the average size of private forest holdings, increasing the area used for forests, and extending forest cultivation and thinning. If successful, the plan would make it possible to raise wood deliveries by roughly one-third by the end of the twentieth century. Finnish officials believed that such growth was necessary if Finland was to maintain its share in world markets for wood and paper products.\nIndustry.\nSince the 1990s, Finnish industry, which for centuries had relied on the country's vast forests, has become increasingly dominated by electronics and services, as globalization lead to a decline of more traditional industries. Outsourcing resulted in more manufacturing being transferred abroad, with Finnish-based industry focusing to a greater extent on R&amp;D and hi-tech electronics.\nElectronics.\nThe Finnish electronics and electrotechnics industry relies on heavy investment in R&amp;D, and has been accelerated by the liberalisation of global markets. Electrical engineering started in the late 19th century with generators and electric motors built by Gottfried Str\u00f6mberg, now part of the ABB. Other Finnish companies \u2013 such as Instru, Vaisala and Neles (now part of Metso) - have succeeded in areas such as industrial automation, medical and meteorological technology. Nokia was once a world leader in mobile telecommunications.\nMetals, engineering and manufacturing.\nFinland has an abundance of minerals, but many large mines have closed down, and most raw materials are now imported. For this reason, companies now tend to focus on high added-value processing of metals. The exports include steel, copper, chromium, gold, zinc and nickel, and finished products such as steel roofing and cladding, welded steel pipes, copper pipe and coated sheets. Outokumpu is known for developing the flash smelting process for copper production and stainless steel.\nIn 2019, the country was the world's 5th largest producer of chromium, the 17th largest world producer of sulfur and the 20th largest world producer of phosphate\nWith regard to vehicles, the Finnish motor industry consists mostly of manufacturers of tractors (Valtra, formerly Valmet tractor), forest machines (f.ex. Ponsse), military vehicles (Sisu, Patria), trucks (Sisu Auto), buses and Valmet Automotive, a contract manufacturer, whose factory in Uusikaupunki produces Mercedes-Benz cars. Shipbuilding is an important industry: the world's largest cruise ships are built in Finland; also, the Finnish company W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4 produces the world's largest diesel engines and has market share of 47%. In addition, Finland also produces train rolling stock.\nThe manufacturing industry is a significant employer of about 400,000 people.\nChemical industry.\nThe chemical industry is one of the Finland's largest industrial sectors with its roots in tar making in the 17th century. It produces an enormous range of products for the use of other industrial sectors, especially for forestry and agriculture. In addition, its produces plastics, chemicals, paints, oil products, pharmaceuticals, environmental products, biotech products and petrochemicals. In the beginning of this millennium, biotechnology was regarded as one of the most promising high-tech sectors in Finland. In 2006 it was still considered promising, even though it had not yet become \"the new Nokia\".\nPulp and paper industry.\nForest products has been the major export industry in the past, but diversification and growth of the economy has reduced its share. In the 1970s, the pulp and paper industry accounted for half of Finnish exports. Although this share has shrank, pulp and paper is still a major industry with 52 sites across the country. Furthermore, several of large international corporations in this business are based in Finland. Stora Enso and UPM were placed No. 1 and No. 3 by output in the world, both producing more than ten million tons. M-real and Myllykoski also appear on the top 100 list.\nEnergy industry.\nFinland's energy supply is divided as follows: nuclear power 26%, net imports 20%, hydroelectric power 16%, combined production district heat 18%, combined production industry 13%, condensing power 6%.\nOne half of all the energy consumed in Finland goes to industry, one fifth to heating buildings and one fifth to transport. Lacking indigenous fossil fuel resources, Finland has been an energy importer. This might change in the future since Finland is currently building its fifth nuclear reactor, and approved building permits for its sixth and seventh ones. There are some uranium resources in Finland, but to date no commercially viable deposits have been identified for exclusive mining of uranium. However, permits have been granted to Talvivaara to produce uranium from the tailings of their nickel-cobalt mine.\nCompanies.\nNotable companies in Finland include Nokia, the former market leader in mobile telephony; Stora Enso, the largest paper manufacturer in the world; Neste Oil, an oil refining and marketing company; UPM-Kymmene, the third largest paper manufacturer in the world; Aker Finnyards, the manufacturer of the world's largest cruise ships (such as Royal Caribbean's \"Freedom of the Seas\"); Rovio Mobile, video game developer most notable for creating Angry Birds; KONE, a manufacturer of elevators and escalators; W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4, a producer of power plants and ship engines; and Finnair, the largest Helsinki-Vantaa based international airline. Additionally, many Nordic design firms are headquartered in Finland. These include the Fiskars owned Iittala Group, Artek a furniture design firm co-created by Alvar Aalto, and Marimekko made famous by Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis. Finland has sophisticated financial markets comparable to the UK in efficiency. Though foreign investment is not as high as some other European countries, the largest foreign-headquartered companies included names such as ABB, Tellabs, Carlsberg and Siemens.\nAround 70-80% of the equity quoted on the Helsinki Stock Exchange are owned by foreign-registered entities. The larger companies get most of their revenue from abroad, and the majority of their employees work outside the country. Cross-shareholding has been abolished and there is a trend towards an Anglo-Saxon style of corporate governance. However, only around 15% of residents have invested in stock market, compared to 20% in France, and 50% in the US.\nBetween 2000 and 2003, early stage venture capital investments relative to GDP were 8.5% against 4% in the EU and 11.5 in the US. Later stage investments fell to the EU median. Invest in Finland and other programs attempt to attract investment. In 2000 FDI from Finland to overseas was 20 billion euro and from overseas to Finland 7 billion euro. Acquisitions and mergers have internationalized business in Finland.\nAlthough some privatization has been gradually done, there are still several state-owned companies of importance. The government keeps them as strategic assets or because they are natural monopoly. These include e.g. Neste (oil refining and marketing), VR (rail), Finnair, VTT (research) and Posti Group (mail). Depending on the strategic importance, the government may hold either 100%, 51% or less than 50% stock. Most of these have been transformed into regular limited companies, but some are quasi-governmental (\"liikelaitos\"), with debt backed by the state, as in the case of VTT.\nHousehold income and consumption.\nFinland's income is generated by the approximately 1.8 million private sector workers, who make an average 25.1 euro per hour (before the median 60% tax wedge) in 2007. According to a 2003 report, residents worked on average around 10 years for the same employer and around 5 different jobs over a lifetime. 62% worked for small and medium-sized enterprises. Female employment rate was high and gender segregation on career choices was higher than in the US. In 1999 part-time work rate was one of the smallest in OECD.\nFuture liabilities are dominated by the pension deficit. Unlike in Sweden, where pension savers can manage their investments, in Finland employers choose a pension fund for the employee. The pension funding rate is higher than in most Western European countries, but still only a portion of it is funded and pensions exclude health insurances and other unaccounted promises. Directly held public debt has been reduced to around 32% in 2007. In 2007, the average household savings rate was -3.8 and household debt 101% of annual disposable income, a typical level in Europe.\nIn 2008, the OECD reported that \"the gap between rich and poor has widened more in Finland than in any other wealthy industrialised country over the past decade\" and that \"Finland is also one of the few countries where inequality of incomes has grown between the rich and the middle-class, and not only between rich and poor.\"\nIn 2006, there were 2,381,500 households of average size 2.1 people. Forty% of households consisted of single person, 32% two and 28% three or more. There were 1.2 million residential buildings in Finland and the average residential space was 38 square metres per person. The average residential property (without land) cost 1,187 euro per square metre and residential land on 8.6 euro per square metre. Consumer energy prices were 8-12 euro cent per kilowatt hour. 74% of households had a car. There were 2.5 million cars and 0.4 other vehicles.\nAround 92% have mobile phones and 58% Internet connection at home. The average total household consumption was 20,000 euro, out of which housing at around 5500 euro, transport at around 3000 euro, food and beverages excluding alcoholic at around 2500 euro, recreation and culture at around 2000 euro. Upper-level white-collar households (409,653) consumed an average 27,456 euro, lower-level white-collar households (394,313) 20,935 euro, and blue-collar households (471,370) 19,415 euro.\nUnemployment.\nThe unemployment rate was 10.3% in 2015. The employment rate is (persons aged 15\u201364) 66.8%. Unemployment security benefits for those seeking employment are at an average OECD level. The labor administration funds labour market training for unemployed job seekers, the training for unemployed job seeker can last up to 6 months, which is often vocational. The aim of the training is to improve the channels of finding employment.\nGross domestic product.\nEuro Membership.\nThe American economist and \"The New York Times\" columnist Paul Krugman has suggested that the short term costs of euro membership to the Finnish economy outweigh the large gains caused by greater integration with the European economy. Krugman notes that Sweden, which has yet to join the single currency, had similar rates of growth compared to Finland for the period since the introduction of the euro.\nMembership of the euro protects Finland from currency fluctuations, which is particularly important for small member states of the European Union like Finland that are highly integrated into the larger European economy. If Finland had retained its own currency, unpredictable exchange rates would prevent the country from selling its products at competitive prices on the European market. In fact, business leaders in Sweden, which is obliged to join the euro when its economy has converged with the eurozone, are almost universal in their support for joining the euro. Although Sweden's currency is not officially pegged to the euro like Denmark's currency the Swedish government maintains an unofficial peg. This exchange rate policy has in the short term benefited the Swedish economy in two ways; (1) much of Sweden's European trade is already denominated in euros and therefore bypasses any currency fluctuation and exchange rate losses, (2) it allows Sweden's non-euro-area exports to remain competitive by dampening any pressure from the financial markets to increase the value of the currency.\nMaintaining this balance has allowed the Swedish government to borrow on the international financial markets at record low interest rates and allowed the Swedish central bank to quantitatively ease into a fundamentally sound economy. This has led Sweden's economy to prosper at the expense of less sound economies who have been impacted by the 2008 financial crisis. Sweden's economic performance has therefore been slightly better than Finland's since the financial crisis of 2008. Much of this disparity has, however, been due to the economic dominance of Nokia, Finland's largest company and Finland's only major multinational. Nokia supported and greatly benefited from the euro and the European single market, particularly from a common European digital mobile phone standard (GSM), but it failed to adapt when the market shifted to mobile computing.\nOne reason for the popularity of the euro in Finland is the memory of a 'great depression' which began in 1990, with Finland not regaining it competitiveness until approximately a decade later when Finland joined the single currency. Some American economists like Paul Krugman claim not to understand the benefits of a single currency and allege that poor economic performance is the result of membership of the single currency. These economists do not, however, advocate separate currencies for the states of the United States, many of which have quite disparate economies.\nPublic policy.\nFinnish politicians have often emulated other Nordics and the Nordic model. Nordic's have been free-trading and relatively welcoming to skilled migrants for over a century, though in Finland immigration is a relatively new phenomenon. This is due largely to Finland's less hospitable climate and the fact that the Finnish language shares roots with none of the major world languages, making it more challenging than average for most to learn. The level of protection in commodity trade has been low, except for agricultural products.\nAs an economic environment, Finland's judiciary is efficient and effective. Finland is highly open to investment and free trade. Finland has top levels of economic freedom in many areas, although there is a heavy tax burden and inflexible job market. Finland is ranked 16th (ninth in Europe) in the 2008 Index of Economic Freedom. Recently, Finland has topped the patents per capita statistics, and overall productivity growth has been strong in areas such as electronics. While the manufacturing sector is thriving, OECD points out that the service sector would benefit substantially from policy improvements. The IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2007 ranked Finland 17th most competitive, next to Germany, and lowest of the Nordics. while the World Economic Forum report has ranked Finland the most competitive country. Finland is one of the most fiscally responsible EU countries.\nProduct market.\nEconomists attribute much growth to reforms in the product markets. According to OECD, only four EU-15 countries have less regulated product markets (UK, Ireland, Denmark and Sweden) and only one has less regulated financial markets (Denmark). Nordic countries were pioneers in liberalising energy, postal, and other markets in Europe. The legal system is clear and business bureaucracy less than most countries. For instance, starting a business takes an average of 14 days, compared to the world average of 43 days and Denmark's average of 6 days. Property rights are well protected and contractual agreements are strictly honored. Finland is rated one of the least corrupted countries in Corruption Perceptions Index. Finland is rated 13th in the Ease of Doing Business Index. It indicates exceptional ease to trade across borders (5th), enforce contracts (7th), and close a business (5th), and exceptional hardship to employ workers (127th) and pay taxes (83rd).\nJob market.\nAccording to the OECD, Finland's job market is the least flexible of the Nordic countries. Finland increased job market regulation in the 1970s to provide stability to manufacturers. In contrast, during the 1990s, Denmark liberalised its job market, Sweden moved to more decentralised contracts, whereas Finnish trade unions blocked many reforms. Many professions have legally recognized industry-wide contracts that lay down common terms of employment including seniority levels, holiday entitlements, and salary levels, usually as part of a Comprehensive Income Policy Agreement. Those who favor less centralized labor market policies consider these agreements bureaucratic, inflexible, and along with tax rates, a key contributor to unemployment and distorted prices. Centralized agreements may hinder structural change as there are fewer incentives to acquire better skills, although Finland already enjoys one of the highest skill-levels in the world.\nTaxation.\nTax is collected mainly from municipal income tax, state income tax, state value added tax, customs fees, corporate taxes and special taxes. There are also property taxes, but municipal income tax pays most of municipal expenses. Taxation is conducted by a state agency, Verohallitus, which collects income taxes from each paycheck, and then pays the difference between tax liability and taxes paid as tax rebate or collects as tax arrears afterward. Municipal income tax is a flat tax of nominally 15-20%, with deductions applied, and directly funds the municipality (a city or rural locality). The state income tax is a progressive tax; low-income individuals do not necessarily pay any. The state transfers some of its income as state support to municipalities, particularly the poorer ones. Additionally, the state churches - Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church and Finnish Orthodox Church - are integrated to the taxation system in order to tax their members.\nThe middle income worker's tax wedge is 46% and effective marginal tax rates are very high. Value-added tax is 24% for most items. Capital gains tax is 30-34% and corporate tax is 20%, about the EU median. Property taxes are low, but there is a transfer tax (1.6% for apartments or 4% for individual houses) for home buyers. There are high excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, tobacco, automobiles and motorcycles, motor fuels, lotteries, sweets and insurances. For instance, McKinsey estimates that a worker has to pay around 1600 euro for another's 400 euro service - restricting service supply and demand - though some taxation is avoided in the black market and self-service culture. Another study by Karlson, Johansson &amp; Johnsson estimates that the%age of the buyer's income entering the service vendor's wallet (inverted tax wedge) is slightly over 15%, compared to 10% in Belgium, 25% in France, 40% in Switzerland and 50% in the United States. Tax cuts have been in every post-depression government's agenda and the overall tax burden is now around 43% of GDP compared to 51.1% in Sweden, 34.7% in Germany, 33.5% in Canada, and 30.5% in Ireland.\nHigh income workers, for instance someone making 10000\u20ac/month gross, living in the city of Vantaa and using 3000\u20ac/year on commuting to work, pay 60% income tax plus 8.65% social security payments (this varies mildly depending on the age of the worker, but for someone born in 1975, it is currently in the year 2022, 8.65%). This means that 68.65% of the gross income goes to taxes and tax like payments.\nState and municipal politicians have struggled to cut their consumption, which is very high at 51.7% of GDP compared to 56.6% in Sweden, 46.9 in Germany, 39.3 in Canada, and 33.5% in Ireland. Much of the taxes are spent on public sector employees, which amount to 124,000 state employees and 430,000 municipal employees. That is 113 per 1000 residents (over a quarter of workforce) compared to 74 in the US, 70 in Germany, and 42 in Japan (8% of workforce). The Economist Intelligence Unit's ranking for Finland's e-readiness is high at 13th, compared to 1st for United States, 3rd for Sweden, 5th for Denmark, and 14th for Germany. Also, early and generous retirement schemes have contributed to high pension costs. Social spending such as health or education is around OECD median. Social transfers are also around OECD median. In 2001 Finland's outsourced proportion of spending was below Sweden's and above most other Western European countries. Finland's health care is more bureaucrat-managed than in most Western European countries, though many use private insurance or cash to enjoy private clinics. Some reforms toward more equal marketplace have been made in 2007\u20132008. In education, child nurseries, and elderly nurseries private competition is bottom-ranking compared to Sweden and most other Western countries. Some public monopolies such Alko remain, and are sometimes challenged by the European Union. The state has a programme where the number of jobs decreases by attrition: for two retirees, only one new employee is hired.\nOccupational and income structure.\nFinland's export-dependent economy continuously adapted to the world market; in doing so, it changed Finnish society as well. The prolonged worldwide boom, beginning in the late 1940s and lasting until the first oil crisis in 1973, was a challenge that Finland met and from which it emerged with a highly sophisticated and diversified economy, including a new occupational structure. Some sectors kept a fairly constant share of the work force. Transportation and construction, for example, each accounted for between 7 and 8% in both 1950 and 1985, and manufacturing's share rose only from 22 to 24%. However, both the commercial and the service sectors more than doubled their share of the work force, accounting, respectively, for 21 and 28% in 1985. The greatest change was the decline of the economically active population employed in agriculture and forestry, from approximately 50% in 1950 to 10% in 1985. The exodus from farms and forests provided the labour power needed for the growth of other sectors.\nStudies of Finnish mobility patterns since World War II have confirmed the significance of this exodus. Sociologists have found that people with a farming background were present in other occupations to a considerably greater extent in Finland than in other West European countries. Finnish data for the early 1980s showed that 30 to 40% of those in occupations not requiring much education were the children of farmers, as were about 25% in upper-level occupations, a rate two to three times that of France and noticeably higher than that even of neighboring Sweden. Finland also differed from the other Nordic countries in that the generational transition from the rural occupations to white-collar positions was more likely to be direct, bypassing manual occupations.\nThe most important factor determining social mobility in Finland was education. Children who attained a higher level of education than their parents were often able to rise in the hierarchy of occupations. In the Helsinki Metropolitan Area, those who are more educated, in the long-run, will move to newer centrally located buildings. A tripling or quadrupling in any one generation of the numbers receiving schooling beyond the required minimum reflected the needs of a developing economy for skilled employees. Obtaining advanced training or education was easier for some than for others, however, and the children of white-collar employees still were more likely to become white-collar employees themselves than were the children of farmers and blue-collar workers. In addition, children of white-collar professionals were more likely than not to remain in that class.\nThe economic transformation also altered income structure. A noticeable shift was the reduction in wage differentials. The increased wealth produced by an advanced economy was distributed to wage earners via the system of broad income agreements that evolved in the postwar era. Organized sectors of the economy received wage hikes even greater than the economy's growth rate. As a result, blue-collar workers' income came, in time, to match more closely the pay of lower level white-collar employees, and the income of the upper middle class declined in relation to that of other groups.\nThe long trend of growth in living standards paired with diminishing differences between social classes was dramatically reversed during the 1990s. For the first time in the history of Finland income differences have sharply grown. This change has been mostly driven by the growth of income from capital to the wealthiest segment of the population.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10713", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10713", "title": "Telecommunications in Finland", "text": "Finland has excellent communications, and is considered one of the most advanced information societies in the world.\nTelephones.\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use: 2.368 million (2004)\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular: 4.988 million (2004)\nTelephone system: General Assessment: Modern system with excellent service.\nDomestic: Digital fiber-optic fixed-line network and an extensive cellular network provide domestic needs. There are three major cellular network providers with independent networks (Elisa Oyj, Telia Finland and DNA Oyj). There are several smaller providers which may have independent networks in smaller areas, but are generally dependent on rented networks. There is a great variety of cellular providers and contracts, and competition is particularly fierce.\nInternational: Country code \u2013 358; 2 submarine cable (Finland-Estonia and Finland-Sweden Connection); satellite earth stations \u2013 access to Intelsat transmission service via a Swedish satellite earth station, 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean regions); note \u2013 Finland shares the Inmarsat earth station with the other Nordic countries (Denmark, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden).\nRadio and television.\nThere is a national public radio and television company Yleisradio (Yle), which was previously funded by television license fees, but nowadays via the YLE tax. and two major private media companies, Alma Media and Sanoma, with national TV channels. Yle maintains four TV channels YLE1, YLE2, Teema and FST5. There are four commercial, national channels: Alma Media has MTV3 and SubTV, and Sanoma has Nelonen and Jim. There are also a lot of pay-TV channels. News Corporation introduced itself to the market in 2012 with the Fox channel, which was preceded by Finnish-owned SuomiTV.\nRadio broadcast stations.\nAM 2, FM 186, shortwave 1 (1998)\nTelevision broadcast stations.\n120 (plus 431 repeaters) (1999)\nTelevision is broadcast as digital (DVB-T) only since August 2007. On cable, only digital (DVB-C) will be broadcast from 2008 on.\nInternet.\nInternet country code: .fi\nInternet hosts: 1,503,976 (2005)\nInternet users: 3.286 million (2005)\nIn 2011, there were over 3.5 million broadband subscriptions in Finland, and the number of both them and mobile data transmission subscriptions continued to grow.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10714", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10714", "title": "Transport in Finland", "text": "Overview of transport infrastructure in Finland\nThe transport system of Finland is well-developed. Factors affecting traffic include the sparse population and long distance between towns and cities, and the cold climate with waterways freezing and land covered in snow for winter.\nThe extensive road system is utilized by most internal cargo and passenger traffic. As of 2010[ [update]], the country's network of main roads has a total length of around and all public roads . The motorway network totals with additional reserved only for motor traffic. Road network expenditure of around \u20ac1\u00a0billion is paid with vehicle and fuel taxes that amount to around \u20ac1.5\u00a0billion and \u20ac1\u00a0billion, respectively.\nThe main international passenger gateway is Helsinki-Vantaa Airport with over 20 million passengers in 2018. About 25 airports have scheduled passenger services. They are financed by competitive fees and rural airport may be subsidized. The Helsinki-Vantaa based Finnair (known for an Asia-focused strategy), Nordic Regional Airlines provide air services both domestically and internationally. Helsinki has an optimal location for great circle routes between Western Europe and the Far East. Hence, many international travelers visit Helsinki on a stop-over between Asia and Europe.\nDespite low population density, taxpayers spend annually around \u20ac350 million in maintaining railway tracks even to many rural towns. Operations are privatized and currently the only operator is the state-owned VR. It has 5 percent passenger market share (out of which 80 percent are urban trips in Greater Helsinki) and 25 percent cargo market share. Helsinki has an urban rail network.\nIcebreakers keep the 23 ports open all year round. There is passenger traffic from Helsinki and Turku, which have ferry connections to Tallinn, Mariehamn, Sweden and several other destinations.\nRoads.\nRoad transport in Finland is the most popular method of transportation, particularly in rural areas where the railway network does not extend to. As of 2011[ [update]] there are of public roads, of which are paved. The main road network comprises over of road.\nHighways.\n64% of all traffic on public roads takes place on main roads, which are divided into class I (\"/\") and class II (\"/\") main roads. Motorways have been constructed in the country since the 1960s, but they are still reasonably rare because traffic volumes are not large enough to motivate their construction. There are of motorways. Longest stretches are Helsinki\u2013Turku (Main road 1/E18), Vantaa\u2013Yl\u00f6j\u00e4rvi (Main road 3/E12), Helsinki\u2013Heinola (Main road 4/E75), and Helsinki\u2013Vaalimaa (Main road 7/E18). The world's northernmost motorway is also located in Finland between Keminmaa and Tornio (Main road 29/E8).\nThere are no toll roads in Finland.\nSpeed limits.\nSpeed limits change depending on the time of the year; the maximum speed limit on motorways is in the summer and in the winter. The main roads usually have speed limits of either 100\u00a0km/h or . Speed limits in urban areas range between and . If no other speed limit is signposted, the general speed limit in Finland is in built-up areas and outside.\nVehicles.\nAs of 2013[ [update]], there are 4,95\u00a0million registered automobiles, of which 2,58\u00a0million cars. Average age of cars (museum cars excluded) is 12,5 years (in some regions even 15 years), and typically the cars are destroyed in age of 24 years. In 2015, ca. 123\u00a0000 new vehicles were registered in Finland. About 550,000\u2013600,000 used automobiles are sold each year in Finland. During 2011\u20132014 the most sold car brand was Volkswagen. It had a market share of 12% of new cars.\nPublic transport.\nCoaches are mainly operated by private companies and provide services widely across the country. There is a large network of ExpressBus services with connections to all major cities and the most important rural areas as well as a burgeoning OnniBus 'cheap bus' network. Coach stations are operated by Matkahuolto.\nLocal bus services inside cities and towns have often been tightly regulated by the councils. Many councils also have their own bus operators, such as Tampere City Transit (TKL), which operates some bus lines on a commercial basis in competition with privately owned providers. Regional bus lines have been regulated by the provincial administration to protect old transit companies, leading to cartel situations like TLO in the Turku region, but strong regional regulating bodies, like the Helsinki Regional Transport Authority (HSL/HRT), whose routes are put out to tender exist as well and will become the norm after the transitional period during the 2010s.\nAccidents.\nIn 2015, number of road traffic accidents involving personal injury was 5,164. In them, 266 persons were killed. The number of road deaths per million inhabitants is just below the European average. Traffic safety has improved significantly since the early 1970s, when more than one thousand people died in road traffic every year.\nParking.\nMunicipal law 30-31 \u00a7 gives right to Referendum since year 1990. Citizens of Turku collected 15,000 names in one month for referendum against the underground car park. Politicians with in the elections unknown financing from the parking company neglected the citizens opinion. According to International Association of Public Transport UITP parking places are among the most effective ways to promote private car use in the city. Therefore, many European cities have cancelled the expensive underground car parking after the 1990s. The EU recommended actions cover develop guidance for concrete measures for the internalisation of external costs for car traffic also in urban areas. In Finland the shops routinely offer free parking for private cars.\nRail transport.\nRailways.\nThe Finnish railway network consists of a total of of railways built with . of track is electrified. In 2010, passengers made 13.4\u00a0million long-distance voyages and 55.5\u00a0million trips in local traffic. On the same year, over of freight were transported.\nFinland's first railway was opened between Helsinki and H\u00e4meenlinna in 1862, and today it forms part of the Finnish Main Line (\"p\u00e4\u00e4rata\"), which is more than 800 kilometers long. Nowadays, passenger trains are operated by the state-owned VR. They serve all the major cities and many rural areas, complemented by bus connections where needed. Most passenger train services originate or terminate at Helsinki Central railway station, and a large proportion of the passenger rail network radiates out of Helsinki. High-speed Pendolino services are operated from Helsinki to other major cities like Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4, Joensuu, Kuopio, Oulu, Tampere and Turku. Modern InterCity services complement the Pendolino network, and cheaper and older long and short-distance trains operate in areas with fewer passengers.\nThe Helsinki area has three urban rail systems: a tramway, a metro, and a commuter rail system. Light rail systems are currently being planned for Helsinki and also for Turku and Tampere, two of the country's other major urban centres.\nHigh-speed rail.\nThere are plans to link Helsinki to Turku and Tampere by high-speed lines resulting in journey times of an hour between the capital and the two cities. A link to Kouvola is also planned. The estimated cost of these lines is \u20ac10 billion.\nTrams and light rail.\nIn Finland there have been four cities with trams: Helsinki, Turku, Viipuri and Tampere. Of the older systems only Helsinki has retained its tramway network. The trams in Viipuri, having been lost to Soviet Union in 1945, ceased operations in 1957, while the Turku tramway network shut down in 1972.\nIn November 2016, Tampere city council approved the construction of a new light rail system. Construction of phase 1 begun late 2016 and finished in 2021. Tampere trams are already operating but the official opening date is 9 August 2021. Turku also has preliminary plans for new tram system, but no decision to build it has been made.\nHelsinki currently operates 10 tramlines on a network of approximately of track in passenger service. The trams have annually 57 million passengers.\nAir transport.\nThere are 148 airfields, 74 of which have paved runways. 21 airports are served by scheduled passenger flights. By far the largest airport is Helsinki-Vantaa Airport, and the second largest by passenger volume is Oulu Airport. The larger airports are managed by the state-owned Finavia (formerly the Finnish Civil Aviation Administration). Finnair, Nordic Regional Airlines and Norwegian Air Shuttle are the main carriers for domestic flights.\nHelsinki-Vantaa airport is Finland's global gateway with scheduled non-stop flights to such places as Bangkok, Beijing, Guangzhou, Nagoya, New York, Osaka, Shanghai, Hong Kong and Tokyo. Helsinki has an optimal location for great circle airline traffic routes between Western Europe and the Far East. The airport is located approximately 19 kilometers north of Helsinki's downtown in the city of Vantaa, thus the name Helsinki-Vantaa.\nOther airports with regular scheduled international connections are Kokkola-Pietarsaari Airport, Mariehamn Airport, Tampere-Pirkkala Airport, Turku Airport and Vaasa Airport.\nWater transport.\nThe Finnish Maritime Administration is responsible for the maintenance of Finland's waterway network. Finland's waterways includes some of coastal fairways and of Finland waterways (on rivers, canals, and lakes). Saimaa Canal connects Lake Saimaa, and thus much of the inland waterway system of Finland, with the Baltic Sea at Vyborg (Viipuri). However, the lower part of the canal is currently located in Russia. To facilitate through shipping, Finland leases the Russian section of the canal from Russia (the original agreement with the Soviet Union dates to 1963).\nThe largest general port is Port of Hamina-Kotka. Port of Helsinki is the busiest passenger harbour, and it also has significant cargo traffic. By cargo tons, the five busiest ports are Hamina-Kotka, Helsinki, Rauma, Kilpilahti and Naantali.\nIcebreakers keep 23 ports open for traffic even in winter. The ports in Gulf of Bothnia need icebreakers in average six months a year, while in Gulf of Finland icebreakers are needed for three months a year.\nFrequent ferry service connects Finland with Estonia and Sweden. Baltic cruise liners regularly call on the\nport of Helsinki as well. In domestic service, ferries connect Finland's islands with the mainland. Finland's cargo ports\nmove freight both for Finland's own needs and for transshipment to Russia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10715", "revid": "1160760248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10715", "title": "Finnish Defence Forces", "text": "Armed forces of Finland\nThe Finnish Defence Forces (FDF) (, ) are the military of Finland. The Finnish Defence Forces consist of the Finnish Army, the Finnish Navy and the Finnish Air Force. In wartime the Finnish Border Guard (which is its own military unit in peacetime) becomes part of the Finnish Defence Forces.\nUniversal male conscription is in place, under which all men serve for 165, 255, or 347 days, from the year they turn 18 until the year they turn 29. Alternative non-military service for men and voluntary service for women is available.\nFinland's official policy states that a wartime military strength of 280,000 personnel constitutes a sufficient deterrent. The army consists of a highly mobile field army backed up by local defence units. The army defends the national territory and its military strategy employs the use of the heavily forested terrain and numerous lakes to wear down an aggressor, instead of attempting to hold the attacking army on the frontier.\nFinland's defence budget for 2022 equals approximately \u20ac5.8 billion. The voluntary overseas service is highly popular and troops serve around the world in UN, NATO and EU missions. With an arsenal of 700 howitzers, 700 heavy mortars and 100 multiple rocket launchers, Finland has the largest artillery capability in western Europe. Homeland defence willingness against a superior enemy is at 83%, one of the highest rates in Europe.\nThe Finnish Defence Forces cooperate closely with the Finnish Border Guard. The Finnish Border Guard has its own yearly and long term investment budget.\nHistory.\nCivil War.\nAfter Finland's declaration of independence on 6 December 1917, the Civic Guards were proclaimed the troops of the government on 25 January 1918 and then Lieutenant-General of the Russian Imperial Army C. G. E. Mannerheim was appointed as Commander-in-Chief of these forces the next day. Fighting between the White Guards (as the Civic Guards were commonly known) and the Red Guards had already broken out about a week before around Viipuri, in what became known as the Finnish Civil War.\nIn the war, the Whites were victorious in large part thanks to the leadership of General Mannerheim and the lead by example offensive mindedness of 1,800 German-trained Finnish J\u00e4gers, who brought with them German tactical doctrine and military culture. The post-war years were characterized by the Volunteer Campaigns that came to an end in 1920 with the signing of the Treaty of Tartu, which ended the state of war between Finland and Soviet Russia and defined the internationally recognized borders of Finland.\nInterwar years.\nAfter winning the Civil War, the Finnish peacetime army was organized as three divisions and a brigade by professional German officers. It became the basic structure for the next 20 years. The coast was guarded by former czarist coastal fortifications and ships taken as prizes of war. The Air Force had already been formed in March 1918, but remained a part of the Army and did not become a fully independent fighting force until 1928. The White Guard (\"Suojeluskunta\") played a key role in interwar Finnish defence policy, as they essentially served as local/territorial militia forces, and some had higher readiness and training for quick mobilization.\nThe new government instituted conscription after the Civil War and also introduced a mobilization system and compulsory refresher courses for reservists. An academy providing basic officer training (\"Kadettikoulu\") was established in 1919, the founding of a General Staff College (\"Sotakorkeakoulu\") followed in 1924, and in 1927 a tactical training school (\"Taistelukoulu\") for company-grade and junior officers and NCOs was set up. The requirement of one year of compulsory service was greater than that imposed by any other Scandinavian country in the 1920s and the 1930s, but political opposition to defense spending left the military badly equipped to resist an attack by the Soviet Union, the only security threat in Finnish eyes.\nWorld War II.\nWhen the Soviets invaded in November 1939, the Finns, led by Marshal Mannerheim, defeated the Red Army on numerous occasions, including at the crucial Battle of Suomussalmi. These successes were in large part thanks to the application of motti tactics. Finland successfully defended its independence, but ceded 9% of its territory per the Moscow Peace Treaty. During the war the Finns lost 25,904 men, while Soviet losses were 167,976 dead.\nFinland fought in the Continuation War alongside Germany from 1941 to 1944. Thanks to Nazi-German aid, the army was much better equipped, and the period of conscription was increased to two years, making possible the formation of sixteen infantry divisions. Having initially deployed on the defensive, the Finns took advantage of the weakened Soviet positions as a consequence of Operation Barbarossa, swiftly recovering their lost territories and invading Soviet territory in Karelia, after settling into defensive positions in December 1941. The Soviet offensive of June 1944 undid these Finnish gains and, while failing in its objective of destroying the Finnish army and forcing Finland's unconditional surrender, forced Finland out of the war. The Finns were able to preserve their independence with key defensive victories over the Red Army, the Battle of Tali-Ihantala being very significant.\nThese conflicts involving Finland had a significant impact on the modern Finnish defense force. While other European militaries have reduced their forces, Finland has maintained a large conscript-based reserve army. As a Swedish report stated: \"The reason why the FDF chose to maintain this model while its Nordic neighbours jumped on the expeditionary bandwagon is not hard to see. Sharing a 1340km border with Russia, the need for large ground forces is self-explanatory. Furthermore, memories of World War II \u2013 in which over 2 per cent of the population perished in two brutal wars with the Soviet Union \u2013 are very much alive in Finland\". This same aspect has been highlighted even more strongly after the Russian invasion of Ukraine and Finland's decision to join NATO. With quotes like; \"After World War II, having thwarted the advance of the mighty Red Army in the Winter War of 1939-40 and then seeking to recapture the territory the Soviets eventually claimed, Finland had to settle for neutrality imposed by Moscow. But to almost everyone's surprise, it succeeded in this degrading task, too, building up armed forces that were highly capable and were energetically supported by civil society\u2014while at the same time managing to maintain dialogue with Moscow.\", \"Finland still has compulsory military service. Finland would be in a position to mobilize an army of 280,000 soldiers. That's quite a big army in modern Europe,\", with similar views being expressed elsewhere as well, often referring to the fact that Finland has kept its conscript-based armed force or other readiness-related units, contrasting with other European countries that now have to re-arm, such as Germany as an example. During the events of 2022 all this has received attention internationally as well.\nCold War.\nThe demobilization and regrouping of the Finnish Defence Forces were carried out in late 1944 under the supervision of the Soviet-dominated Allied Control Commission. Following the Treaty of Paris in 1947, which imposed restrictions on the size and equipment of the armed forces and required disbandment of the Civic Guard, Finland reorganized its defense forces. The fact that the conditions of the peace treaty did not include prohibitions on reserves or mobilization made it possible to contemplate an adequate defense establishment within the prescribed limits. The reorganization resulted in the adoption of the brigade -in place of the division- as the standard formation.\nFor the first two decades after the Second World War, the Finnish Defence Forces relied largely on obsolete wartime material. Defence spending remained minimal until the early 1960s. During the peak of the Cold War, the Finnish government made a conscious effort to increase defence capability. This resulted in the commissioning of several new weapons systems and the strengthening of the defence of Finnish Lapland by the establishment of new garrisons in the area. From 1968 onwards, the Finnish government adopted the doctrine of territorial defence, which requires the use of large land areas to delay and wear out a potential aggressor. The doctrine was complemented by the concept of total defence which calls for the use of all resources of society for national defence in case of a crisis. From the mid-1960s onwards the Finnish Defence Forces also began to specifically prepare to defeat a strategic strike, the kind which the Soviet Union employed successfully to topple the government of Czechoslovakia in 1968. In an all-out confrontation between the two major blocs, Finnish objective would have been to prevent any military incursions to Finnish territory and thereby keep Finland outside the war.\nRecent history.\nThe collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 did not eliminate the military threat perceived by the government, but the nature of the threat had changed. While the concept of total, territorial defence was not dropped, military planning has moved towards the capability to prevent and frustrate a strategic attack toward the vital regions of the country.\nThe end of the Cold War also allowed new opportunities which would have previously been seen as breaking Finland's stance of neutrality, such as participation in the War in Afghanistan and the Nordic Battlegroup.\nWith the change in the European security environment brought by the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Finnish government officials began voicing increasingly strong support for joining NATO, buttressed by polls showing a rapid increase in Finnish citizens' willingness to join NATO. NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg voiced his support in April 2022 for the inclusion of Finland into the Euro-Atlantic defence alliance and stated that NATO member countries would likely enthusiastically support a Finland bid for membership.\nOn 11 May 2022, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Finnish President Sauli Niinist\u00f6 signed a new mutual defence agreement \"to reinforce their security and fortify northern Europe's defences, in the face of renewed threats.\" This has helped to address concerns within Finland that the delay between application and acceptance to NATO, during which time Finland would not yet be able to invoke NATO Article 5 and may present an opportunity for a Russian invasion.\nOn 12 May 2022, President Sauli Niinist\u00f6 and Prime Minister Sanna Marin issued a joint statement supporting Finland's application for membership of NATO, saying \"As a member of NATO, Finland would strengthen the entire defence alliance. Finland must apply for NATO membership without delay.\" On 17 May 2022, the Parliament of Finland voted overwhelmingly to apply for membership of NATO, with 188 votes in favour of the motion and 8 against. The following morning, the Finnish ambassador to NATO, Klaus Korhonen, formally submitted Finland's application to NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg. Sweden also submitted its application at the same time.\nOn 29 June 2022, 30 NATO countries extended a formal invitation for Finland along with Sweden to join NATO. Both nations received the status of aspiring members while attending the annual NATO summit in Madrid as guest nations. Finland became a full NATO member on 4 April 2023.\nFuture.\nThe Defence Forces are currently undergoing key procurement programmes for all the three branches. The Navy is scheduled to get its largest vessels since the WW2-era \"V\u00e4in\u00e4m\u00f6inen\" class with the new \"Pohjanmaa\" class. The Air Force has made the decision to acquire the Lockheed Martin F-35A to replace all McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet fighter jets for 10\u20ac billion. Meanwhile, the Army is planning to complement the modernized Patria Pasi armoured vehicles with the Finnish Patria 6\u00d76. The standard issue assault rifle RK 62 is also being upgraded to a new variant. A new high altitude air defence missile system was selected in April 2023, Rafael's David's Sling system.\nOrganization.\nThe Finnish Defence Forces are under the command of the Chief of Defence, who is directly subordinate to the President of the Republic in matters related to the military command. Decisions concerning military orders are made by the President of the Republic in consultation with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence.\nApart from the Defence Command (, ), the military branches are the Finnish Army (, ), the Finnish Navy (, ) and the Finnish Air Force (, ). The Border Guard (, ) (including the coast guard) is under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior, but can be incorporated fully or in part into the defence forces when required by defence readiness. All logistical duties of the Defence Forces are carried out by the Defence Forces Logistics Command (), which has three Logistics Regiment for each military province.\nThe Army is divided into eight brigade-level units (). Under the brigades, there were 12 military districts (), which were responsible for carrying out the draft, training and crisis-time activation of reservists and for planning and executing territorial defence of their areas. The military districts were disbanded in 2014, as a part of the 800 million euro savings the Finnish Defence Forces had to carry out.\nThe Navy consists of headquarters and four brigade-level units: Coastal Fleet (), Coastal Brigade (), Nyland Brigade (, ), and Naval Academy (). The Coastal Fleet includes all the surface combatants of the Navy, while Coastal Brigade and Nyland Brigade train coastal troops.\nThe Air Force consists of headquarters and four brigade-level units: Satakunta, Lapland and Karelian Air Commands () and Air Force Academy (). They are responsible for securing the integrity of the Finnish airspace during peace and for conducting aerial warfare independently during a crisis.\nThe military training of the reservists is primarily the duty of the Defence Forces, but it is assisted by the National Defence Training Association of Finland (). This association provides reservists with personal, squad, platoon and company level military training. Most of the 2,000 instructors of the association are volunteers certified by the Defence Forces, but when Defence Forces materiel is used, the training always takes place under the supervision of career military personnel. Annually, the Defence Forces requests the Association to run specialized exercises for some 8,500 personnel placed in reserve units, and an additional 16,500 reservists participate in military courses where the participants are not directly selected by the Defence Forces. The legislation concerning the association will require that the chairman and the majority of the members of its board are chosen by the Finnish Government. The other board members are chosen by NGOs active in the national defence.\nGeneral Officers.\nThe Finnish Defence Forces.\nChief of Defence\nGeneral Timo Kivinen\nDefence Command.\nChief of Defence Command Finland\nLieutenant General Vesa Virtanen\nDeputy Chief of Staff, Logistics and Armaments\nLieutenant General Mikko Heiskanen\nDeputy Chief of Staff, Operations\nMajor General Kari Nisula\nDeputy Chief of Staff, Personnel\nMajor General Rami Saari\nDeputy Chief of Staff, Strategy\nMajor General Janne Jaakkola\nChief of Intelligence\nRear Admiral Juha Vauhkonen\nChief of Planning\nBrigadier General Tero Ylitalo\nAssistant Chief of Staff Operations\nCommodore Janne Huusko\nDefence Command Chief of C5\nBrigadier General Jarmo V\u00e4h\u00e4tiitto\nChief of Personnel (J1)\nCommodore Tuomas Tiilikainen\nChief of Logistics\nBrigadier General Timo Saarinen\nChief Surgeon\nCommodore Medical Juha-Petri Ruohola\nArmy.\nCommander of the Finnish Army\nLieutenant General Pasi V\u00e4lim\u00e4ki\nChief of Staff, Army\nMajor General Jukka Jokinen\nChief of Operations, Army Command\nBrigadier General Sami-Antti Takamaa\nCommander of Karelia Brigade\nBrigadier General Jyri Raitasalo\nCommander of Kainuu Brigade\nBrigadier General Manu Tuominen\nCommander of Pori Brigade\nBrigadier General Vesa Valtonen\nNavy.\nCommander of the Finnish Navy\nRear Admiral Jori Harju\nChief of Staff, Navy\nCommodore Jukka Anteroinen\nAir Force.\nCommander of the Finnish Air Force\nMajor General Juha-Pekka Ker\u00e4nen\nChief of Staff, Air Force\nBrigadier General Timo Herranen\nNational Defence University.\nRector of The National Defence University\nMajor General Mika Kalliomaa\nSpecial Assignments.\nMilitary Representative to The EU and NATO\nLieutenant General Kim J\u00e4\u00e4meri\nMinistry of Defence, Director, National Defence Unit\nBrigadier General Sami Nurmi\nDefence Forces Logistics Command.\nChief of Finnish Defence Forces Logistics Command\nMajor General Jari Mikkonen\nDeputy Manager, Logistic Command\nBrigadier General Engineering Juha-Matti Ylitalo\nConscription.\nThe Finnish defence forces is based on universal male conscription. All men above 18 years of age are liable to serve either six, nine, or 12 months. Some 27,000 conscripts are trained annually. 80% of Finnish men complete their service. The conscripts at first receive basic training, after which they are assigned to various units for special training. Privates who are trained for tasks not requiring special skills serve for six months. In technically demanding tasks the time of service is nine, or in some cases 12 months. Those selected for NCO (non-commissioned officer) or officer training serve 12 months. At the completion of the service, the conscripts receive a reserve military rank of private, lance corporal, corporal, sergeant or second lieutenant, depending on their training and accomplishments. After their military service, the conscripts are placed in reserve until the end of their 50th or 60th living year, depending on their military rank. During their time in reserve, the reservists are liable to participate in military refresher exercises for a total of 40, 75 or 100 days, depending on their military rank. In addition, all reservists are liable for activation in a situation where the military threat against Finland has seriously increased, in full or partial mobilization or in a large-scale disaster or a virulent epidemic. The males who do not belong to the reserve may only be activated in case of full mobilization, and those rank-and-file personnel who have fulfilled 50 years of age only with a specific parliamentary decision.\nMilitary service can be started after turning 18. The service can be delayed due to studies, work or other personal reasons until the 28th birthday, but these reasons do not result in exemptions. In addition to lodging, food, clothes and health care the conscripts receive between 5 and 11.70 euros per day, depending on the time they have served. The state also pays for any rental and electricity bills the conscripts incur during their service. If the conscripts have families, they are entitled to benefits as well. It is illegal to fire an employee due to military service or due to a refresher exercise or activation. Voluntary females in military service receive a small additional benefit, because they are expected to provide their own underwear and other personal items.\nThe military service consists of lessons, practical training, various cleaning and maintenance duties and field exercises. Most weekends conscripts can leave the barracks on Friday and are expected to return by midnight on Sunday. A small force of conscripts are kept in readiness on weekends to aid civil agencies in various types of emergency situations, to guard the premises and to maintain defence in case of a sudden military emergency. Field exercises can go on regardless of the time of day or week.\nThe training of conscripts is based on \"joukkotuotanto\"-principle (lit. English \"troop production\"). In this system, 80% of the conscripts are trained to fulfill a specific role in a specific wartime military unit. Each brigade-level unit is responsible for producing specified reserve units from the conscripts it has been allocated. As the reservists are discharged, they receive a specific wartime placement in the unit with which they have trained during their conscription. As the conscripts age, their unit is given new, different tasks and materiel. Typically, reservists are placed for the first five years in first-line units, then moved to military formations with less demanding tasks, while the reservists unable to serve in the unit are substituted with reservists from the reserve without specific placement. In refresher exercises, the unit is then given new training for these duties, if the defence funding permits this.\nThe inhabitants of the demilitarized \u00c5land islands are exempt from military service. By the Conscription act of 1950, they are however required to serve a time at a local institution, like the coast guard instead. However, until such service has been arranged, they are freed from service obligation. The non-military service of \u00c5land islands has not been arranged since the introduction of the act, and there are no plans to institute it. The inhabitants of \u00c5land islands can also volunteer for military service on the mainland. Jehovah's Witnesses were exempt until February 2019. It is also possible to serve either weapon-free military service of 255 or 347 days or undergo a 12-month-long non-military service. Finnish law requires that men who do not want to serve the defense of the country in any capacity (so-called total objectors) be sentenced to a prison term of 173 days. As of 1995, women were permitted to serve on a voluntary basis and pursue careers as officers. In conscription, women have consideration time of six weeks, during which they have the choice to halt their service without any other specific reason. After the said six weeks, all the same laws and jurisdictions apply to them as to men. Unlike in many other countries, women are allowed to serve in all combat arms including front-line infantry and special forces.\nMilitary ranks.\nThe Finnish military ranks follow the Western usage in the officer ranks. As a Finnish peculiarity, the rank of lieutenant has three grades: 2nd lieutenant, lieutenant and senior lieutenant. The 2nd lieutenant is a reserve officer rank, active commissioned officers beginning their service as lieutenants.\nThe basic structure of the NCO ranks is a variant of the German rank structure, but the rank system has some peculiarities due to different personnel groups. The duties carried out by NCOs in most Western armed forces are carried out by\nIn a case of war, most of the NCO duties would be carried out by reserve NCOs who have received their training during conscription.\nThe rank and file of the Finnish Defence Forces is composed of conscripts serving in the ranks of private, lance corporal and NCO student.\nEquipment.\nFinnish Defence Forces Materiel and equipment photos.\nFinland does not have attack helicopters or submarines. Legislation forbids nuclear weapons entirely.\nIn early March 2012 Finland decided to purchase advanced Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missiles (AGM-158 JASSM) from the United States. Other non-USA operators for the JASSM are Australia, Poland and South Korea.Deal also included other sophisticated bombs like glidebomp AGM-154 Joint Standoff Weapon and JDAM (Joint Direct Attack Munition).\nFinland has updated its M270 Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS. In Finnish 298 RSRAKH 06) to be able to fire the ATACMS tactical ballistic missile).\nUniform.\nThe main field uniform is the M05 uniform, introduced in 2005, which is green camouflage uniform used by the army. M05 has cold weather and snow camouflage variants, which are gray-green and white with green flecks, respectively. Older green camouflage uniforms are M91 and M62. The M83 light service uniform remains in use as a service uniform for permanent personnel such as officers and as a dress uniform, but is not commonly issued to troops. This is gray for army, blue for the air force and dark blue for the navy. The navy has separate naval uniforms, while the air force uses army-pattern uniforms. There are also four separate full dress uniforms depending on the dress code.\nPeacekeeping operations.\nFinland has taken part in peacekeeping operations since 1956 (the number of Finnish peacekeepers who have served since 1956 amounts to 43,000). In 2003 over a thousand Finnish peacekeepers were involved in peacekeeping operations, including UN and NATO led missions. According to the Finnish law the maximum simultaneous strength of the peacekeeping forces is limited to 2,000 soldiers.\nSince 1956, 39 Finnish soldiers have died while serving in peacekeeping operations.\nSince 1996 the Pori Brigade has trained parts of the Finnish Rapid Deployment Force (FRDF), which can take part in international crisis management/peacekeeping operations at short notice. The Nyland/Uusimaa Brigade has started training the Amphibious Task Unit (ATU) in recent years, a joint Swedish-Finnish international task unit.\nSince 2006, Finland has participated in the formation of European Union Battlegroups. Finland participated in two European Union Battlegroups in 2011.\nInternational operations Finland is participating in by deploying military units (personnel strength in parenthesis):\nOther international operations Finland is participating in with staff personnel, military observers and similar (personnel strength in parenthesis):\nTotal defence.\nThe Finnish military doctrine is based on the concept of total defence. The term total means that all sectors of the government and economy are involved in the defence planning. In principle, each ministry has the responsibility for planning its operations during a crisis. There are no special emergency authorities, such as the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Russian Ministry of Emergency Situations. Instead, each authority regularly trains for crises and has been allocated a combination of normal and emergency powers it needs to keep functioning in any conceivable situation. In a war, all resources of society may be diverted to ensure the survival of the nation. The legal basis for such measures is found in the Readiness Act and in the State of Defence Act, which would come into force through a presidential decision verified by parliament in the case of a crisis.\nThe main objective of the doctrine is to establish and maintain a military force capable of deterring any potential aggressor from using Finnish territory or applying military pressure against Finland. To accomplish this, the defence is organised on the doctrine of territorial defence. The stated main principles of the territorial defence doctrine are\nThe defence planning is organised to counteract three threat situations:\nIn all cases, the national objective is to keep the vital areas, especially the capital area in Finnish possession. In other areas, the size of the country is used to delay and wear down the invader, until the enemy may be defeated in an area of Finnish choosing. The Army carries most of the responsibility for this task.\nThe key wartime army units in 2015 are:\nThe total number of territorial and regional units is undisclosed.\nThe army units are mostly composed of reservists, the career soldiers manning the command and specialty positions.\nThe role of the Navy is to repel all attacks carried out against Finnish coasts and to safeguard the territorial integrity during peacetime and the \"gray\" phase of the conflict. The maritime defence relies on combined use of coastal artillery, missile systems and naval mines to wear down the attacker. The Air Force is used to deny the invader the air superiority and to protect most important troops and objects of national importance in conjunction with the ground-based air defence. As the readiness of the Air Force and the Navy is high even during the peacetime, the career personnel have a much more visible role in the wartime duties of these defence branches.\nThe Border Guard has the responsibility for border security in all situations. During a war, it will contribute to the national defence partially integrated into the army, its total mobilized strength being some 11,600 troops. One of the projected uses for the Border Guard is guerrilla warfare in areas temporarily occupied by enemy.\nKey wartime units.\nThe army is organised into operative forces, which consist of approximately 61,000 persons, and territorial forces, which consist of 176,000 persons. The following list is the wartime organisation of the Finnish army from January 2008.\nArmy.\nTerritorial forces:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10716", "revid": "18527088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10716", "title": "Foreign relations of Finland", "text": "The foreign relations of Finland are the responsibility of the president of Finland, who leads foreign policy in cooperation with the government. Implicitly the government is responsible for internal policy and decision making in the European Union. Within the government, preparative discussions are conducted in the government committee of foreign and security policy (\"ulko- ja turvallisuuspoliittinen ministerivaliokunta\"), which includes the Prime Minister and at least the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Defence, and at most four other ministers as necessary. The committee meets with the President as necessary. Laws concerning foreign relations are discussed in the parliamentary committee of foreign relations (\"ulkoasiainvaliokunta, utrikesutskottet\"). The Ministry of Foreign Affairs implements the foreign policy.\nDuring the Cold War, Finland's foreign policy was based on official neutrality between the Western powers and the Soviet Union, while simultaneously stressing Nordic cooperation in the framework of the Nordic Council and cautious economic integration with the West as promoted by the Bretton-Woods Agreement and the free trade treaty with the European Economic Community. Finland shares this history with close neighbour Sweden, which Finland was a part of until the split of the Swedish empire in 1809. Finland did not join the Soviet Union's economic sphere (Comecon) but remained a free-market economy and conducted bilateral trade with the Soviet Union. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Finland unilaterally abrogated the last restrictions imposed on it by the Paris peace treaties of 1947 and the Finno-Soviet Agreement of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance. The government filed an application for membership in the European Union (EU) three months after the dissolution of the Soviet Union and became a member in 1995. Finland did not attempt to join NATO, even though post-Soviet countries on the Baltic Sea and elsewhere joined. Nevertheless, defence policymakers have quietly converted to NATO equipment and contributed troops.\nPresident Martti Ahtisaari and the coalition governments led Finland closer to the core EU in the late 1990s. Finland was considered a cooperative model state, and Finland did not oppose proposals for a common EU defence policy. This was reversed in the 2000s, when Tarja Halonen and Erkki Tuomioja made Finland's official policy to resist other EU members' plans for common defense. However, Halonen allowed Finland to join European Union Battlegroups in 2006 and the NATO Response Force in 2008.\nRelations with Russia are cordial and common issues include bureaucracy (particularly at the Vaalimaa border crossing), airspace violations, development aid Finland gives to Russia (especially in environmental problems that affect Finland), and Finland's energy dependency on Russian gas and electricity. Behind the scenes, the administration witnessed a resurrection of Soviet-era tactics as recently as 2017. The Finnish Security Intelligence Service, the nation's security agency, says the known number of Russian agents from Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) and GRU now exceeds Cold War levels and there are unknown numbers of others. Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said in March 2022 that her government would have to respond if Finland became a NATO member.\nAs of March 2011 Finland maintains diplomatic relations with all UN member states.\nAll NATO countries approved Finland's accession to the military alliance by April 1, 2023, and it officially joined on April 4. The move was the final process in Finland's transition from conducting a foreign policy of neutrality to clearly standing as an official part of the Western bloc.\nHistory.\nAfter independence from Russia in 1917, the Finnish Civil War, including interventions by Imperial Germany and Soviet Russia, and failure of the Communist revolution, resulted in the official ban on Communism, and strengthening relations with Western countries. Overt alliance with Germany was not possible due to the result of the First World War, but in general the period of 1918 to 1939 was characterised by economic growth and increasing integration to the Western world economy. Relations with Soviet Russia from 1918 to 1939 were icy; voluntary expeditions to Russia called heimosodat ended only in 1922, four years after the conclusion of the Finnish Civil War. However, attempts to establish military alliances were unsuccessful. Thus, when the Winter War broke out, Finland was left alone to resist the Soviet attack. Later, during the Continuation War, Finland declared \"co-belligerency\" with Nazi Germany, and allowed Northern Finland to be used as a German attack base. For 872 days, the German army, aided indirectly by Finnish forces, besieged Leningrad, the Soviet Union's second-largest city. The peace settlement in 1944 with the Soviet Union led to the Lapland War in 1945, where Finland fought Germans in northern Finland.\nFrom the end of the Continuation War with the Soviet Union in 1944 until 1991, the policy was to avoid superpower conflicts and to build mutual confidence with the Western powers and the Soviet Union. Although the country was culturally, socially, and politically Western, Finns realised they had to live in peace with the Soviets and so could take no action that might be interpreted as a security threat. The dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 opened up dramatic new possibilities for Finland and has resulted in the Finns actively seeking greater participation in Western political and economic structures. The popular support for the strictly self-defensive doctrine remains.\n2000 constitution.\nIn the 2000 constitution, where diverse constitutional laws were unified into one statute, the leading role of the President was slightly moderated. However, because the constitution still stipulates only that the President leads foreign policy and the government internal policy, the responsibility over European Union affairs is not explicitly resolved. Implicitly this belongs to the powers of the government. In a cohabitation situation as with Matti Vanhanen's recent second government right-wing government and left-wing President Tarja Halonen, there can be friction between government ministers and the president.\nThe arrangement has been criticised by Risto E. J. Penttil\u00e4 for not providing a simple answer of who's in charge.\nMultilateral relations.\nFinnish foreign policy emphasises its participation in multilateral organisations. Finland joined the United Nations in 1955 and the European Union in 1995. As noted, the country also is a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace as well as an observer in the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council. The military has been prepared to be more compatible with NATO, as co-operation with NATO in peacekeeping is needed, but military alliance does not have popular support. Political scientist Teija Tiilikainen has attributed tensions like this one to the importance that Finland's political identity places on sovereignty and the (sometimes competing) stress it places on international cooperation.\nIn the European Union, Finland is a member of the Eurozone, and in addition, the Schengen treaty abolishing passport controls. 60% of foreign trade is to the EU. Other large trade partners are Russia and the United States.\nFinland is well represented in the UN civil service in proportion to its population and belongs to several of its specialised and related agencies. Finnish troops have participated in United Nations peacekeeping activities since 1956, and the Finns continue to be one of the largest per capita contributors of peacekeepers in the world. Finland is an active participant in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and in early 1995 assumed the co-chairmanship of the OSCE's Minsk Group on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.\nCooperation with the other Scandinavian countries also is important to Finland, and it has been a member of the Nordic Council since 1955. Under the council's auspices, the Nordic countries have created a common labor market and have abolished immigration controls among themselves. The council also serves to coordinate social and cultural policies of the participating countries and has promoted increased cooperation in many fields.\nIn addition to the organisations already mentioned, Finland is a member of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization, the International Finance Corporation, the International Development Association, the Bank for International Settlements, the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Council of Europe, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Finland has moved steadily towards integration into Western institutions and abandoned its formal policy of neutrality, which has been recast as a policy of military nonalliance coupled with the maintenance of a credible, independent defence. Finland's 1994 decision to buy 64 F-18 Hornet fighter planes from the United States signalled the abandonment of the country's policy of balanced arms purchases from Communist countries and Western countries.\nIn 1994, Finland joined NATO's Partnership for Peace; the country is also an observer in the North Atlantic Cooperation Council. Finland became a full member of the EU in January 1995, at the same time acquiring observer status in the EU's defence arm, the Western European Union.\nIn 2003, Anneli J\u00e4\u00e4tteenm\u00e4ki of the Centre Party won the elections after she had accused her rival Paavo Lipponen, who was prime minister at the time, of allying neutral Finland with the United States in the war in Iraq during a meeting with President George W. Bush, and thus associated Finland with what many Finns considered an illegal war of aggression. Lipponen denied the claims and declared that \"We support the UN and the UN Secretary-General.\" J\u00e4\u00e4tteenm\u00e4ki resigned as prime minister after 63 days in office amid accusations that she had lied about the leak of the documents about the meeting between Bush and Lipponen. This series of events was considered scandalous and it is named Iraq leak or Iraq-gate.\nGenerally, Finland has abided by the principle of neutrality and has good relations with nearly all countries, as evidenced by the freedom of travel that a Finnish passport gives; though relations with Russia remain strained and are often tense due to past historical grievances, including Russian threats and past invasion.\nDiplomatic relations list.\nFinland has established diplomatic relations with all United Nations member states, plus the Holy See and Kosovo.\nInternational organization participation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10722", "revid": "60840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10722", "title": "Telecommunications in France", "text": "Overview of telecommunications in France\nTelecommunications in France are highly developed. France is served by an extensive system of automatic telephone exchanges connected by modern networks of fiber-optic cable, coaxial cable, microwave radio relay, and a domestic satellite system; cellular telephone service is widely available, expanding rapidly, and includes roaming service to foreign countries.\nFixed-line telephony.\nThe telephony system employs an extensive system of modern network elements such as digital telephone exchanges, mobile switching centres, media gateways and signalling gateways at the core, interconnected by a wide variety of transmission systems using fibre-optics or Microwave radio relay networks. The access network, which connects the subscriber to the core, is highly diversified with different copper-pair, optic-fibre and wireless technologies. The fixed-line telecommunications market is dominated by the former state-owned monopoly France Telecom.\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use: 36.441 million; 35.5 million (metropolitan France) (2009)\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular: 60.95 million; 59.543 million (metropolitan France) (2009)\nInternational connection.\nSatellite earth stations \u2013 2 Intelsat (with total of 5 antennas \u2013 2 for Indian Ocean and 3 for Atlantic Ocean), NA Eutelsat, 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean region); HF radiotelephone communications with more than 20 countries\nRadio.\nRadio stations: AM 41, FM about 3,500 (this figure is an approximation and includes many repeaters), shortwave 2 (1998)\nRadios: 55.3 million (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision stations: 584 (plus 9,676 repeaters) (1995)\nTelevisions: 34.8 million (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet country code: .fr\nInternet service providers (ISPs): 62 (2000)\nInternet hosts: 15,182,001; 15.161\u00a0million (metropolitan France) (2010)\nInternet users: 45.262\u00a0million; 44.625\u00a0million (metropolitan France) (2009)\nMobile networks.\nFrance currently has 4 mobile networks, Orange, SFR, Bouygues Telecom and Free all of which are licensed for UMTS. All except Free are also licensed for GSM. In 2016 Q3, Orange had 28.966\u00a0million mobile phone customers, SFR had 14.577\u00a0million, Bouygues had 12.660\u00a0million, Free Mobile had 12.385\u00a0million, and the MVNOs had 7.281\u00a0million.\nBefore the launch of Free Mobile in January 2012, the number of physical mobile phone operators was very limited. For example, Sweden currently has 4 licensed operators with their own networks despite a smaller and sparser population than France's, making improved coverage less economically rewarding. However, France has a number of MVNOs which increases competition.\nHowever, Free Mobile obtained its licence in December 2009 and operates since January 2012.\nIn France, the satellite telecommunications system TELECOM 1 (TC1) will provide high-speed, broadband transfer of digital data between different sections of subscribing companies. Conventional telecommunications links between continental France and its overseas departments will also be supplied.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10723", "revid": "7088832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10723", "title": "Transport in France", "text": "Overview of the transport in France\nTransportation in France relies on one of the densest networks in the world with 146\u00a0km of road and 6.2\u00a0km of rail lines per 100\u00a0km2. It is built as a web with Paris at its center. Rail, road, air and water are all widely developed forms of transportation in France.\nHistory.\nThe first important human improvements were the Roman roads linking major settlements and providing quick passage for marching armies.\nAll through the Middle Ages improvements were few and second rate. Transport became slow and awkward to use. The early modern period saw great improvements. There was a very quick production of canals connecting rivers. It also saw great changes in oceanic shipping. Rather than expensive galleys, wind powered ships that were much faster and had more room for cargo became popular for coastal trade. Transatlantic shipping with the New World turned cities such as Nantes, Bordeaux, Cherbourg-Octeville and Le Havre into major ports.\nRailways.\nThere is a total of of railway in France, mostly operated by SNCF (Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 nationale des chemins de fer fran\u00e7ais), the French national railway company. Like the road system, the French railways are subsidised by the state, receiving \u20ac13.2 billion in 2013. The railway system is a small portion of total travel, accounting for less than 10% of passenger travel.\nFrom 1981 onwards, a newly constructed set of high-speed \"Lignes \u00e0 Grande Vitesse\" (LGV) lines linked France's most populous areas with the capital, starting with Paris-Lyon. In 1994, the Channel Tunnel opened, connecting France and Great Britain by rail under the English Channel. The TGV has set many world speed records, the most recent on 3 April 2007, when a new version of the TGV dubbed the V150 with larger wheels than the usual TGV, and a stronger engine, broke the world speed record for conventional rail trains, reaching 574.8\u00a0km/h (357.2\u00a0mph).\nTrains, unlike road traffic, drive on the left (except in Alsace-Moselle). Metro and tramway services are not thought of as trains and usually follow road traffic in driving on the right (except the Lyon Metro).\nFrance was ranked 7th among national European rail systems in the 2017 European Railway Performance Index for intensity of use, quality of service and safety performance, a decrease from previous years.\nThe French non-TGV intercity service (TET) is in decline, with old infrastructure and trains. It is likely to be hit further as the French government is planning to remove the monopoly that rail currently has on long-distance journeys by letting coach operators compete. Travel to the UK through the Channel Tunnel has grown in recent years, and from May 2015 passengers have been able to travel direct to Marseille, Avignon and Lyon. Eurostar is also introducing new Class 374 trains and refurbishing the current Class 373s.\nThe French government are making plans to privatise the French railway network, following a similar model Great Britain used from the 1990s until the 2020s.\nRapid transit.\nSix cities in France currently have a rapid transit service (frequently known as a 'metro'). Full metro systems are in operation in Paris (16 lines), Lyon (4 lines) and Marseille (2 lines). Light metro (VAL-type) systems are in use in Lille (2 lines), Toulouse (2 lines) and Rennes (2 lines).\nTrams.\nIn spite of the closure of most of France's first generation tram systems in earlier years, a fast-growing number of France's major cities have modern tram or light rail networks, including Paris, Lyon (Lyon having the biggest one), Toulouse, Montpellier, Saint-\u00c9tienne, Strasbourg and Nantes. Recently the tram has seen a very big revival with many experiments such as ground level power supply in Bordeaux, or trolleybuses pretending to be trams in Nancy.\nThis way of travelling started disappearing in France at the end of the 1930s. Only Lille, Marseille and Saint-\u00c9tienne have never given up their tram systems. Since the 1980s, several cities have re-introduced it.\nThe following French towns and cities run light rail or tram systems:\nTram systems are planned or under construction in Tours, and Fort-de-France.\nThe revival of tram networks in France has brought about a number of technical developments both in the traction systems and in the styling of the cars:\n \"APS third rail\": The Alstom APS system uses a third rail placed between the running rails, divided electrically into eight-metre segments with three metre neutral sections between. Each tram has two power collection skates, next to which are antennas that send radio signals to energise the power rail segments as the tram passes over them. At any one time no more than two consecutive segments under the tram should actually be live. Alstrom developed the system primarily to avoid intrusive power supply cables in sensitive area of the old city of Bordeaux.\n\"Modern styling\": The Eurotram, used in Strasbourg has a modern design that makes it look almost as much like a train as a tram, and has large windows along its entire length.\n\"Modular design\": The Citadis tram, flagship of the French manufacturer Alstom, enjoys an innovative design combining lighter bogies with a modular concept for carriages providing more choices in the types of windows and the number of cars and doors. The recent Citadis-Dualis, intended to run at up to 100 km/h, is suitable for stop spacings ranging from 500 m to 5 km. Dualis is a strictly modular partial low-floor car, with all doors in the low-floor sections.\nProminent bi-articulated \"tram-like\" Van Hool vehicles (Mettis) are used in Metz since 2013. They work as classic trams but without needing rails and catenaries, and can transport up to 155 passengers while being ecological thanks to a diesel-electric hybrid engine. \nIn the starting up, batteries feed the engine of the bus, which can then roll 150 meters before the diesel engine takes over.\nRoads.\nThere are ~ of roads in France. The French motorway network or autoroute system consists largely of toll roads, except around large cities and in parts of the north. It is a network totalling of motorways operated by private companies such as Sanef (Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des autoroutes du Nord et de l'Est de la France). It has the 8th largest highway network in the world, trailing only the United States, China, India, Russia, Japan, Canada, Spain and Germany.\nFrance currently counts 30,500\u00a0km of major trunk roads or routes nationales and state-owned motorways. By way of comparison, the \"routes d\u00e9partementales\" cover a total distance of 365,000\u00a0km. The main trunk road network reflects the centralising tradition of France: the majority of them leave the gates of Paris. Indeed, trunk roads begin on the parvis of Notre-Dame of Paris at Kilometre Zero. To ensure an effective road network, new roads not serving Paris were created.\nFrance is believed to be the most car-dependent country in Europe. In 2005, 937 billion vehicle kilometres were travelled in France (85% by car).\nIn order to overcome this dependence, in France and many more countries the long-distance coaches' market has been liberalised. Since 2015, with the law Macron, the market has exploded: the increasing demand lead to a higher supply of bus services and coach companies.\nBlack Saturday refers, in France, to the day of the year when road traffic is most dense due to the many departures on holiday. (Traffic problems are exacerbated by France's extreme centralisation, with Paris being the hub of the entire national highway network.) This Saturday is usually at the end of July, though in 2007 both the last Saturday of July and the first Saturday of August are designated as Black Saturdays. The Autoroute du Soleil, the highway to the south of France and Spain, is usually particularly busy. In 2004 there was more than in accumulated traffic congestion. The black colour is the qualification with which the French government web site \"Bison Fut\u00e9\" designates a day with \"extr\u00eamement dense\" (extremely busy) traffic. The French newspapers call this day \"samedi noir\" after Bison Fut\u00e9's designation. Usually, the French call these days \"les jours de grands d\u00e9parts\" (days of great departures). In Dutch, this French phenomenon was known as \"zwarte zaterdag\" long before the French adopted the term \"samedi noir\", both meaning (literally) Black Saturday.\nThe term Black Saturday may also refer to Saturday July 31, 1982, when the worst road accident in French history happened. Around 1:45 AM, a coach collided into passenger cars near Beaune in dense holiday traffic during rainfall. The collision and subsequent fire killed 53 people, among which 46 were children. After this crash, a regulation was enforced to prohibit the transportation of groups of children during this part of the year.\nElectric roads.\nFrance plans to invest 30 to 40 billion euro by 2035 in an electric road system spanning 8,800 kilometers that recharges electric cars, buses and trucks while driving. Two tenders for assessment of electric road technologies are expected to be announced in 2022 and 2023. Three technologies are being considered: inductive charging, overhead lines, and ground-level power supply. Inductive charging is not considered a mature technology as it delivers the least power, loses 20%-25% of the supplied power when installed on trucks, and its health effects have yet to be documented. Overhead lines is the most mature technology, but the catenaries and overhead wires pose safety and maintenance issues. Ground-level power supply technologies, provided by Alstom, Elonroad, and others, are considered the most likely candidate for electric roads. A working group of the French Ministry of Ecology recommended adopting a European electric road standard formulated with Sweden, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Poland, and others. The first standard for electrical equipment on-board a vehicle powered by a rail electric road system (ERS), CENELEC Technical Standard 50717, has been approved in late 2022. Following standards, encompassing \"full interoperability\" and a \"unified and interoperable solution\" for ground-level power supply, are scheduled to be published by the end 2024, detailing complete \"specifications for communication and power supply through conductive rails embedded in the road\".\nBus transport in France.\nIn most, if not all, French cities, urban bus services are provided at a flat-rate charge for individual journeys. Many cities have bus services that operate well out into the suburbs or even the country. Fares are normally cheap, but rural services can be limited, especially on weekends.\nTrains have long had a monopoly on inter-regional buses, but in 2015 the French government introduced reforms to allow bus operators to travel these routes.\nWaterways/Canals.\nThe French natural and man-made waterways network is the largest in Europe extending to over of which (VNF, ), the French navigation authority, manages the navigable sections. Some of the navigable rivers include the Loire, Seine and Rh\u00f4ne. The assets managed by VNF comprise of waterways, made up of of canals and of navigable rivers, 494 dams, 1595 locks, 74 navigable aqueducts, 65 reservoirs, 35 tunnels and a land area of . Two significant waterways not under VNF's control are the navigable sections of the River Somme and the Brittany Canals, which are both under local management.\nApproximately 20% of the network is suitable for commercial boats of over 1000\u00a0tonnes and the VNF has an ongoing programme of maintenance and modernisation to increase depth of waterways, widths of locks and headroom under bridges to support France's strategy of encouraging freight onto water.\nMarine transport.\nFrance has an extensive merchant marine, including 55 ships of size Gross register tonnage 1,000 and above. The country also maintains a captive register for French-owned ships in Iles Kerguelen (French Southern and Antarctic Lands).\nFrench companies operate over 1,400 ships of which 700 are registered in France. France's 110 shipping firms employ 12,500 personnel at sea and 15,500 on shore. Each year, 305 million tonnes of goods and 15 million passengers are transported by sea. Marine transport is responsible for 72% of France's imports and exports.\nFrance also boasts a number of seaports and harbours, including Bayonne, Bordeaux, Boulogne-sur-Mer, Brest, Calais, Cherbourg-Octeville, Dunkerque, Fos-sur-Mer, La Pallice, Le Havre, Lorient, Marseille, Nantes, Nice, Paris, Port-la-Nouvelle, Port-Vendres, Roscoff, Rouen, Saint-Nazaire, Saint-Malo, S\u00e8te, Strasbourg and Toulon.\nAir travel.\nThere are approximately 478 airports in France (1999 est.) and by a 2005 estimate, there are three heliports. 288 of the airports have paved runways, with the remaining 199 being unpaved.\nAmong the airspace governance authorities active in France, one is A\u00e9roports de Paris, which has authority over the Paris region, managing 14 airports including the two busiest in France, Charles de Gaulle Airport and Orly Airport. The former, located in Roissy near Paris, is the fifth busiest airport in the world with 60 million passenger movements in 2008, and France's primary international airport, serving over 100 airlines.\nThe national carrier of France is Air France, a full service global airline which flies to 20 domestic destinations and 150 international destinations in 83 countries (including Overseas departments and territories of France) across all 6 major continents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10724", "revid": "40697375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10724", "title": "French Armed Forces", "text": "Military of France\nThe French Armed Forces () is the military of France. It consists of four military branches: the Army, Navy, Air and Space Force, and the National Gendarmerie; and a reserve force: the National Guard. The President of France serves as commander-in-chief of the French Armed Forces. France has the sixth largest defence budget in the world and the first in the European Union (EU). It also has the largest military by size in the EU. According to Credit Suisse, the French Armed Forces are ranked as the world's sixth-most powerful military.\nHistory.\nThe military history of France encompasses an immense panorama of conflicts and struggles extending for more than 2,000 years across areas, including modern France, greater Europe, and French territorial possessions overseas. According to British historian Niall Ferguson, the French participated in 50 of the 125 major European wars that have been fought since 1495; more than any other European state. They are followed by the Austrians who fought in 47 of them, the Spanish in 44 and the English (and later British) who were involved in 43. In addition, out of all recorded conflicts which occurred since the year 387 BC, France has fought in 168 of them, won 109, lost 49 and drawn 10.\nThe Gallo-Roman conflict predominated from 60 BC to 50 BC, with the Romans emerging victorious in the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar. After the decline of the Roman Empire, a Germanic tribe known as the Franks took control of Gaul by defeating competing tribes. The \"land of Francia,\" from which France gets its name, had high points of expansion under kings Clovis I and Charlemagne. In the Middle Ages, rivalries with England and the Holy Roman Empire prompted major conflicts such as the Norman Conquest and the Hundred Years' War. With an increasingly centralized monarchy, the first standing army since Roman times, and the use of artillery, France expelled the English from its territory and came out of the Middle Ages as the most powerful nation in Europe, only to lose that status to Spain following defeat in the Italian Wars. The Wars of Religion crippled France in the late 16th century, but a major victory over Spain in the Thirty Years' War made France the most powerful nation on the continent once more. In parallel, France developed its first colonial empire in Asia, Africa, and in the Americas. Under Louis XIV, France achieved military supremacy over its rivals, but escalating conflicts against increasingly powerful enemy coalitions checked French ambitions and left the kingdom bankrupt at the opening of the 18th century.\nResurgent French armies secured victories in dynastic conflicts against the Spanish, Polish, and Austrian crowns. At the same time, France was fending off attacks on its colonies. As the 18th century advanced, global competition with Great Britain led to the Seven Years' War, where France lost its North American holdings. Consolation came in the form of dominance in Europe and the American Revolutionary War, where extensive French aid in the form of money and arms, and the direct participation of its army and navy led to America's independence. Internal political upheaval eventually led to 23 years of nearly continuous conflict in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars. France reached the zenith of its power during this period, dominating the European continent in an unprecedented fashion under Napoleon Bonaparte, but by 1815 it had been restored to its pre-Revolutionary borders. The rest of the 19th century witnessed the growth of the Second French colonial empire as well as French interventions in Belgium, Spain, and Mexico. Other major wars were fought against Russia in the Crimea, Austria in Italy, and Prussia within France itself.\nFollowing defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, Franco-German rivalry erupted again in the First World War. France and its allies were victorious this time. Social, political, and economic upheaval in the wake of the conflict led to the Second World War, in which the Allies were defeated in the Battle of France and the French government surrendered and was replaced with an authoritarian regime. The Allies, including the government in exile's Free French Forces and later a liberated French nation, eventually emerged victorious over the Axis powers. As a result, France secured an occupation zone in Germany and a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.\nThe imperative of avoiding a third Franco-German conflict on the scale of those of two world wars paved the way for European integration starting in the 1950s. France became a nuclear power with its first test of an atomic bomb in Algeria in 1960 Since the 1990s its military action is most often seen in cooperation with NATO and its European partners.\nInternational stance.\nToday, French military doctrine is based on the concepts of national independence, nuclear deterrence (\"see Force de frappe\"), and military self-sufficiency. France is a charter member of NATO, and has worked actively with its allies to adapt NATO\u2014internally and externally\u2014to the post-Cold War environment. In December 1995, France announced that it would increase its participation in NATO's military wing, including the Military Committee (France withdrew from NATO's military bodies in 1966 whilst remaining full participants in the Organisation's political Councils). France remains a firm supporter of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and other cooperative efforts. Paris hosted the May 1997 NATO-Russia Summit which sought the signing of the Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and Security. Outside of NATO, France has actively and heavily participated in both coalition and unilateral peacekeeping efforts in Africa, the Middle East, and the Balkans, frequently taking a lead role in these operations. France has undertaken a major restructuring to develop a professional military that will be smaller, more rapidly deployable, and better tailored for operations outside of mainland France. Key elements of the restructuring include: reducing personnel, bases and headquarters, and rationalisation of equipment and the armaments industry.\nSince the end of the Cold War, France has placed a high priority on arms control and non-proliferation. French Nuclear testing in the Pacific, and the sinking of the \"Rainbow Warrior\" strained French relations with its Allies, South Pacific states (namely New Zealand), and world opinion. France agreed to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1992 and supported its indefinite extension in 1995. After conducting a controversial final series of six nuclear tests on Mururoa in the South Pacific, the French signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996. Since then, France has implemented a moratorium on the production, export, and use of anti-personnel landmines and supports negotiations leading toward a universal ban. The French are key players in the adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe to the new strategic environment. France remains an active participant in: the major programs to restrict the transfer of technologies that could lead to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction: the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia Group (for chemical and biological weapons), and the Missile Technology Control Regime. France has also signed and ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention.\nWhite Papers.\n2008.\nOn 31 July 2007, President Nicolas Sarkozy ordered M. Jean-Claude Mallet, a member of the Council of State, to head up a thirty-five member commission charged with a wide-ranging review of French defence. The commission issued its White Paper in early 2008. Acting upon its recommendations, President Sarkozy began making radical changes in French defense policy and structures starting in the summer of 2008. In keeping with post-Cold War changes in European politics and power structures, the French military's traditional focus on territorial defence will be redirected to meet the challenges of a global threat environment. Under the reorganisation, the identification and destruction of terrorist networks both in metropolitan France and in francophone Africa will be the primary task of the French military. Redundant military bases will be closed and new weapons systems projects put on hold to finance the restructuring and global deployment of intervention forces. In a historic change, Sarkozy furthermore has declared that France \"will now participate fully in NATO,\" four decades after former French president General Charles de Gaulle withdrew from the alliance's command structure and ordered American troops off French soil.\n2013.\nIn May 2014, high ranking defence chiefs of the French Armed Forces threatened to resign if the defence budget received further cuts on top of those already announced in the 2013 White Paper. They warned that further cuts would leave the armed forces unable to support operations abroad.\nRecent operations.\nThere are currently 36,000 French troops deployed in foreign territories\u2014such operations are known as \"OPEX\" for \"Op\u00e9rations Ext\u00e9rieures\" (\"External Operations\"). Among other countries, France provides troops for the United Nations force stationed in Haiti following the 2004 Haiti rebellion. France has sent troops, especially special forces, into Afghanistan to help the United States and NATO forces fight the remains of the Taliban and Al Qaeda. In Op\u00e9ration Licorne a force of a few thousand French soldiers is stationed in Ivory Coast on a UN peacekeeping mission. These troops were initially sent under the terms of a mutual protection pact between France and the Ivory Coast, but the mission has since evolved into the current UN peacekeeping operation. The French Armed Forces have also played a leading role in the ongoing UN peacekeeping mission along the Lebanon-Israel border as part of the cease-fire agreement that brought the 2006 Lebanon War to an end. Currently, France has 2,000 army personnel deployed along the border, including infantry, armour, artillery and air defence. There are also naval and air personnel deployed offshore.\nThe French Joint Force and Training Headquarters (\u00c9tat-Major Interarm\u00e9es de Force et d'Entra\u00eenement) at Air Base 110 near Creil maintains the ability to command a medium or large-scale international operation, and runs exercises . In 2011, from 19 March, France participated in the enforcement of a no-fly zone over northern Libya, during the Libyan Civil war, in order to prevent forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi from carrying out air attacks on Anti-Gaddafi forces. This operation was known as Op\u00e9ration Harmattan and was part of France's involvement in the conflict in the NATO-led coalition, enforcing UN Security Council Resolution 1973. On 11 January 2013 France begun Operation Serval to fight Islamists in Mali and the Sahal Region with African support but without NATO involvement and launched Operation Barkhane to combat terror in African Sahal from 2014 to 2022.\nExercises.\nFrance participates in several recurring exercises with other nations, including:\nIn 2023, Exercise Orion, the largest in decades, is to be held in the Champagne-Ardenne region. About 10,000 soldiers are expected to take part, along with the French navy and possibly forces from Belgium, Britain, and the United States.\nPersonnel.\nThe head of the French armed forces is the President of the Republic, in his role as \"chef des arm\u00e9es\". However, the Constitution puts civil and military government forces at the disposal of the \"gouvernement\" (the executive cabinet of ministers chaired by the Prime Minister, who are not necessarily of the same political side as the president). The Minister of the Armed Forces (as of 2022, the incumbent S\u00e9bastien Lecornu) oversees the military's funding, procurement and operations. Historically, France relied a great deal on conscription to provide manpower for its military, in addition to a minority of professional career soldiers. Following the Algerian War, the use of non-volunteer draftees in foreign operations was ended; if their unit was called up for duty in war zones, draftees were offered the choice between requesting a transfer to another unit or volunteering for the active mission. In 1996, President Jacques Chirac's government announced the end of conscription and in 2001, conscription formally was ended. Young people must still, however, register for possible conscription (should the situation call for it). As of 2017 the French Armed Forces have total manpower of 426,265, and has an active personnel of 368,962 (with the Gendarmerie Nationale).\nIt breaks down as follows (2022):\nThe reserve element of the French Armed Forces consists of two structures; the Operational Reserve and the Citizens Reserve. As of 2022 the strength of the Operational Reserve is 25,785 personnel.\nApart from the three main service branches, the French Armed Forces also includes a fourth military branch called the National Gendarmerie. It had a reported strength of 103,000 active personnel and 25,000 reserve personnel in 2018. They are used in everyday law enforcement, and also form a coast guard formation under the command of the French Navy. There are however some elements of the Gendarmerie that participate in French external operations, providing specialised law enforcement and supporting roles.\nHistorically the National Guard functioned as the Army's reserve national defense and law enforcement militia. After 145 years since its disbandment, due to the risk of terrorist attacks in the country, the Guard was officially reactivated, this time as a service branch of the Armed Forces, on 12 October 2016.\nSince 2019 young French citizens can fulfill the mandatory service \"Service national universel (SNU)\" within the Armed Forces in the service branch of their choice.\nOrganisation and service branches.\nPlaced under the command of the staffs, the French armed forces include the five service branches, the Army, the National Navy, the Air and Space Force, the National Gendarmerie, and the National Guard, as well as the support services and joint organizations:\nNational Navy (\"Marine nationale\").\nIn addition, the National Gendarmerie form a Coast Guard force called the Gendarmerie Maritime which is commanded by the French Navy.\nNational Gendarmerie (\"Gendarmerie nationale\").\nThe National Gendarmerie is primarily a military and airborne capable police force which serves as a rural and general purpose police force.\nNational Guard (\"Garde nationale\").\nReactivated in 2016, the National Guard serves as the official primary military and police reserve service of the Armed Forces. It is placed under the jurisdiction of Ministry of the Armed Forces and serves as a reserve force. It also doubles as a force multiplier for law enforcement personnel during contingencies and to reinforce military personnel whenever being deployed within France and abroad.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10725", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10725", "title": "Foreign relations of France", "text": "Overview of the foreign relations of France\nIn the 19th century France built a new French colonial empire second only to the British Empire. It was humiliated in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371, which marked the rise of Germany to dominance in Europe. France allied with Great Britain and Russia and was on the winning side of the First World War. Although it was initially easily defeated early in the Second World War, Free France, through its Free French Forces and the Resistance, continued to fight against the Axis powers as an Allied nation and was ultimately considered one of the victors of the war, as the allocation of a French occupation zone in Germany and West Berlin testifies, as well as the status of permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. It fought losing colonial wars in Indochina (ending in 1954) and Algeria (ending in 1962). The Fourth Republic collapsed and the Fifth Republic began in 1958 to the present. Under Charles De Gaulle it tried to block American and British influence on the European community. Since 1945, France has been a founding member of the United Nations, of NATO, and of the European Coal and Steel Community (the European Union's predecessor). As a charter member of the United Nations, France holds one of the permanent seats in the Security Council and is a member of most of its specialized and related agencies.\nFrance is also a founding member of the Union for the Mediterranean and the La Francophonie and plays a key role, both in regional and in international affairs.\nFifth Republic since 1981.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand: 1981\u20131995.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, a Socialist, emphasized European unity and the preservation of France's special relationships with its former colonies in the face of \"Anglo-Saxon influence.\" A part of the enacted policies was formulated in the Socialist Party's 110 Propositions for France, the electoral program for the 1981 presidential election. He had a warm and effective relationship with the conservative German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. They promoted French-German bilateralism in Europe and strengthened military cooperation between the two countries.\nAccording to Wayne Northcutt, certain domestic circumstances helped shape Mitterrand's foreign policy in four ways: he needed to maintain a political consensus; he kept an eye on economic conditions; he believed in the nationalistic imperative for French policy; and he tried to exploit Gaullism and its heritage that is on political advantage.\nJacques Chirac.\nChrirac's foreign policy featured continuity. His most dramatic move was a break with Washington. Along with his friend Vladimir Putin of Russia, Hu Jintao of China, and Gerhard Schr\u00f6der of Germany, Chirac emerged as a leading voice against the Iraq War of 2003. They opposed George W. Bush of the U.S. and Tony Blair of Britain during the organisation and deployment of a \"Coalition of the willing\" to forcibly remove the government of Iraq controlled by the Ba'ath Party under the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein. Despite British and American pressure, Chirac threatened to veto a resolution in the UN Security Council that would authorise the use of military force to rid Iraq of alleged weapons of mass destruction. He rallied other governments to his position. \"Iraq today does not represent an immediate threat that justifies an immediate war\", Chirac said on 18 March 2003. Future Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin acquired much of his popularity for his speech against the war at the United Nations (UN).\nNicolas Sarkozy.\nShortly after taking office, President Sarkozy began negotiations with Colombian president \u00c1lvaro Uribe and the left-wing guerrilla FARC, regarding the release of hostages held by the rebel group, especially Franco-Colombian politician Ingrid Betancourt. According to some sources, Sarkozy himself asked for Uribe to release FARC's \"chancellor\" Rodrigo Granda.\n Furthermore, he announced on 24 July 2007, that French and European representatives had obtained the extradition of the Bulgarian nurses detained in Libya to their country. In exchange, he signed with Gaddafi security, health care and immigration pacts \u2013 and a $230\u00a0million (168\u00a0million euros) MILAN antitank missile sale. The contract was the first made by Libya since 2004, and was negotiated with MBDA, a subsidiary of EADS. Another 128 million euros contract would have been signed, according to Tripoli, with EADS for a TETRA radio system. The Socialist Party (PS) and the Communist Party (PCF) criticized a \"state affair\" and a \"barter\" with a \"Rogue state\". The leader of the PS, Fran\u00e7ois Hollande, requested the opening of a parliamentary investigation.\nOn 8 June 2007, during the 33rd G8 summit in Heiligendamm, Sarkozy set a goal of reducing French CO2 emissions by 50% by 2050 in order to prevent global warming. He then pushed forward the important Socialist figure of Dominique Strauss-Kahn as European nominee to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Critics alleged that Sarkozy proposed to nominate Strauss-Kahn as managing director of the IMF to deprive the Socialist Party of one of its more popular figures.\nSarkozy normalised what had been strained relations with NATO. In 2009, France again was a fully integrated NATO member. Fran\u00e7ois Hollande has continued the same policy.\nFran\u00e7ois Hollande.\nSocialist Fran\u00e7ois Hollande won election in 2012 as president. He adopted a generally hawkish foreign-policy, in close collaboration with Germany in regard to opposing Russian moves against Ukraine, and in sending the military to fight radical Islamists in Africa. He takes a hard line with regard to the Greek debt crisis. Fran\u00e7ois Hollande launched two military operations in Africa: Operation Serval in Mali (the French armed forces stopped an Islamist takeover of Bamako, the nation's capital city); and Operation Sangaris (to restore peace there as tensions between different religious communities had turned into a violent conflict). France was also the first European nation to join the United States in bombing the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. Under President Hollande, France's stances on the civil war in Syria and Iran's nuclear program has been described as \"hawkish\".\nEmmanuel Macron, 2017\u2013present.\nSophie Meunier in 2017 ponders whether France is still relevant in world affairs:\nFrance does not have as much relative global clout as it used to. Decolonization ... diminished France\u2019s territorial holdings and therefore its influence. Other countries acquired nuclear weapons and built up their armies. The message of \u201cuniversal\u201d values carried by French foreign policy has encountered much resistance, as other countries have developed following a different political trajectory than the one preached by France. By the 1990s, the country had become, in the words of Stanley Hoffmann, an \u201cordinary power, neither a basket case nor a challenger.\u201d Public opinion, especially in the United States, no longer sees France as an essential power. The last time that its foreign policy put France back in the world spotlight was at the outset of the Iraq intervention...[with] France\u2019s refusal to join the US-led coalition...In reality, however, France is still a highly relevant power in world affairs...France is a country of major military importance nowadays..., France also showed it mattered in world environmental affairs with...the Paris Agreement, a global accord to reduce carbon emissions. The election of Trump in 2016 may reinforce demands for France to step in and lead global environmental governance if the US disengages, as the new president has promised, from a variety of policies.\nIn July 2019, the UN ambassadors from 22 nations, including France, signed a joint letter to the UNHRC condemning China\u2019s mistreatment of the Uyghurs as well as its mistreatment of other minority groups, urging the Chinese government to close the Xinjiang re-education camps.\nOn 31 May 2022, due to the reforms pushed by the president and perceived lack of recognition, the French diplomats will go on a strike for the first time in 20 years. This is a bad timing for President Emmanuel Macron as the France is holding the EU Presidency until the end of June.\nInternational organization participation.\nACCT, AfDB, AsDB, Australia Group, BDEAC, BIS, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECA (associate), ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EMU, ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, FZ, G-5, G-7, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, InOC, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MINURSO, MIPONUH, MONUC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, SPC, UN, UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WADB (nonregional), WEU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, Zangger Committee\nMiddle East.\nFrance established relations with the Middle East during the reign of Louis XIV. To keep Austria from intervening into its plans regarding Western Europe he lent limited support to the Ottoman Empire, though the victories of Prince Eugene of Savoy destroyed these plans. In the nineteenth century France together with Great Britain tried to strengthen the Ottoman Empire, the now \"Sick man of Europe\", to resist Russian expansion, culminating in the Crimean War.\nFrance also pursued close relations with the semi-autonomous Egypt. In 1869 Egyptian workers -under the supervision of France- completed the Suez Canal. A rivalry emerged between France and Britain for control of Egypt, and eventually Britain emerged victorious by buying out the Egyptian shares of the company before the French had time to act.\nAfter the unification of Germany in 1871, Germany successfully attempted to co-opt France's relations with the Ottomans. In World War I the Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers, and was defeated by France and Britain. After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire France and Britain divided the Middle East between themselves. France received Syria and Lebanon.\n1945\u20131958.\nThese colonies were granted independence after 1945, but France still tried to forge cultural and educational bonds between the areas, particularly with Lebanon. Relationships with Syria are more strained, due to the policies of that country. In 2005, France, along with the United States, pressured Syria to evacuate Lebanon.\nIn the post-World War II era French relations with the Arab Middle East reached a very low point. The war in Algeria between Muslim fighters and French colonists deeply concerned the rest of the Muslim world. The Algerian fighters received much of their supplies and funding from Egypt and other Arab powers, much to France's displeasure.\nMost damaging to Franco-Arab relations, however, was the Suez Crisis. It greatly diminished France's reputation in the region. France openly supported the Israeli attack on the Sinai peninsula, and was working against Nasser, then a popular figure in the Middle East. The Suez Crisis also made France and the United Kingdom look again like imperialist powers attempting to impose their will upon weaker nations. Another hindrance to France's relations with the Arab Middle East was its close alliance with Israel during the 1950s.\nDe Gaulle's policies.\nThis all changed with the coming of Charles de Gaulle to power. De Gaulle's foreign policy was centered around an attempt to limit the power and influence of both superpowers, and at the same time increase France's international prestige. De Gaulle hoped to move France from being a follower of the United States to becoming the leading nation of a large group of non-aligned countries. The nations de Gaulle looked at as potential participants in this group were those in France's traditional spheres of influence: Africa and the Middle East. The former French colonies in eastern and northern Africa were quite agreeable to these close relations with France. These nations had close economic and cultural ties to France, and they also had few other suitors amongst the major powers. This new orientation of French foreign policy also appealed strongly to the leaders of the Arab nations. None of them wanted to be dominated by either of the superpowers, and they supported France's policy of trying to balance the US and the USSR and to prevent either from becoming dominant in the region. The Middle Eastern leaders wanted to be free to pursue their own goals and objectives, and did not want to be chained to either alliance bloc. De Gaulle hoped to use this common foundation to build strong relations between the nations. He also hoped that good relations would improve France's trade with the region. De Gaulle also imagined that these allies would look up to the more powerful French nation, and would look to it in leadership in matters of foreign policy.\nThe end of the Algerian conflict in 1962 accomplished much in this regard. France could not portray itself as a leader of the oppressed nations of the world if it still was enforcing its colonial rule upon another nation. The battle against the Muslim separatists that France waged in favour of the minority of French settlers was an extremely unpopular one throughout the Muslim world. With the conflict raging it would have been close to impossible for France to have had positive relations with the nations of the Middle East. The Middle Eastern support for the FLN guerillas was another strain on relations that the end of the conflict removed. Most of the financial and material support for the FLN had come from the nations of the Middle East and North Africa. This was especially true of Nasser's Egypt, which had long supported the separatists. Egypt is also the most direct example of improved relations after the end of hostilities. The end of the war brought an immediate thaw to Franco-Egyptian relations, Egypt ended the trial of four French officers accused of espionage, and France ended its trade embargo against Egypt.\nIn 1967 de Gaulle completely overturned France's Israel policy. De Gaulle and his ministers reacted very harshly to Israel's actions in the Six-Day War. The French government and de Gaulle condemned Israel's treatment of refugees, warned that it was a mistake to occupy the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and also refused to recognize the Israeli control of Jerusalem. The French government continued to criticize Israel after the war and de Gaulle spoke out against other Israeli actions, such as the operations against the Palestine Liberation Organization in Lebanon. France began to use its veto power to oppose Israel in the UN, and France sided with the Arab states on almost all issues brought to the international body. Most importantly of all, however, de Gaulle's government imposed an arms embargo on the Israeli state. The embargo was in fact applied to all the combatants, but very soon France began selling weaponry to the Arab states again. As early as 1970 France sold Libya a hundred Dassault Mirage fighter jets. However, after 1967 France continued to support Israel's right to exist, as well as Israel's many preferential agreements with France and the European Economic Community.\nForeign aid.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, France increased its expenditures in foreign aid greatly, to become second only to the United States in total aid amongst the Western powers and first on a per capita basis. By 1968 France was paying out $855\u00a0million per year in aid far more than either West Germany or the United Kingdom. The vast majority of French aid was directed towards Africa and the Middle East, usually either as a lever to promote French interests or to help with the sale of French products (e.g. arms sales). France also increased its expenditures on other forms of aid sending out skilled individuals to developing countries to provide technical and cultural expertise.\nThe combination of aid money, arms sales, and diplomatic alignments helped to erase the memory of the Suez Crisis and the Algerian War in the Arab world and France successfully developed amicable relationships with the governments of many of the Middle Eastern states. Nasser and de Gaulle, who shared many similarities, cooperated on limiting American power in the region. Nasser proclaimed France as the only friend of Egypt in the West. France and Iraq also developed a close relationship with business ties, joint military training exercises, and French assistance in Iraq's nuclear program in the 1970s. France improved relations with its former colony Syria, and eroded cultural links were partially restored.\nIn terms of trade France did receive some benefits from the improved relations with the Middle East. French trade with the Middle East increased by over fifty percent after de Gaulle's reforms. The weaponry industries benefited most as France soon had lucrative contracts with many of the regimes in the Middle East and North Africa, though these contracts account for a negligible part of France's economy.\nDe Gaulle had hoped that by taking a moderate path and not strongly supporting either side France could take part in the Middle East peace process between Israel and the Arab nations. Instead it has been excluded from any major role.\nModern history.\nFor France, Middle East has been the major factor of its foreign policy. Over a decade since 2000, France successfully built an influential presence across the MENA region, where the major focus had been on Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. The Middle East policy of France was essential from the strategic, cultural and economic point of view, where the focus remained on proving itself as an international power. The country invested years in maintaining a strong foothold in the region on the lines of trade, security interests, and cultural and social exchanges. As Emmanuel Macron became the president in 2017, he gave a clear picture about the French relations with the Middle East and its importance, both in his foreign policy speeches and his initiatives. His predecessors, on the other hand, had mostly picked the option of \u201creassurance\u201d with the region\u2019s governments. Gradually, France began to show increasing interest in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, particularly. The country became actively supportive towards the two Arab nations in their involvement in the Yemen civil war, becoming one of the crucial arms suppliers. There had been a number of calls from the human rights organizations for France to halt their arms sales to both Saudi and the UAE, which were known for causing a humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Even in 2021, Macron continued taking initiatives towards strengthening relations with the Kingdom and the Emirates. During his visit to the region in November 2021, Macron signed a weapons deal worth 16 billion euros with the UAE. The agreement involved transfer of 80 upgraded Rafale warplanes, along with 12 Airbus-built combat helicopters. While France viewed it as a way to deepen ties with the Emirates, rights organizations criticized and raised concerns around the UAE\u2019s involvement in the Yemen and Libyan wars. They objected the deal stating that the Gulf leaders have reflected a constant failure in improving their human rights records.\nDespite the improving relations between the Emirates and France, the UAE made extensive efforts towards to showcase its image in a positive light. In light of it, a Franco-Tunisian businessman, Elyes Ben Chedly reportedly ran promotion for two of the Emirates\u2019 cultural campaigns. Reports revealed that the middleman worked to promote the UAE\u2019s \u201cYear of Tolerance\u201d campaign, and was also involved in running the \u201cyear Zayed\u201d program in Paris. Reports also revealed that Ben Chedly also used his network of arms contracts to mediate weapons deal between the UAE and other nations.\nA report in March 2023 by Mediapart revealed that the UAE had been interfering in France by the means of a Switzerland-based intelligence firm Alp Services. A French journalist, Roland Jacquard connected Alp\u2019s head Mario Brero with the Emirati secret services client, identified as Mohammed. Jacquard maintained a close contact with a network of politicians and diplomats. He was directly in contact with Mohammed, whose emails revealed that Jacquard was supplying the UAE with information from the security services, Emmanuel Macron and the \u00c9lys\u00e9e.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which France maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAfrica.\nFrance plays a significant role in Africa, especially in its former colonies, through extensive aid programs, commercial activities, military agreements, and cultural impact. In those former colonies where the French presence remains important, France contributes to political, military, and social stability. Many think that French policy in Africa \u2013 particularly where British interests are also involved \u2013 is susceptible to what is known as 'Fashoda syndrome'. Others have criticized the relationship as neocolonialism under the name \"Fran\u00e7afrique\", stressing France's support of various dictatorships, among others: Omar Bongo, Idriss D\u00e9by, and Denis Sassou Nguesso.\nAsia.\nFrance has extensive political and economical relations with Asian countries, including China, India, Japan, South Korea and Southeast Asia as well as an increasing presence in regional fora. France was instrumental in launching the Asia\u2013Europe Meeting (ASEM) process which could eventually emerge as a competitor to APEC. France is seeking to broaden its commercial presence in China and will pose a competitive challenge to U.S. business, particularly in aerospace, high-tech, and luxury markets. In Southeast Asia, France was an architect of the Paris Peace Accords, which ended the conflict in Cambodia.\nFrance does not have formal diplomatic relationships with North Korea. North Korea however maintains a \"delegation\" (not an embassy nor a consulate) near Paris. As most countries, France does not recognize, nor have formal diplomatic relationships with Taiwan, due to its recognition of China; however, Taiwan maintains a representation office in Paris which is similar to an embassy. Likewise, the French Institute in Taipei has an administrative consular section that delivers visas and fulfills other missions normally dealt with by diplomatic outposts.\nEurope.\nFrance has maintained its status as key power in Western Europe because of its size, location, strong economy, membership in European organizations, strong military posture and energetic diplomacy. France generally has worked to strengthen the global economic and political influence of the EU and its role in common European defense and collective security.\nFrance supports the development of a European Security and Defence Identity (ESDI) as the foundation of efforts to enhance security in the European Union. France cooperates closely with Germany and Spain in this endeavor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10727", "revid": "45171963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10727", "title": "French Guinea", "text": "French colony in West Africa (1891-1958); now the country of Guinea\nFrench Guinea () was a French colonial possession in West Africa. Its borders, while changed over time, were in 1958 those of the current independent nation of Guinea.\nFrench Guinea was established by France in 1891, within the same borders as its previous colony known as Rivi\u00e8res du Sud (1882\u20131891). Prior to 1882, the coastal portions of French Guinea were part of the French colony of Senegal.\nIn 1891, Rivi\u00e8res du Sud was placed under the colonial lieutenant governor at Dakar, who had authority over the French coastal regions east to Porto-Novo (modern Benin). In 1894 Rivi\u00e8res du Sud, Cote d'Ivoire and Dahomey were separated into 'independent' colonies, with Rivi\u00e8res du Sud being renamed as the Colony of French Guinea. In 1895, French Guinea was made one of several dependent colonies and its Governor became one of several Lieutenant Governors who reported to a Governor-General in Dakar. In 1904, this federation of colonies was formalised as French West Africa. French Guinea, Senegal, Dahomey, Cote d'Ivoire and Upper Senegal and Niger, were each ruled by a lieutenant governor, under the Governor General in Dakar.\nColonial history.\nGuinea was ruled by France until 1958. It became independent from France in 1958 following its voters' rejection of Charles de Gaulle's Constitution of 1958. At the time French Guinea was the only colony to reject the new constitution. French Guinea became the modern-day country of Guinea, keeping French as its official language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10729", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10729", "title": "French Guinea/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "10732", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10732", "title": "French Guinea/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "10733", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10733", "title": "French Guinea/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "10735", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10735", "title": "French Guinea/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "10737", "revid": "11015197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10737", "title": "French Polynesia", "text": "Overseas French territory\nFrench Polynesia (; ]; ) is an overseas collectivity of France and its sole overseas country. It comprises 121 geographically dispersed islands and atolls stretching over more than in the South Pacific Ocean. The total land area of French Polynesia is , with a population of 278,786 (Aug. 2022 census).\nFrench Polynesia is divided into five groups of islands: \nAmong its 121 islands and atolls, 75 were inhabited at the 2017 census. Tahiti, which is in the Society Islands group, is the most populous island, being home to nearly 69% of the population of French Polynesia as of 2017[ [update]]. Papeete, located on Tahiti, is the capital of French Polynesia. Although not an integral part of its territory, Clipperton Island was administered from French Polynesia until 2007.\nHundreds of years after the Great Polynesian Migration, European explorers began traveling through the region, visiting the islands of French Polynesia on several occasions. Traders and whaling ships also visited. In 1842, the French took over the islands and established a French protectorate that they called \"\" (French Establishments/Settlements of Oceania).\nIn 1946, the ' became an overseas territory under the constitution of the French Fourth Republic, and Polynesians were granted the right to vote through citizenship. In 1957, the ' were renamed French Polynesia. In 1983 French Polynesia became a member of the Pacific Community, a regional development organization. Since 28 March 2003, French Polynesia has been an overseas collectivity of the French Republic under the constitutional revision of article 74, and later gained, with law 2004-192 of 27 February 2004, an administrative autonomy, two symbolic manifestations of which are the title of the President of French Polynesia and its additional designation as an overseas country.\nHistory.\nAnthropologists and historians believe the Great Polynesian Migration commenced around 1500 BC as Austronesian peoples went on a journey using celestial navigation to find islands in the South Pacific Ocean. The first islands of French Polynesia to be settled were the Marquesas Islands in about 200 BC. The Polynesians later ventured southwest and discovered the Society Islands around AD 300.\nEuropean encounters began in 1521 when Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan, sailing at the service of the Spanish Crown, sighted Puka-Puka in the Tu\u0101motu-Gambier Archipelago. In 1606 another Spanish expedition under Pedro Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s sailed through Polynesia sighting an inhabited island on 10 February which they called Sagitaria (or Sagittaria), probably the island of Rekareka to the southeast of Tahiti. In 1722, Dutchman Jakob Roggeveen while on an expedition sponsored by the Dutch West India Company, charted the location of six islands in the Tuamotu Archipelago and two islands in the Society Islands, one of which was Bora Bora.\nBritish explorer Samuel Wallis became the first European navigator to visit Tahiti in 1767. French explorer Louis Antoine de Bougainville also visited Tahiti in 1768, while British explorer James Cook arrived in 1769, and observed the transit of Venus. He would stop in Tahiti again in 1773 during his second voyage to the Pacific, and once more in 1777 during his third and last voyage before being killed in Hawaii.\nIn 1772, the Spanish Viceroy of Peru Don Manuel de Amat ordered a number of expeditions to Tahiti under the command of Domingo de Bonechea who was the first European to explore all of the main islands beyond Tahiti. A short-lived Spanish settlement was created in 1774, and for a time some maps bore the name \"Isla de Amat\" after Viceroy Amat. Christian missions began with Spanish priests who stayed in Tahiti for a year. Protestants from the London Missionary Society settled permanently in Polynesia in 1797.\nKing P\u014dmare II of Tahiti was forced to flee to Mo'orea in 1803; he and his subjects were converted to Protestantism in 1812. French Catholic missionaries arrived on Tahiti in 1834; their expulsion in 1836 caused France to send a gunboat in 1838. In 1842, Tahiti and Tahuata were declared a French protectorate, to allow Catholic missionaries to work undisturbed. The capital of Papeet\u0113 was founded in 1843. In 1880, France annexed Tahiti, changing the status from that of a protectorate to that of a colony. The island groups were not officially united until the establishment of the French protectorate in 1889.\nAfter France declared a protectorate over Tahiti in 1842 and fought a war with Tahiti (1844\u20131847), the British and French signed the Jarnac Convention in 1847, declaring that the kingdoms of Raiatea, Huahine and Bora Bora were to remain independent from both powers and that no single chief was to be allowed to reign over the entire archipelago. France eventually broke the agreement, and the islands were annexed and became a colony in 1888 (eight years after the Windward Islands) after many native resistances and conflicts called the Leewards War, lasting until 1897.\nIn the 1880s, France claimed the Tuamotu Archipelago, which formerly belonged to the P\u014dmare Dynasty, without formally annexing it. Having declared a protectorate over Tahuata in 1842, the French regarded the entire Marquesas Islands as French. In 1885, France appointed a governor and established a general council, thus giving it the proper administration for a colony. The islands of Rimatara and R\u016brutu unsuccessfully lobbied for British protection in 1888, so in 1889 they were annexed by France. Postage stamps were first issued in the colony in 1892. The first official name for the colony was (Establishments in Oceania); in 1903 the general council was changed to an advisory council and the colony's name was changed to (French Establishments in Oceania).\nIn 1940, the administration of French Polynesia recognised the Free French Forces and many Polynesians served in World War II. Unknown at the time to the French and Polynesians, the Konoe Cabinet in Imperial Japan on 16 September 1940 included French Polynesia among the many territories which were to become Japanese possessions, as part of the \"Eastern Pacific Government-General\" in the post-war world. However, in the course of the war in the Pacific the Japanese were not able to launch an actual invasion of the French islands.\nIn 1946, Polynesians were granted French citizenship and the islands' status was changed to an overseas territory; the islands' name was changed in 1957 to (French Polynesia). In 1962, France's early nuclear testing ground in Algeria was no longer usable when Algeria became independent and the Moruroa atoll in the Tuamotu Archipelago was selected as the new testing site; tests were conducted underground after 1974. In 1977, French Polynesia was granted partial internal autonomy; in 1984, the autonomy was extended. French Polynesia became a full overseas collectivity of France in 2003.\nIn September 1995, France stirred up widespread protests by resuming nuclear testing at Fangataufa atoll after a three-year moratorium. The last test was on 27 January 1996. On 29 January 1996, France announced that it would accede to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and no longer test nuclear weapons.\nFrench Polynesia was relisted in the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories in 2013, making it eligible for a UN-backed independence referendum. The relisting was made after the indigenous opposition was voiced and supported by the Polynesian Leaders Group, Pacific Conference of Churches, Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, Non-Aligned Movement, World Council of Churches, and Melanesian Spearhead Group.\nGovernance.\nUnder the terms of Article 74 of the French constitution and the Organic Law 2014\u2013192 on the statute of autonomy of French Polynesia, politics of French Polynesia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic French overseas collectivity, whereby the President of French Polynesia is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Assembly of French Polynesia (the territorial assembly).\nPolitical life in French Polynesia was marked by great instability from the mid-2000s to the mid-2010s. The anti-independence right-wing president of French Polynesia, Gaston Flosse, who had been in power since 1991, had supported the resumption of the French nuclear weapons tests in 1995, and had obtained from his longtime friend and political ally Jacques Chirac, then president of France, a status of expanded autonomy for French Polynesia in 2004, failed to secure an absolute majority in the 2004 French Polynesian legislative election, resulting in deadlock at the Assembly of French Polynesia. Flosse's longtime opponent, the pro-independence leader Oscar Temaru, whose pro-independence coalition had won one less seat than Flosse's party in the Assembly, was nonetheless elected president of French Polynesia by the Assembly in June 2004 thanks to the votes of two non-aligned Assembly members. This resulted in several years of political instability, as neither the pro- nor the anti-independence camps were assured of a majority, depending on the votes of smaller non-aligned parties representing the interests of the distant islands of French Polynesia (as opposed to Tahiti). Temaru was toppled from the presidency of French Polynesia in October 2004, succeeded by Flosse who was toppled in March 2005, succeeded by Temaru again who was toppled in December 2006, succeeded by Gaston Tong Sang, a close ally of Flosse.\nOn 14 September 2007, the pro-independence leader Oscar Temaru was elected president of French Polynesia for the third time in three years (with 27 of 44 votes cast in the territorial assembly). He replaced former president Gaston Tong Sang, opposed to independence, who lost a no-confidence vote in the Assembly of French Polynesia on 31 August after the longtime former president of French Polynesia, Gaston Flosse, hitherto opposed to independence, sided with his long enemy Oscar Temaru to topple the government of Gaston Tong Sang. Oscar Temaru, however, had no stable majority in the Assembly of French Polynesia, and new territorial elections were held in February 2008 to solve the political crisis.\nThe party of Gaston Tong Sang won the territorial elections, but that did not solve the political crisis: the two minority parties of Oscar Temaru and Gaston Flosse, who together had one more member in the territorial assembly than the political party of Gaston Tong Sang, allied to prevent Gaston Tong Sang from becoming president of French Polynesia. Gaston Flosse was then elected president of French Polynesia by the territorial assembly on 23 February 2008 with the support of the pro-independence party led by Oscar Temaru, while Oscar Temaru was elected speaker of the territorial assembly with the support of the anti-independence party led by Gaston Flosse. Both formed a coalition cabinet. Many observers doubted that the alliance between the anti-independence Gaston Flosse and the pro-independence Oscar Temaru, designed to prevent Gaston Tong Sang from becoming president of French Polynesia, could last very long.\nAt the French municipal elections held in March 2008, several prominent mayors who were member of the Flosse-Temaru coalition lost their offices in key municipalities of French Polynesia, which was interpreted as a disapproval of the way Gaston Tong Sang, whose party French Polynesian voters had placed first in the territorial elections the month before, had been prevented from becoming president of French Polynesia by the last minute alliance between Flosse and Temaru's parties. Eventually, on 15 April 2008 the government of Gaston Flosse was toppled by a constructive vote of no confidence in the territorial assembly when two members of the Flosse-Temaru coalition left the coalition and sided with Tong Sang's party. Tong Sang's majority in the territorial assembly was very narrow, and he was toppled in February 2009, succeeded by Temaru (supported again by Flosse).\nOscar Temaru's return to power was brief as he fell out with Gaston Flosse and was toppled in November 2009, succeeded by Gaston Tong Sang. Tong Sang remained in power for a year and a half before being toppled in a vote of no confidence in April 2011, and succeeded by Temaru. Oscar Temaru's fifth stint as president of French Polynesia lasted two years, during which he campaigned for the re-inscription of French Polynesia on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories. Temaru lost the 2013 French Polynesian legislative election by a wide margin, only two weeks before the United Nations re-registered French Polynesia on its list of non-self governing territories. This was interpreted by political analysts as a rejection by French Polynesian voters of Temaru's push for independence as well as the consequence of the socioeconomic crisis affecting French Polynesia after years of political instability and corruption scandals.\nGaston Flosse, whose anti-independence party was the big winner of the 2013 election, succeeded Oscar Temaru as president of French Polynesia in May 2013, but he was removed from office in September 2014 due to a corruption conviction by France's highest court. Flosse was replaced as president of French Polynesia by his second-in-command in the anti-independence camp, \u00c9douard Fritch, who was also Flosse's former son-in-law (divorced from Flosse's daughter). Fritch fell out with Flosse in 2015 as both leaders were vying for control of the anti-independence camp, and Fritch was excluded from Gaston Flosse's party in September 2015, before founding his own anti-independence party, Tapura Huiraatira, in February 2016. His new party managed to keep a majority in the Assembly of French Polynesia, and Fritch remained president of French Polynesia.\nPolitical stability has returned in French Polynesia since the split of the anti-independence camp in 2015\u20132016. Tapura Huiraatira won 70% of the seats in the Assembly of French Polynesia at the 2018 French Polynesian legislative election, defeating both Oscar Temaru's pro-independence party and Gaston Flosse's anti-independence party, and \u00c9douard Fritch was re-elected president of French Polynesia by the Assembly in May 2018. By 2022, \u00c9douard Fritch was the longest-serving president of French Polynesia since Gaston Flosse in the 1990s and early 2000s.\nAdministration.\nBetween 1946 and 2003, French Polynesia had the status of an overseas territory (', or \"TOM\"). In 2003, it became an overseas collectivity (', or COM). Its statutory law of 27 February 2004 gives it the particular designation of \"overseas country inside the Republic\" (\"\", or POM), but without legal modification of its status.\nRelations with mainland France.\nDespite a local assembly and government, French Polynesia is not in a free association with France, like the Cook Islands with New Zealand. As a French overseas collectivity, the local government has no competence in justice, university education, security and defense. Services in these areas are directly provided and administered by the Government of France, including the National Gendarmerie (which also polices rural and border areas in metropolitan France), and French military forces. The collectivity government retains control over primary and secondary education, health, town planning, and the environment. The highest representative of the State in the territory is the High Commissioner of the Republic in French Polynesia ().\nFrench Polynesia also sends three deputies to the French National Assembly in three constituencies, the 1st representing Papeete and its north-eastern suburbs, plus the commune (municipality) of Mo'orea-Mai'ao, the Tu\u0101motu-Gambier administrative division, and the Marquesas Islands administrative division, the 2nd representing much of Tahiti outside Papeete and the Austral Islands administrative subdivision, and the 3rd representing the Leeward Islands administrative subdivision and the south-western suburbs of Papeete. French Polynesia also sends two senators to the French Senate.\nDefence.\nThe defence of the collectivity is the responsibility of the French Armed Forces. Some 900 military personnel are deployed in the territory \u2013 incorporating the Pacific-Polynesian Marine Infantry Regiment (RIMaP-P) \u2013 along with modest air transport and surveillance assets. The latter include three Falcon 200 Gardian maritime surveillance aircraft from French Naval Aviation, which are to be replaced by the more modern Falcon 2000 Albatros starting in 2025. The former is composed of two CN-235 tactical transport aircraft drawn from the Air Force's ET 82 \"Maine\" transport squadron.\nThree principal French Navy vessels are based in the territory, including: the surveillance frigate , the patrol and support ship \"Bougainville\" and the coast guard vessel \"Arago\". As of 2021, two smaller port and coastal tugs (RPCs), \"Maroa\" and \"Manini\", were also operational in the territory. Flottille 35F of French naval aviation deploys a detachment of three AS 365N Dauphin helicopters in Tahiti. The helicopters carry out a variety of roles in the territory or may be embarked on \"Prairial\" as required. In late 2023 or early 2024, \"Arago\" is to be replaced by \"Teriieroo to Teriierooiterai\", a vessel of the new \"F\u00e9lix \u00c9bou\u00e9\" class of patrol vessels. The French Navy will further reinforce its offshore patrol capabilities in the region by deploying a second vessel of the class (\"Philip Bernardino\") to Tahiti by 2025.\nThe National Gendarmerie deploys some 500 active personnel and civilians, plus around 150 reservists, in French Polynesia. The patrol boat \"Jasmin\" of the Maritime Gendarmerie is also based in the territory and is to be replaced by a new PCG-NG patrol boat in about 2025\u20132026.\nGeography.\nThe islands of French Polynesia make up a total land area of , scattered over more than of ocean. There are 121 islands in French Polynesia and many more islets or \"motus\" around atolls. The highest point is Mount Orohena on Tahiti.\nIt is made up of five archipelagos. The largest and most populated island is Tahiti, in the Society Islands. \nThe archipelagos are:\nAside from Tahiti, some other important atolls, islands, and island groups in French Polynesia are: Ah\u0113, Bora Bora, Hiva 'Oa, Huahine, Mai'ao, Maupiti, Meheti'a, Mo'orea, Nuku Hiva, Raiatea, Taha'a, Tetiaroa, Tupua'i and T\u016bpai.\nFrench Polynesia is home to four terrestrial ecoregions: Marquesas tropical moist forests, Society Islands tropical moist forests, Tuamotu tropical moist forests, and Tubuai tropical moist forests.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFrench Polynesia is divided in five administrative subdivisions (\"):\nThe five administrative subdivisions are not local councils; they are solely deconcentrated subdivisions of the French central State. At the head of each administrative subdivision is an ' (\"State administrator\"), generally simply known as ', also sometimes called ' (\"head of the administrative subdivision\"). The ' is a civil servant under the authority of the High Commissioner of the French Republic in French Polynesia in Papeete.\nFour administrative subdivisions (Marquesas Islands, Leeward Islands, Tuamotu-Gambier, and Austral Islands) each also form a deconcentrated subdivision of the government of French Polynesia. These are called ' (\"districts\"). The head of a ' is the ', known as ' in French (\"territorial administrator\"), but the Tahitian title ' is most often used. The ' is the direct representative of the president of French Polynesia's government who appoints him or her. The Windward Islands, due to their proximity to Papeete, do not form a deconcentrated subdivision of the government of French Polynesia.\nThe 5 administrative subdivisions are themselves divided in 48 communes. Like all other communes in the French Republic, these are municipalities in which local residents with either a French or another EU citizenship elect a municipal council and a mayor in charge of managing local affairs within the commune. Municipal elections occur every six years on the same date as in the rest of the French Republic (the last municipal elections took place in 2020).\n30 communes are further subdivided in 98 associated communes which have each a delegate mayor and a registry office. These 30 communes were subdivided in associated communes either because they have a large land territory (particularly in the larger islands such as Tahiti or Nuku Hiva) or because they are made up of atolls distant from each other (particularly in the Tuamotu archipelago), which led to the creation of associated communes for each inhabited atoll.\n17 communes (out of French Polynesia's 48 communes) have banded together in three separate communities of communes. These indirectly elected intercommunal councils are still relatively new in French Polynesia, and unlike in metropolitan France and its overseas regions it is not mandatory for the communes in French Polynesia to join an intercommunal council. The three intercommunal councils in existence as of 2022, all formed on a voluntary basis, were:\nThese communities of communes, as elsewhere in the French Republic, are not full-fledged territorial collectivities, but only federations of communes. From a legal standpoint, the only territorial collectivities in French Polynesia are the overseas collectivity of French Polynesia and the 48 communes.\nDemographics.\nTotal population was 278,786 according to the August 18, 2022 census, 68.7% of whom lived on the island of Tahiti alone. The urban area of Papeete, the capital city, has 136,771 inhabitants (2017 census).\nAt the 2017 census, 89.0% of people living in French Polynesia had been born there (up from 87.3% in 2007); 8.1% had been born in Metropolitan France (down from 9.3% in 2007); 1.2% were born elsewhere in overseas France (down from 1.4% in 2007); and 1.7% were from foreign countries (down from 2.0% in 2007). The population of natives of Metropolitan France living in French Polynesia has declined in relative terms since the 1980s, but in absolute terms their population peaked at the 2007 census, when 24,265 lived in French Polynesia (not counting their children born there). With the local economic crisis, their population declined to 22,278 at the 2012 census, and 22,387 at the 2017 census.\nAt the 1988 census, the last census which asked questions regarding ethnicity, 66.5% of people were ethnically unmixed Polynesians, 7.1% were ethnically Polynesians with light European and/or East Asian mixing, 11.9% were Europeans (mostly French), 9.3% were people of mixed European and Polynesian descent, the so-called Demis (literally meaning \"Half\"), and 4.7% were East Asians (mainly Chinese).\nChinese, Demis, and the white populace are essentially concentrated on the island of Tahiti, particularly in the urban area of Papeete, where their share of the population is thus much greater than in French Polynesia overall. Despite a long history of ethnic mixing, ethnic tensions have been growing in recent years, with politicians using a xenophobic discourse and fanning the flame of nationalism.\nCulture.\nLanguages.\nAll the indigenous languages of French Polynesia are Polynesian. French Polynesia has been linguistically diverse since ancient times, with each community having its own local speech variety. These dialects can be grouped into seven languages on the basis of mutual intelligibility: Tahitian, Tuamotuan, Rapa, Austral, North Marquesan, South Marquesan, and Mangarevan. Some of these, especially Tuamotuan, are really dialect continua formed by a patchwork of different dialects. The distinction between languages and dialects is notoriously difficult to establish, and so some authors may view two varieties as dialects of the same language, while others may view them as distinct languages. In this way, North and South Marquesan are often grouped together as a single Marquesan language, and Rapa is often viewed as part of Austral subfamily. At the same time, Ra'ivavae is often viewed as distinct from them.\nFrench is the sole official language of French Polynesia. An organic law of 12 April 1996 states that \"French is the official language, Tahitian and other Polynesian languages can be used.\" At the 2017 census, among the population whose age was 15 and older, 73.9% of people reported that the language they spoke the most at home was French (up from 68.6% at the 2007 census), 20.2% reported that the language they spoke the most at home was Tahitian (down from 24.3% at the 2007 census), 2.6% reported Marquesan and 0.2% the related Mangareva language (same percentages for both at the 2007 census), 1.2% reported any of the Austral languages (down from 1.3% at the 2007 census), 1.0% reported Tuamotuan (down from 1.5% at the 2007 census), 0.6% reported a Chinese dialect (41% of which was Hakka) (down from 1.0% at the 2007 census), and 0.4% another language (more than half of which was English) (down from 0.5% at the 2007 census).\nAt the same census, 95.2% of people whose age was 15 or older reported that they could speak, read and write French (up from 94.7% at the 2007 census), whereas only 1.3% reported that they had no knowledge of French (down from 2.0% at the 2007 census). 86.5% of people whose age was 15 or older reported that they had some form of knowledge of at least one Polynesian language (up from 86.4% at the 2007 census but down from 87.8% at the 2012 census), whereas 13.5% reported that they had no knowledge of any of the Polynesian languages (down from 13.6% at the 2007 census but up from 12.2% at the 2012 census).\nMusic.\nFrench Polynesia appeared in the world music scene in 1992, recorded by French musicologist Pascal Nabet-Meyer with the release of The Tahitian Choir's recordings of unaccompanied vocal Christian music called himene t\u0101rava. This form of singing is common in French Polynesia and the Cook Islands, and is notable for a unique drop in pitch at the end of the phrases, a characteristic formed by several different voices, accompanied by a steady grunting of staccato, nonlexical syllables.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the main religion of the islands. A majority of 54% belongs to various Protestant churches, especially the Maohi Protestant Church, which is the largest and accounts for more than 50% of the population. It traces its origins to P\u014dmare II, the king of Tahiti, who converted from traditional beliefs to the Reformed tradition brought to the islands by the London Missionary Society.\nLatin Rite Catholics constitute a large minority of 38.3% of the population (2019) which has its own ecclesiastical province, comprising the Metropolitan Archdiocese of Papeete and its only suffragan, the Diocese of Taiohae. The number and proportion of Catholics has increased significantly since 1950, when they represented 21.6% of the total population.\nData from 1991 revealed that Catholics were in the majority in the Tuamotu Islands, Gambier Islands and the Marquesas Islands, while Protestants formed the majority in the Austral Islands and several of the Society Islands such as Tahiti. This diversity is due to the fact that Protestant missionaries (from England and the United States) first came to one group of islands, and after French colonisation the Catholic Church spread to several more scattered islands, but also to the main island of Tahiti.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had 28,147 members as of 2018[ [update]]. Community of Christ, another denomination within the Latter-Day Saint tradition, claimed 9,256 total French Polynesian members as of 2018 including Mareva Arnaud Tchong who serves in the church's governing Council of Twelve Apostles. There were about 3,000 Jehovah's Witnesses in Tahiti as of 2014[ [update]], and an estimated 500 Muslims in French Polynesia.\nCuisine.\nDue to the island location and the fact that the French Polynesia produce a significant array of fruits and vegetables, natural local produce, especially coconut, features in many of the dishes of the islands as does fresh seafood.\nfoods like Faraoa 'ipo, Poisson cru and R\u0113ti'a.\nSports.\nFootball.\nThe sport of football in the island of Tahiti is run by the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Tahitienne de Football.\nVa'a.\nThe Polynesian traditional sport va'a is practiced in all the islands. French Polynesia hosts the Hawaiki nui va'a an international race between Tahiti, Huahine and Bora Bora.\nSurfing.\nFrench Polynesia is famous for its reef break waves. Teahupo'o is probably the most renowned, regularly ranked in the best waves of the world. This site hosts the annual Billabong Pro Tahiti surf competition, the 7th stop of the World Championship Tour, and is scheduled to host the surfing events of the 2024 Summer Olympics.\nKitesurfing.\nThere are many spots to practice kitesurfing in French Polynesia, with Tahiti, Moorea, Bora-Bora, Maupiti and Raivavae being among the most iconic.\nDiving.\nFrench Polynesia is internationally known for diving. Each archipelago offers opportunities for divers. Rangiroa and Fakarava in the Tuamotu islands are the most famous spots in the area.\nRugby.\nRugby is also popular in French Polynesia, specifically Rugby union.\nTelevision.\nTelevision channels with local programming include Polyn\u00e9sie la 1\u00e8re (established in 1965) and Tahiti Nui Television (established in 2000). Channels from metropolitan France are also available.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nThe legal tender of French Polynesia is the CFP franc which has a fixed exchange rate with the euro. The nominal gross domestic product (or GDP) of French Polynesia in 2019 was 6.01\u00a0billion U.S. dollars at market exchange rates, the seventh-largest economy in Oceania after Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, Papua New Guinea, New Caledonia, and Guam. The GDP per capita was US$21,615 in 2019 (at market exchange rates, not at PPP), lower than in Hawaii, Australia, New Zealand, Guam, and New Caledonia, but higher than in all other independent insular states and dependent territories of Oceania.\nFrench Polynesia was severely affected by the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 and subsequent Great Recession, and experienced as a result 4 years of recession from 2009 to 2012. French Polynesia renewed with economic growth in 2013, and experienced strong economic growth in the 2nd half of the 2010s, with an average real GDP growth rate of +2.8% per year from 2016 to 2019, before being affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, which has led to another recession.\nFrench Polynesia has a moderately developed economy, which is dependent on imported goods, tourism, and the financial assistance of mainland France. Tourist facilities are well developed and are available on the major islands. Main agricultural productions are coconuts (copra), vegetables and fruits. French Polynesia exports noni juice, a high quality vanilla, and the famous black Tahitian pearls which accounted for 55% of exports (in value) in 2008.\nFrench Polynesia's seafloor contains rich deposits of nickel, cobalt, manganese, and copper that are not exploited.\nIn 2008, French Polynesia's imports amounted to 2.2\u00a0billion U.S. dollars and exports amounted to 0.2\u00a0billion U.S. dollars.\nTransportation.\nThere are 53 airports in French Polynesia; 46 are paved. Fa'a'\u0101 International Airport is the only international airport in French Polynesia. Each island has its own airport that serves flights to other islands. Air Tahiti is the main airline that flies around the islands.\nCommunication.\nIn 2017, Alcatel Submarine Networks, a unit of Nokia, launched a project to connect many of the islands in French Polynesia with underwater fiber optic cable. The project, called NATITUA, is intended to improve French Polynesian broadband connectivity by linking Tahiti to 10 islands in the Tuamotu and Marquesas archipelagos. In August 2018, a celebration was held to commemorate the arrival of a submarine cable from Papeete to the atoll of Hao, extending the network by about 1000 kilometres.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10738", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10738", "title": "French Polynesia/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "10739", "revid": "1027977", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10739", "title": "Geography of French Polynesia", "text": "French Polynesia is located in Oceania. It is a group of six archipelagos in the South Pacific Ocean, about halfway between South America and Australia. Its area is about 4,167\u00a0km2 (around 130 islands), of which 3,827\u00a0km2 is land and 340\u00a0km2 is (inland) water. It has a coastline of 2,525\u00a0km but no land borders with other countries.\nPhysical geography.\nThere are 118 islands in French Polynesia (and many more islets or \"motus\" around atolls). Four of the islands are volcanic and one island is coral. Makatea in French Polynesia is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific Ocean \u2013 the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and Nauru. The terrain consists of a mixture of rugged high islands and low islands with reefs.\nIt is made up of six archipelagos. The largest and most populated island is Tahiti, in the Society Islands.\nThe archipelagos are:\nAside from Tahiti, some other important atolls, islands, and island groups in French Polynesia are: Ah\u0113, Bora Bora, Hiva 'Oa, Huahine, Mai'ao, Maupiti, Meheti'a, Mo'orea, Nuku Hiva, Raiatea, Taha'a, Tetiaroa, Tupua'i, and T\u016bpai. The country's highest point is Mont Orohena on Tahiti at 2,241 meters high.\nClimate.\nThe country has a tropical, but moderate climate.\n* Territorial sea: 12 nautical miles\n* Exclusive economic zone: 200 nautical miles\n Timber, fish, cobalt, hydropower\n* Arable land: 0.68%\n* Permanent crops: 6.28%\n* Other: 93.03% (2012)\n 10 km2 (2003)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10740", "revid": "1161058486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10740", "title": "Demographics of French Polynesia", "text": "This article is about the demographic features of the population of French Polynesia, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nBirths and deaths.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Post-censal estimates.): \nCIA World Factbook demographic statistics.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10741", "revid": "45964651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10741", "title": "Politics of French Polynesia", "text": "Political system of French Polynesia\nPolitics of French Polynesia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic French overseas collectivity, whereby the President of French Polynesia is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Assembly of French Polynesia.\nBetween 1946 and 2003, French Polynesia had the status of an overseas territory (French: \"territoire d'outre-mer\", or \"TOM\"). In 2003 it became an overseas collectivity (French: \"collectivit\u00e9 d'outre-mer\", or COM). Its statutory law of 27 February 2004 gives it the particular designation of \"overseas country\" to underline the large autonomy of the territory.\nExecutive branch.\nThe President of the French Republic is represented by the High Commissioner of the Republic in French Polynesia (\"Haut-Commissaire de la R\u00e9publique en Polyn\u00e9sie fran\u00e7aise\"). The government is headed by the President of French Polynesia. He submits as Council of Ministers a list of members of the Territorial Assembly, the Assembly of French Polynesia (\"Assembl\u00e9e de la Polyn\u00e9sie fran\u00e7aise\"), for approval by them to serve as ministers.\nLegislative branch.\nFrench Polynesia elects the Assembly of French Polynesia (\"Assembl\u00e9e de la Polyn\u00e9sie fran\u00e7aise\"), the unicameral legislature on the territorial level. The Assembly of French Polynesia has 57 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation in multi-seat constituencies. Since the territorial elections of March 6, 2001, the parity bill now binds that the number of women matches the number of men at the Assembly.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThe members of the Assembly of French Polynesia are elected in 6 different electoral districts or electoral circumscriptions () which slightly differ from the administrative subdivisions (\"subdivisions administratives\") on the Tuamotus and the Gambier Islands. The 6 electoral circumscriptions (\"circonscriptions \u00e9lectorales\") are:\nJudicial branch.\nCourt of Appeal or Cour d'Appel; Court of the First Instance or Tribunal de Premiere Instance; Court of Administrative Law or Tribunal Administratif.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFrench Polynesia has 5 administrative subdivisions ():\n\"note:\" Clipperton Island (), just off the coast of Mexico, was administered by France from French Polynesia.\nInternational organization participation.\nESCAP (associate), FZ, ITUC, SPC, WMO\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10742", "revid": "34158818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10742", "title": "Economy of French Polynesia", "text": "The economy of French Polynesia is one of a developed country with a service sector accounting for 75%. French Polynesia's GDP per capita is around $22,000, one of the highest in the Pacific region.\nHistory.\nPast economy.\nBefore French colonisation, the Polynesian islands that constitute nowadays French Polynesia, relied on a subsistence economy. Work was heavily organised and performed by the community as a whole under the direction of the Arii ruling class and the priests. Mountains were terraced for agriculture production, river banks were contained by stone walls, artificial soil was created on atolls in large trenches, and large systems made out of coral stone walls trapped and stocked live fish. Production outputs were divided by the ruling class between the population.\nAfter the contact was established with European ships, foreign diseases killed large portions of the populations, and Christian beliefs and clergy produced a huge shift in the culture of those islands. With fewer population to feed, more land per capita was available, and the land use switched toward the limited production required by a family to live. Habitations moved toward seashores as the population relied more on the lagoon and sea trade. European ships stopped in those islands to purchase water, salt pork meat, dried fish and fresh fruits.\nAs French, English and Americans settled, part of the agriculture moved towards exports of oranges, coprah, coffee, cotton, and vanilla. They also exported Tahitian black pearls and sandalwood. Santal wood nearly disappeared, cotton production was short-lived, as the US's south recovered from the American Civil War, and coffee and orange trees suffered from imported diseases that stopped those exports. Coprah and vanilla prices and competition worldwide impacted heavily those productions in the second half of the 20th century, although they still exist. The guano mining at Makatea started in 1917 and stopped in 1966 when the stocks were depleted.\nIn 1962, France stationed military personnel in the region and started nuclear experimentations in Moruroa. French Polynesia's economy switched to services to support the military and the growing tourist industry.\n21st century.\nTourism accounts nowadays for about 13% of the GDP, and is a primary source of foreign currency earnings. The tourist industry was heavily impacted after the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the 2008 economic crises, and never really recovered since. There are around 160,000 tourists per year. The local government mostly focuses its action at developing a high-end market with luxurious hotels built with foreign investment and French tax cut incentives, but many of these investments close after a few years. The subsidized air company Air Tahiti Nui brings tourists from France, Los Angeles, Japan and China. Other companies also operate, like Air France and Air New Zealand.\nThe small manufacturing sector primarily processes agricultural products. Vanilla and pearls are its main exports.\nThe public administration is an important part of the GDP and a provider of stable employment. The French republic finances the functionaries working in education, justice, hospitals, gendarmerie (military police), and military. The local government controls its own administration, like the ministry of agriculture, and oversees the administration and buildings of some sectors like schools. The local government also influence a large part of the economy through subsidies and development programs.\nSome parts of the economy involve quasi-monopolistic groups due to the small economy size, the challenges of a country of small islands spread in a huge oceanic space, and the action of the government through subsidies and public companies. Some sectors show an important horizontal and vertical integration trend. Recently, the local government tries to maintain a healthy competition and regulate the growth of the biggest groups, but face many challenges. For example, it was unable to prevent a major supermarket group to develop its own vegetable production, ending its supplying contracts with local farmers. But it blocked the merger of two local shipping companies to avoid a monopoly on some trade routes. The price of shipping goods between islands is fixed by the government, and subsidies are provided for transporting some items like farming products or construction materials.\nSome products' price margins are controlled by the local government to reduce the disparity of prices between the different archipelagos. Import taxes and VAT are fixed and collected by the local government that also control what imports are allowed to protect its agriculture and nature from diseases and invasive species.\nThe majority of the population is of mixed Polynesian and European origin. Around 5% of the population is of Asian origin, descending from farm workers imported in the 19th century to work in the cotton fields. They are present in the administration and trading sector of the economy. The recent metropolitan population is mostly involved in the state administration and in small and medium-sized enterprises.\nAgriculture.\nMost Polynesians in agriculture farm traditional products like taro, ufi, casava and sweet potato to feed themselves and small surplus are sold for monetary income alongside a small fishing activity. Farmers of Asian origin tends to produce European and Asian vegetables for the local market.\nThe Moorea island developed pineapple production for local market and supplying the juice factory. Maupiti and Huahine produce watermelons. Tahiti and Tahaa have a small production of sugarcane for rum distillery.\nTahiti produces a small quantity of fresh milk, mostly for the local yogurt factory, as most of the population is used to drinking UHT and powdered milk from France and New Zealand. French Polynesia has a single slaughterhouse treating beef, pork, and chickens. The local beef meat production is very limited and mostly used to supply the local corned beef factory. Most of the meat comes from New Zealand, amounting to around 10% of the exports of fresh meat of this country. Two charcuteries produce ham, sausages, and p\u00e2t\u00e9s from local and imported pork.\nThe copra production is heavily subsidized as the local government treats it as a form of social support for the remote islands with a limited range of economic activities possibilities like Tuamotu atolls. The copra is milled by the Huilerie de Tahiti to produce coconut oil mostly used for the monoi. The coconut cake residue is used as a cattle and pork feed, and surplus used to be exported to New Zealand. \nVanilla production depends heavily on the situation in Madagascar. When a typhoon hit this main supplier of vanilla, the market price increased worldwide and the local Polynesian government started a heavy program of subsidies and loans to develop vanilla farms. As the Polynesian production increased and Madagascar recovered, prices dropped and a lot of Polynesian farmers stopped caring for their vanilla plants. The plants are fragile and require regular care of experienced farmers. Diseases and insects can heavily reduce the production, and the cost of chemical products used impact the farmer harder when the vanilla prices are low. As the vanilla production falls, the price increase and the government started a new program of development, starting a new cycle. Despite the high price of Tahitian dried vanilla on the international market, it usually still finds buyers in the high-end market because of the specificities of its cultivar and quality.\nIn the 1990s, the commercial production of Noni started because of the supposed benefits of the juice of this fruit. Exports were mostly directed toward the North American market. But this production was short-lived, falling quickly from 7000 tonnes in 2005 down to 2000 tonnes in 2008, as the plant can be easily farmed in any tropical climate, especially in countries with lower labor costs and more land.\nA small vineyard production exists in Rangiroa atoll and is aimed at the high-end market, capitalizing on its rarity and specificity of a vine grown on coral soil in a tropical island.\nElectricity.\nFrench Polynesia's electricity production in 2004 was 477 GWh. In 1998 59.72% of French Polynesia's electricity came from fossil fuel with the remainder from hydropower.\nCurrency.\nFrench Polynesia uses the Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (CFPF), with 1 CFP franc subdivided into 100 centimes. The CFP franc was formerly linked at the exact official rate of 0.055 French francs to one Pacifique franc. When France switched its currency to the euro in 1999 this static link remained true, so that the rate is now about 119.26 Pacifique franc to one euro (1 euro being exactly 6.55957 French francs). In 2016 the exchange rate was 110.2 CFP francs per US dollar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10743", "revid": "42425010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10743", "title": "Telecommunications in French Polynesia", "text": "Communication systems in French Polynesia\nThis article is about communications systems in French Polynesia. \nThe Honotua fiber optic cable connected Tahiti to Hawaii in 2010, increasing Internet speeds to 20 gigabits per second from 500 megabits per second. The cable will also connect to Moorea and the Leeward Islands of Huahine, Raiatea and Bora Bora.\nTelephone.\nMain lines in use: 32,000 (1995)\nMobile cellular: 4,000 (1995)\nTelephone system:\nDomestic:\nN/A\nInternational:\nSatellite Earth station\u20141 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)\nRadio.\nRadio stations:\nAM 2, FM 14, shortwave 2 (1998)\nRadios:\n128,000 (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision stations:\n7 (plus 17 low-power repeaters) (1997)\nTelevisions:\n40,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\nOPT (national operator),\nCountry code (Top Level Domain): PF\nITU Prefix: F\nAmateur radio prefix (Designated by France): FO\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10744", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10744", "title": "Transport in French Polynesia", "text": "Railways:\n0\u00a0km\nHighways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n2590\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"paved:\"\n1735\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"unpaved:\"\n855\u00a0km (1999)\nPorts and harbours:\nMataura, Papeete, Rikitea, Uturoa\nMerchant marine:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n10 ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT) \n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\"\ncargo ship 3, passenger ship 2, passenger/cargo 3, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off ship 1 (2003 est.)\nAirports:\n49 (2003 est.)\nAirports - with paved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n37\n&lt;br&gt;\"over 3,047 m:\"\n2\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n5\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n23\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n3 (2004 est.)\nAirports - with unpaved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n13\n&lt;br&gt;\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n5\n&lt;br&gt;\"under 914 m:\"\n8 (2004 est.)\nHeliports\n1 (2003 est.)"}
{"id": "10745", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10745", "title": "French Polynesia/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "10746", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10746", "title": "French Polynesia/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "10747", "revid": "11015197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10747", "title": "French Southern and Antarctic Lands", "text": "Overseas Territory of France\nThe French Southern and Antarctic Lands (, TAAF) is an overseas Territory ( or ) of France. It consists of:\nThe territory is sometimes referred to as the French Southern Lands () or the French Southern Territories, usually to emphasize non-recognition of French sovereignty over Ad\u00e9lie Land as part of the Antarctic Treaty System.\nThe entire territory has no known permanently settled inhabitants. Approximately 150 (in the winter) to 310 (in the summer) people are usually present in the French Southern and Antarctic Lands at any time, but they are mainly made up of military personnel, officials, scientific researchers and support staff.\nOn July 5, 2019, the Crozet, Kerguelen, and Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site as the \"French Austral Lands and Seas\" because of their pristine wilderness, biodiversity, and enormous bird colonies.\nHistory.\nSeveral of the islands within this territory were originally discovered as part of the sea route to India. The Portuguese discovered \u00cele Saint-Paul in the sixteenth century; in the seventeenth century, the Dutch became the first to land on (and name) \u00cele Amsterdam. The French discovered the Crozet Islands some time later, in the eighteenth century; the other islands were also first explored by Europeans in this time frame.\nAdministration.\nThe French Southern and Antarctic Lands have formed a (an overseas territory) of France since 1955. Formerly, they were administered from Paris by an assisted by a secretary-general; since December 2004, however, their administrator has been a \"pr\u00e9fet\", currently Florence Jeanblanc-Risler, with headquarters in Saint Pierre on R\u00e9union Island.\nThe TAAF administration, the French Polar Institute Paul-\u00c9mile Victor (IPEV) and the French Navy jointly operate the icebreaker \"Astrolabe\" which is based out of Reunion. The vessel is used both to bring personnel and supplies to the Dumont d'Urville Station and for research and patrol duties. \nThe territory is divided into five districts:\nEach district is headed by a district chief, who has powers similar to those of a French mayor (including recording births and deaths and being an officer of judicial police).\nBecause there is no permanent population, there is no elected assembly, nor does the territory send representatives to the national parliament.\nGeography.\nThe territory includes Amsterdam Island, Saint Paul Island, the Crozet Islands, and the Kerguelen Islands in the southern Indian Ocean near 43\u00b0S, 67\u00b0E, along with Ad\u00e9lie Land, the sector of Antarctica claimed by France, named by the French explorer Jules Dumont d'Urville after his wife.\nAd\u00e9lie Land (about ) and the islands, totaling , have no indigenous inhabitants, though in 1997 there were about 100 researchers whose numbers varied from winter (July) to summer (January).\nAmsterdam Island and Saint Paul Island are extinct volcanoes and have been delineated as the Amsterdam and Saint-Paul Islands temperate grasslands ecoregion. The highest point in the territory is Mont Ross on Kerguelen Island at . There are very few airstrips on the islands, only existing on islands with weather stations, and the of coastline have no ports or harbors, only offshore anchorages.\nThe islands in the Indian Ocean are supplied by the special ship \"Marion Dufresne\" sailing out of Le Port in R\u00e9union Island. Terre Ad\u00e9lie is supplied by \"L'Astrolabe\" sailing out of Hobart in Tasmania.\nHowever, the territory has a merchant marine fleet totaling (in 1999) 2,892,911 GRT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT), including seven bulk carriers, five cargo ships, ten chemical tankers, nine container ships, six liquefied gas carriers, 24 petroleum tankers, one refrigerated cargo ship, and ten roll-on-roll-off (RORO) carriers. This fleet is maintained as a subset of the French register that allows French-owned ships to operate under more liberal taxation and manning regulations than permissible under the main French register. This register, however, is to vanish, replaced by the International French Register (\"Registre International Fran\u00e7ais\", RIF).\nFlora and fauna.\nDue to their isolation, the French islands in the southern Indian Ocean comprise one of the last remaining large wilderness areas on Earth. Furthermore, the islands are positioned along the Antarctic Convergence, where upwelling creates nutrient-rich waters. As a result, birds and marine mammals gather on the islands in great abundance. More than 50 million birds of 47 species breed on the islands, including more than half the breeding population of 16 different species. The largest populations of king penguins and the endangered Indian yellow-nosed albatross on Earth are found on the Crozet Islands and Amsterdam Island, respectively. Other threatened bird species with important populations on the islands include Eaton's pintail, MacGillivray's prion, and the Amsterdam albatross, which is one of four bird species endemic to the island group. The French Southern Lands also hold the second largest population of southern elephant seals on Earth, numbering roughly 200,000, and the third largest population of the Antarctic fur seal. \nBecause of their isolation and subpolar location, the French Southern Lands are relatively depauperate of vegetation, with both Saint-Paul and Crozet having no native tree or shrub species. However, eight of the 36 higher plant species are endemic. Some species of endemic invertebrates have also been recorded on the islands, including moths and flies which have lost their wings in the absence of predators.\nEconomy.\nThe territory's natural resources are limited to fish and crustaceans. Economic activity is limited to servicing meteorological and geophysical research stations and French and other fishing fleets.\nThe main fish resources are Patagonian toothfish and spiny lobster. Both are poached by foreign fleets; because of this, the French Navy, and occasionally other services, patrol the zone and arrest poaching vessels. Such arrests can result in heavy fines and/or the seizure of the ship.\nFrance previously sold licenses to foreign fisheries to fish the Patagonian toothfish; because of overfishing, it is now restricted to a small number of fisheries from R\u00e9union Island.\nThe territory takes in revenues of about \u20ac16 million a year.\nCodes.\nThe French Southern Territories (i.e. the TAAF excluding Ad\u00e9lie Land) have been given the following country codes: FS (FIPS) and (ISO 3166-1 alpha-2).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10761", "revid": "21105851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10761", "title": "History of French Guiana", "text": "Aspect of history\nThe history of French Guiana dates back to the period prior to European colonization. Prior to the arrival of the first Europeans, there was no written history in the territory. It was originally inhabited by a number of Native American peoples, among them the Kalina (Caribs), Arawak, Galibi, Palikur, Teko, Wayampi (also known as Oyampi), and Wayana. The first Europeans arrived in the expeditions of Christopher Columbus, shortly before 1500.\nBeginnings of European involvement.\nRumours online proclaim that in 1498, French Guiana was visited by Europeans when Christopher Columbus sailed to the Guiaiean coast, which he named the \"Land of Pariahs\". Columbus had actually sailed to the coast of Venezuela from Trinidad, and he named the coastline \u201cYsla Sancta\u201d, as from his view the far away coast appeared to be an island. The term \u201cLand of Pariahs\u201d comes from the Gulf of Paria, the water that the lands Columbus had discovered were facing.\nIn 1608, the Grand Duchy of Tuscany sent an expedition to the area in order to create an Italian colony for the commerce of Amazonian products to Renaissance Italy, but the sudden death of Ferdinando I de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany, stopped it. In 1624, the French attempted to settle in the area but were forced to abandon it in the face of hostility from the Portuguese, who viewed it as a violation of the Treaty of Tordesillas. However, French settlers returned in 1630 and in 1643 managed to establish a settlement at Cayenne along with some small-scale plantations. This second attempt would again be abandoned following Amerindian attacks. In 1658, the Dutch West Indies Company seized French territory to establish the Dutch colony of Cayenne. The French returned once more in 1664, and founded a second settlement at Sinnamary (this was attacked by the Dutch in 1665).\nIn 1667, the English seized the area. Following the Treaty of Breda on 31 July 1667, the area was given back to France. The Dutch briefly occupied it for a period in 1676.\nConsolidation of French rule.\nAfter the Treaty of Paris in 1763, which deprived France of almost all her possessions in the Americas other than Guiana and a few islands, Louis XV sent thousands of settlers to Guiana who were lured there with stories of plentiful gold and easy fortunes to be made. Instead they found a land filled with hostile natives and tropical diseases. One and a half years later only a few hundred survived. These fled to three small islands which could be seen off shore and named them the Iles de Salut (or \"Islands of Salvation\"). The largest was called Royal Island, another St. Joseph (after the patron saint of the expedition), and the smallest of the islands, surrounded by strong currents, \u00cele du Diable (the infamous \"Devil's Island\"). When the survivors of this ill-fated expedition returned home, the terrible stories they told of the colony left a lasting impression in France.\nIn 1776, Pierre-Victor Malouet was appointed to the Colony, who brought in Jean Samuel Guisan to establish agriculture in the colony. The relatively good period ended in 1792 during the French Revolution, when the first prison for priests and political enemies opened in Sinnamary which set a precedent.\nDuring the French Revolution, the National Convention voted to abolish the French slave trade and slavery in France's overseas colonies in February 1794, months after enslaved Haitians had started a slave rebellion in the colony of Saint-Domingue. However, the 1794 decree was only implemented in Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe, and French Guiana, while the colonies of Senegal, Mauritius, R\u00e9union and Martinique, and French India resisted the imposition of these laws.\nIn 1794, after the execution of Maximilien Robespierre, 193 of his followers were sent to French Guiana. In 1797, the republican general Pichegru and many deputies and journalists were also sent to the colony. When they arrived, they found that only 54 of the 193 deport\u00e9es sent out three years earlier were left; 11 had escaped and the rest had died of tropical fevers and other diseases. Pichegru managed to escape to the United States and then returned to France where he was eventually executed for plotting against Napoleon.\nLater on, slaves were brought out from Africa, and plantations were established along the more disease-free rivers. Exports of sugar, hardwood, Cayenne pepper, and other spices brought a certain prosperity to the colony for the first time. Cayenne, the capital, was surrounded by plantations, some of which had several thousand slaves.\n1800s and the Penal Era.\nIn 1809, an Anglo-Portuguese naval squadron took French Guiana (ousting governor Victor Hugues) and gave it to the Portuguese in Brazil. However, with the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1814, the region was handed back to the French, though a Portuguese presence remained until 1817.\nIn 1848, France abolished slavery and the ex-slaves fled into the rainforest, setting up communities similar to the ones they had come from in Africa. Subsequently, called Maroons, they formed a sort of buffer zone between the Europeans (who settled along the coast and main rivers) and the unconquered (and often hostile) Native American tribes of the inland regions. Deprived of slave labor the plantations were soon taken over by the jungle, and the planters ruined.\nIn 1850, several shiploads of Indians, Malays, and Chinese were brought out to work the plantations but, instead, they set up shops in Cayenne and other settlements.\nIn 1852, the first shiploads of chained convicts arrived from France. In 1885, to get rid of habitual criminals and to increase the number of colonists, the French Parliament passed a law that anyone, male or female, who had more than three sentences for theft of more than three months each, would be sent to French Guiana as a \"rel\u00e9gu\u00e9\". This \" rel\u00e9gu\u00e9s\" was to be kept in prison there for six months but then freed to become settlers in the colony. However, this experiment failed dismally. The ex-prisoners, unable to make a living off the land, found themselves forced to revert to crime or to eke out a hand-to-mouth existence until they died. In fact, transportation to French Guiana as a \"rel\u00e9gu\u00e9\" amounted to a life sentence, and usually, a short life sentence, as most of the \"rel\u00e9gu\u00e9s\" died very quickly from disease and malnutrition.\nThe prisoners would arrive at St Laurent du Maroni before being transported to various camps throughout the country. The Iles du Salut was used to house political prisoners and for solitary confinement. The islands became notorious for the brutality of life there, centering on the notorious Devil's Island. Famous figures sent to the islands included Alfred Dreyfus (in 1895) and Henri Charri\u00e8re (in the 1930s). Charri\u00e8re managed to escape and later wrote a best-selling book called \"Papillon\".\nIn 1853, gold was discovered in the interior, precipitating border disputes with Brazil and Suriname (these were later settled in 1891, 1899, and 1915, although a small region of the border with Suriname remains in dispute). The Republic of Independent Guyana, in French \"La R\u00e9publique de la Guyane ind\u00e9pendante\" and commonly referred to by the name of the capital \"Counani\", was created in the area which was disputed by France (as part of French Guiana) and Brazil in the late 19th century.\n20th century.\nThe territory of Inini, consisting of most of the interior of French Guiana, was created in 1930. It was abolished in 1946.\nDuring World War II the local government declared its allegiance to the Vichy government, despite widespread support for Charles de Gaulle. This government was removed on 22 March 1943.\nFrench Guiana became an overseas \"d\u00e9partement\" of France on 19 March 1946.\nThe infamous penal colonies, including Devil's Island, were gradually phased out and then formally closed in 1951. At first, only those freed prisoners who could raise the fare for their return passage to France were able to go home, so French Guiana was haunted after the official closing of the prisons by numerous freed convicts leading an aimless existence in the colony.\nVisitors to the site in December 1954 reported being deeply shocked by the conditions and the constant screams from the cell block still in use for convicts who had gone insane and which had only tiny ventilation slots at the tops of the walls under the roof. Food was pushed in and bodies removed once a day.\nIn 1961, Brazilian president J\u00e2nio Quadros planned the annexation of French Guiana, but resigned due to \"hidden forces\" before he could execute the operation.\nIn 1964, Kourou was chosen to be the launch site for rockets, largely due to its favourable location near the equator. The Guiana Space Centre was built and became operational in 1968. This has provided some local employment and the mainly foreign technicians, and hundreds of troops stationed in the region to prevent sabotage, bring a little income to the local economy.\nThe 1970s saw the settlement of Hmong refugees from Laos in the county, primarily to the towns of Javouhey and Cacao. The Green Plan (\"Le Plan Vert\") of 1976 aimed to improve production, though it had only limited success. A movement for increased autonomy from France gained momentum in the 70s and 80s, along with the increasing success of the Parti Socialiste Guyanais.\nProtests by those calling for more autonomy from France have become increasingly vocal. Protests in 1996, 1997, and 2000 all ended in violence. While many Guianese wish to see more autonomy, support for complete independence is low.\n21st century.\nIn a 2010 referendum, French Guianans voted against autonomy.\nOn 20 March 2017, French Guianans began going on strike and demonstrating for more resources and infrastructure. 28 March 2017 saw the largest demonstration ever held in French Guiana.\nThe first woman to be elected to the Senate was Marie-Laure Phin\u00e9ra-Horth in 2020.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10762", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10762", "title": "Geography of French Guiana", "text": "French Guiana is an overseas region of France, located on the northern coast of South America between Suriname and Brazil. The country is part of Caribbean South America and borders the North Atlantic Ocean. It has low-lying plains with small mountains to the south. Its climate is split between tropical rainforest and tropical monsoon. French Guiana is mostly unsettled and has low land use.\nFrench Guiana is situated on the northeast coast of South America between 2\u00b0 and 5\u00b0 latitude north and covers an area of 35,135 square miles. It is separated from Surinam (Dutch Guiana) by the Maroni River and two of its tributaries, the Aoua and Itany, in the west, and from Brazil by the Tumuc Humac Mountains in the south and the Oyapock River in the east. Its 200-mile Atlantic coastline is bordered by several rocky islands \u2013 the Iles du Salut (Devil's Island, Royale and Saint-Joseph), the P\u00e8re and M\u00e8re Islands, Malingre Island and R\u00e9mire Island, and the two Conn\u00e9tables\u2014which are all part of French Guiana.\nStatistics.\nArea.\nTotal: 91,000\u00a0km2&lt;br&gt;\nLand: 89,150\u00a0km2&lt;br&gt;\nWater: 1,850\u00a0km2\nLand boundaries.\nTotal: 1,183\u00a0km&lt;br&gt;\nBorder countries: Brazil 673\u00a0km, Suriname 510\u00a0km (disputed)&lt;br&gt;\nCoastline: 378\u00a0km\nMaritime claims.\nExclusive economic zone: \nterritorial sea: .\nLand use.\nArable land: 0%&lt;br&gt;\nOther: 10% (1996 est.)&lt;br&gt;\nIrrigated land: 20\u00a0km2 (1993 est.)&lt;br&gt;\nGeography \u2013 note: mostly an unsettled wilderness.\nNatural resources.\nBauxite, timber, gold (widely scattered), cinnabar, kaolin, fish, shrimp, rice, bananas.\nClimate.\nFrench Guiana's climate is tropical and hot with a K\u00f6ppen climate classification of tropical rainforest (A\"f\") throughout most of the country. Heavy showers, severe thunderstorms, and floodings are frequent, as is intense heat and humidity.\nAlthough French Guiana is very close to the equator, the trade winds which blow almost the year round refresh the coastal region and prevent the formation of great tropical storms. The annual mean temperature on the coast is . There are two principal seasons: \"summer\" from July to December and the \"rainy season\" the rest of the year, broken only by a Short \"March Summer.\"\nTerrain.\nFrench Guiana extends almost 250 miles into the continent and is divided into two natural zones: a small, low, swampy coastal area called the \"Terres Basses,\" varying from ten to thirty miles in width, and a granite peneplain called the \"Terres Hautes,\" worn down by erosion into steps forming a series of low steep hills. Almost the entire country is covered by rain forest and its many large rivers and streams, although their courses are broken by rapids, constitute the only natural means of penetration into the interior. The main rivers, flowing in a general south-north direction, are the Maroni, the Mana, the Iracoubo, the Sinnamary, the Kourou, the Mahury, the Approuague and the Oyapock.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain."}
{"id": "10763", "revid": "28163249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10763", "title": "Demographics of French Guiana", "text": "Population.\nAccording to INSEE the population of French Guiana was 268,700 as of January 1, 2017. The population is very young: 44% are below the age of 20, while only 1.7% are 75 years or older. The age distribution is a reflection of the high fertility rates of French Guiana.\nNationality.\nOn January 1, 2010, 64.5% of the population had French nationality, while 35.5% had a foreign nationality. Of these, Surinamese (13.8% of the total population), Haitians (8.8%) and Brazilians (8.7%) were the largest groups. Smaller groups included people with nationality of Guyana (1.7%), Colombia (1.0%), China (0.5%), the Dominican Republic (0.4%) and Peru (0.2%).\nVital statistics.\nThe total fertility rate in French Guiana has remained high and is today considerably higher than in metropolitan France, and also higher than the average of the French overseas departments. It is largely responsible for the high population growth of French Guiana.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.01.2010) (Provisional) :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2015): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021): \nInfant mortality rate.\nThe infant mortality in French Guiana is higher than in metropolitan France:\nLife expectancy.\nAt birth, life expectancy is 76.2 years for male children, and 82.8 for female (figures for 2011).\nEthnic groups.\nEstimates of the percentages of French Guiana ethnic composition vary, a situation compounded by the large proportion of immigrants.\nCreoles, or Mulattoes (people of mixed African and French ancestry), are the largest ethnic group, though estimates vary as to the exact percentage, depending upon whether the large Haitian community is included as well. Generally the Creole population is judged to be about 60 to 70% of the total population if Haitians (comprising roughly one-third of Creoles) are included, and 30 to 50% without.\nRoughly 41,000 people or 14% of the population of French Guiana is of European ancestry. The vast majority of these are of French heritage, though there are also people of Dutch, British, Spanish and Portuguese ancestry.\nThe main Asian communities are the Chinese (about 3-4%, primarily from Zhejiang province in mainland China and Hong Kong) and Hmong from Laos (1-2%). There are also smaller groups from various Caribbean islands, mainly Saint Lucia as well as Dominica. Other Asian groups include East Indians, Lebanese and Vietnamese.\nThe main groups living in the interior are the Maroons (formerly called \"Bush Negroes\") who are from African descent, and Amerindians. The Maroons, descendants of escaped African slaves, live primarily along the Maroni River. The main Maroon groups are the Saramaka, Ndyuka (both of whom also live in Suriname), and Boni (Aluku). The Maroons are the fastest growing ethnic group, and as of 2018 constitute about one-third of the total population with an estimated population of close to 100,000 people.\nThe main Amerindian groups (estimated population about 10,000) are the Arawak, Carib, Teko (previously called Emerillon), Galibi (now called the Kali\u00f1a), Palikur, Wayampi and Wayana. The estimated population for the beginning of the 17th century was 30,000 people. Until the middle of the 20th century, there was a sharp decline in population to almost 1,200 people in 1961 which was mainly caused by European diseases. Improved health care managed to turn the tide.\nLanguages.\nFrench and French Guianese Creole are the most widely spoken languages. There are also several native languages, including Arawakan (Arawak and Palik\u00far), Cariban (Carib and Wayana), and Tupi-Guarani (Emerillon and Wayampi) languages. Other languages spoken include Hakka Chinese and Javanese.\nThe official language, like for all overseas departments and territories of France, is French.\nReligion.\n Religion in French Guiana (ARDA 2015) \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Catholic Church\n (74.3%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Protestant (9.9%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Christian syncretic\n (3.5%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Chinese folk religion\n (2.9%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 Hinduism\n (1.6%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Other religion (4.4%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 No religion\n (3.4%)\nThe dominant religion of French Guiana is Roman Catholicism; some of the Maroons and Amerindian people maintain their own religions, however large tribes like the Kalina, Ndyuka have been Christianized.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10764", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10764", "title": "Politics of French Guiana", "text": "Overview of the politics of French Guiana\nFrench Guiana is not a separate territory but is both an overseas r\u00e9gion and overseas department of France, with the same government institutions as areas on the French mainland. The administrative center is Cayenne.\nThe President of France appoints a prefect (resident at the prefecture building in Cayenne) as his representative to head the local government of French Guiana. The Assembly of French Guiana replaced the General Council and the Regional Council in 2016.\nAs of 2020 the prefect is Thierry Queffelec. The President of the Guianese Assembly since 2021 is Gabriel Serville.\nKey issues and players.\nPolitics in French Guiana are dominated by the Guianese Socialist Party, which has a close association with the Socialist Party in mainland France.\nA chronic issue affecting French Guiana is the influx of illegal immigrants and clandestine gold prospectors from Brazil and Suriname. The border between the department and Suriname is formed by the Maroni River, which flows through rain forest and is difficult for the Gendarmerie and the French Foreign Legion to patrol.\nThere have been several phases launched by the French government to combat illegal gold mining in French Guiana, beginning with Operation Anaconda beginning in 2003, followed by Operation Harpie in 2008, 2009 and Operation Harpie Reinforce in 2010. Colonel Fran\u00e7ois M\u00fcller, the commander of French Guiana's gendarme, believes these operations have been successful. However, after each operation ends, Brazilian miners, known as garimpeiros, return. Soon after Operation Harpie Reinforce began, an altercation took place between French authorities and Brazilian miners. On March 12, 2010, a team of French soldiers and border police were attacked while returning from a successful operation, during which \"the soldiers had arrested 15 miners, confiscated three boats, and seized 617 grams of gold... currently worth about $22,317\". Garimpeiros returned to retrieve the lost loot and colleagues. \"The soldiers fired warning shots and rubber \"flash balls\" but the miners managed to retake one of their boats and about 500\u00a0grammes of gold. \"The violent reaction by the garimpeiros can be explained by the exceptional take of 617 grammes of gold, about 20 percent of the quantity seized in 2009 during the battle against illegal mining\", said Phillipe Duporge, the director of French Guiana's border police, at a press conference the next day.\"\nGeneral Council of French Guiana.\nThe General Council of French Guiana is the deliberative executive assembly and is composed of 19 members who are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms. It is led by the President of the General Council of French Guiana.\nRegional Council of Guiana.\nThe Regional Council of French Guiana is the elected assembly or regional council and is composed of 31 members who are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms.\nParliamentary representation.\nGuiana elects two senators to the French Senate. The first woman to be elected to the Senate was Marie-Laure Phin\u00e9ra-Horth in 2020.\nCurrent deputies.\nGuiana also elects two deputies to the French National Assembly. The last elections were held in June 2007. The Walwari has one deputy, Christiane Taubira, and the PSG has one deputy, Chantal Berthelot, who defeated long-time UMP incumbent L\u00e9on Bertrand.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10765", "revid": "5286041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10765", "title": "Economy of French Guiana", "text": "The economy of French Guiana is tied closely to that of mainland France through subsidies and imports. Besides the French space center at Kourou, fishing and forestry are the most important economic activities in French Guiana. The large reserves of tropical hardwoods, not fully exploited, support an expanding sawmill industry which provides saw logs for export. Cultivation of crops is limited to the coastal area, where the population is largely concentrated; rice and manioc are the major crops. French Guiana is heavily dependent on imports of food and energy. Unemployment is a serious problem, particularly among younger workers.\nBudget:\n\"revenues:\"\n$135,5\u00a0million\n\"expenditures:\"\n$135,5\u00a0million, including capital expenditures of $105\u00a0million (1996)\nElectricity - production:\n465,2 GWh (2003)\nElectricity - production by source:\n\"fossil fuel:\"\n100%\n\"hydro:\"\n0%\n\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n\"other:\"\n0% (1998)\nElectricity - consumption:\n432,6 GWh (2003)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (2003)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (2003)\nA combined power plant with 55 MW solar, 3 MW hydrogen fuel cell, 20MW/38MWh battery and 16 MW hydrogen electrolyser with 88MWh storage began construction in 2021.\nAgriculture - products:\nrice, manioc (tapioca), sugar, cocoa, vegetables, bananas; cattle, pigs, poultry\nCurrency:\nEuro\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The economic accounts of Guyana in 2006: first results\" (PDF). Retrieved 2008-01-14.\nSee also.\n Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10766", "revid": "60840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10766", "title": "Telecommunications in French Guiana", "text": "Telephones \u2013 main lines in use:\n47,000 (1995)\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular:\nNA\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\nfair open wire and microwave radio relay system\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\nsatellite earth station \u2013 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)\nRadio stations:\nAM 2, FM 14 (including 6 repeaters), shortwave 6 (including 5 repeaters) (1998)\nRadios:\n104,000 (1997)\nTelevision stations:\n3 (plus eight low-power repeaters) (1997)\nTelevisions:\n30,000 (1997)\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\nNA\nCountry code (Top-level domain): GF"}
{"id": "10767", "revid": "210954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10767", "title": "Transport in French Guiana", "text": "Overview of the transport in French Guiana\nTransport in French Guiana consists of transport by road, boat, bus, and airplane. There is a railway line within the Guiana Space Centre to transport spacecraft. The road network is mainly concentrated in the coastal region. The interior of Guiana is accessed by plane or boat. There is one main airport, however there are several smaller airstrips in the interior.\nHighways.\nAs of 2018, there are 440 kilometres of national roads, 408 kilometres of departmental road, and 1,311 kilometres of municipal roads. There is no motorway.\nFollowing a treaty between France and Brazil signed in July 2005, the Oyapock River Bridge over the Oyapock River was built and completed in 2011, becoming the first land crossing ever between French Guiana and the rest of the world (there is a ferry crossing to Albina, Suriname). The bridge was officially opened on 18 March 2017, however the border post introduction on the Brazilian caused additional delays. As of 2020, it possible to drive uninterrupted from Cayenne to Macap\u00e1, the capital of the state of Amap\u00e1 in Brazil.\nRailways.\nA short railway is used within the Guiana Space Centre (this short railway is for transporting spacecraft inside the base to the launch pad, not for passenger use). The railway is double tracked and used by unpowered rail cars (tanker cars, flatcars and launch table transporter platforms fitted with bogies) and are towed by rubber wheeled vehicles with railway wheels or bogies to ride along the rail tracks.\nFrom 1880s to sometime after 1926 a steam narrow gauge railway was used for gold mines in Saint-Elie and two other lines were partially built and never used.\nTwo prison railways were built in the 1890s. One line connected Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni to Saint-Jean-du-Maroni. Another line went to Charvein. The railway lines were abandoned after prisons closed and disappeared sometime after 1946.\nThere are no other railways in French Guiana and none have existed for revenue passenger service, and there are no connections to neighbouring countries.\nAirports.\nThe main international airport of French Guiana is Cayenne \u2013 F\u00e9lix Ebou\u00e9 Airport. The secondary international airport is the Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni Airport.\nIn October 2020, the Camopi Airport was upgraded for regular passenger transport.\nThere are six smaller restricted airports:\nPublic transport.\nThe CACL (Communaut\u00e9 d\u2019Agglom\u00e9ration du Centre Littoral) provides bus service for the urban area of Cayenne and its suburbs. As of 2021, there are six urban bus lines. School transport is also handled by CACL.\nSince early 2010, an agreement was established between the General Council, responsible for organizing transport between the towns, and Taxi Co. The new public service became known as TIG (Long Distance Transport of Guyana). \nAs of 2021, TIG provides nine bus lines to towns outside the urban area of Cayenne.\nHarbours.\nThe main harbour is Degrad des Cannes. The harbour was built in 1972, and handles all international cargo from and to French Guiana. In 2007, the port handled about 700,000 tonnes of cargo. The port also includes as a marina.\nOther harbours include Cayenne, Kourou, Larivot in Matoury, and Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10768", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10768", "title": "Military of French Guiana", "text": ""}
{"id": "10770", "revid": "39761822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10770", "title": "Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut", "text": "French film director (1932\u20131984)\nFran\u00e7ois Roland Truffaut ( , ; ]; 6 February 1932 \u2013 21 October 1984) was a French film director, screenwriter, producer, actor, and film critic. He is widely regarded as one of the founders of the French New Wave. After a career of more than 25 years, he remains an icon of the French film industry. \nTruffaut's film \"The 400 Blows\" (1959) is a defining film of the French New Wave movement, and has four sequels, \"Antoine et Colette\" (1962), \"Stolen Kisses\" (1968), \"Bed and Board\" (1970), and \"Love on the Run\" (1979). Truffaut's 1973 film \"Day for Night\" earned him critical acclaim and several awards, including the BAFTA Award for Best Film and the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. His other notable films include \"Shoot the Piano Player\" (1960), \"Jules and Jim\" (1962), \"The Soft Skin\" (1964), \"The Wild Child\" (1970), \"Two English Girls\" (1971), \"The Last Metro\" (1980), and \"The Woman Next Door\" (1981). \nTruffaut also wrote the notable book \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\" (1966), which detailed his interviews with the film director Alfred Hitchcock during the 1960s.\nEarly life.\nTruffaut was born in Paris on 6 February 1932. His mother was Janine de Montferrand. His mother's future husband, Roland Truffaut, accepted him as an adopted son and gave him his surname. He was passed around to live with various nannies and his grandmother for a number of years. His grandmother instilled in him her love of books and music. He lived with her until her death, when Truffaut was eight years old. It was only after her death that he lived with his parents. Truffaut's biological father's identity is unknown, but a private detective agency in 1968 revealed that its inquiry into the matter led to a Roland Levy, a Jewish dentist from Bayonne. Truffaut's mother's family disputed the finding but Truffaut believed and embraced it.\nTruffaut often stayed with friends and tried to be out of the house as much as possible. He knew Robert Lachenay from childhood, and they were lifelong best friends. Lachenay was the inspiration for the character Ren\u00e9 Bigey in \"The 400 Blows\" and worked as an assistant on some of Truffaut's films. Cinema offered Truffaut the greatest escape from an unsatisfying home life. He was eight years old when he saw his first movie, Abel Gance's \"Paradis Perdu\" (\"Paradise Lost\", 1939), beginning his obsession. He frequently skipped school and sneaked into theaters because he lacked the money for admission. After being expelled from several schools, at age 14 he decided to become self-taught. Two of his academic goals were to watch three movies a day and read three books a week.\nTruffaut frequented Henri Langlois's Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise, where he was exposed to countless foreign films, becoming familiar with American cinema and directors such as John Ford, Howard Hawks and Nicholas Ray, as well as those of British director Alfred Hitchcock.\nCareer.\nAndr\u00e9 Bazin.\nAfter starting his own film club in 1948, Truffaut met Andr\u00e9 Bazin, who had a great effect on his professional and personal life. Bazin was a critic and the head of another film society at the time. He became a personal friend of Truffaut's and helped him out of various financial and criminal situations during his formative years.\nTruffaut joined the French Army in 1950, aged 18, but spent the next two years trying to escape. He was arrested for attempting to desert the army and incarcerated in military prison. Bazin used his political contacts to get Truffaut released and set him up with a job at his new film magazine, \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\".\n\"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\".\nOver the next few years, Truffaut became a critic (and later editor) at \"Cahiers\", where he became notorious for his brutal, unforgiving reviews. He was called \"The Gravedigger of French Cinema\" and was the only French critic not invited to the 1958 Cannes Film Festival. He supported Bazin in developing one of the most influential theories of cinema, the auteur theory.\nIn 1954, Truffaut wrote an article in \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\", \"Une Certaine Tendance du Cin\u00e9ma Fran\u00e7ais\" (\"A Certain Trend of French Cinema\"), in which he attacked the state of French films, lambasting certain screenwriters and producers, and listing eight directors he considered incapable of devising the kinds of \"vile\" and \"grotesque\" characters and storylines he called characteristic of the mainstream French film industry: Jean Renoir, Robert Bresson, Jean Cocteau, Jacques Becker, Abel Gance, Max Ophuls, Jacques Tati and Roger Leenhardt. The article caused a storm of controversy, and landed Truffaut an offer to write for the nationally circulated, more widely read cultural weekly \"Arts-Lettres-Spectacles\". Truffaut wrote more than 500 film articles for that publication over the next four years.\nTruffaut later devised the auteur theory, according to which the director was the \"author\" of his work and great directors such as Renoir or Hitchcock have distinct styles and themes that permeate their films. Although his theory was not widely accepted then, it gained some support in the 1960s from American critic Andrew Sarris. In 1967, Truffaut published his book-length interview of Hitchcock, \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\" (New York: Simon and Schuster).\nShort films.\nAfter having been a critic, Truffaut decided to make films. He began with the short film \"Une Visite\" (1955) and followed it with \"Les Mistons\" (1957).\n\"The 400 Blows\".\nAfter seeing Orson Welles's \"Touch of Evil\" at the Expo 58, Truffaut made his feature film directorial debut with \"The 400 Blows\" (1959), which received considerable critical and commercial acclaim. He won the Best Director award at the 1959 Cannes Film Festival. The film follows the character of Antoine Doinel through his perilous misadventures in school, an unhappy home life and later reform school. The film is highly autobiographical. Both Truffaut and Doinel were only children of loveless marriages; they both committed petty crimes of theft and truancy from the military. Truffaut cast Jean-Pierre L\u00e9aud as Doinel. L\u00e9aud was seen as an ordinary boy of 14 who auditioned for the role after seeing a flyer, but interviews after the film's release (one is included on the Criterion DVD of the film) reveal L\u00e9aud's natural sophistication and an instinctive understanding of acting for the camera. L\u00e9aud and Truffaut collaborated on several films over the years. Their most noteworthy collaboration was the continuation of Doinel's story in a series of films called \"The Antoine Doinel Cycle\".\nThe primary focus of \"The 400 Blows\" is Doinel's life. The film follows him through his troubled adolescence. He is caught in between an unstable parental relationship and an isolated youth. From birth Truffaut was thrown into a troublesome situation. As he was born out of wedlock, his birth had to remain a secret because of the stigma of illegitimacy. He was registered as \"a child born to an unknown father\" in hospital records and looked after by a nurse for an extended period of time. His mother eventually married and her husband gave Fran\u00e7ois his surname, Truffaut.\nAlthough he was legally accepted as a legitimate child, his parents did not accept him. The Truffauts had another child, who died shortly after birth. This experience saddened them greatly and as a result they despised Fran\u00e7ois because of the regret he represented (Knopf 4). He was an outcast from his earliest years, dismissed as an unwanted child. Fran\u00e7ois was sent to live with his grandparents. When his grandmother died, his parents took him in, much to his mother's dismay. His experiences with his mother were harsh. He recalled being treated badly by her but found comfort in his father's laughter and spirit. Fran\u00e7ois had a very depressing childhood after moving in with his parents. They left him alone when they took vacations. He even recalled being alone during Christmas. Being left alone forced Fran\u00e7ois into independence, often doing various tasks around the house to improve it, such as painting or changing the electric outlets. Sadly, these kind gestures often resulted in catastrophic events, causing him to get scolded by his mother. His father mostly laughed them off.\n\"The 400 Blows\" marked the beginning of the French New Wave movement, which gave directors such as Jean-Luc Godard, Claude Chabrol and Jacques Rivette a wider audience. The New Wave dealt with a self-conscious rejection of traditional cinema structure. This was a topic on which Truffaut had been writing for years.\n\"Shoot the Piano Player\".\nFollowing the success of \"The 400 Blows\", Truffaut featured disjunctive editing and seemingly random voiceovers in his next film, \"Shoot the Piano Player\" (1960), starring Charles Aznavour. Truffaut has said that in the middle of filming, he realized that he hated gangsters. But since gangsters were a main part of the story, he toned up the comical aspect of the characters and made the movie more to his liking.\nEven though \"Shoot the Piano Player\" was much appreciated by critics, it performed poorly at the box office. While the film focused on two of the French New Wave's favourite elements, American film noir and themselves, Truffaut never again experimented as heavily.\n\"Jules and Jim\" and \"The Soft Skin\".\nIn 1962, Truffaut directed his third movie, \"Jules and Jim\", a romantic drama starring Jeanne Moreau. The film was very popular and highly influential.\nIn 1963, Truffaut was approached to direct the American film \"Bonnie and Clyde\", with a treatment written by \"Esquire\" journalists David Newman and Robert Benton intended to introduce the French New Wave to Hollywood. Although he was interested enough to help in script development, Truffaut ultimately declined, but not before interesting Jean-Luc Godard and American actor and would-be producer Warren Beatty, who proceeded with the film with director Arthur Penn.\nThe fourth movie Truffaut directed was \"The Soft Skin\" (1964). It was not acclaimed on its release.\n\"Fahrenheit 451\".\nTruffaut's first non-French film was a 1966 adaptation of Ray Bradbury's classic science fiction novel \"Fahrenheit 451\", showcasing Truffaut's love of books. His only English-speaking film, made on location in England, was a great challenge for Truffaut, because he barely spoke English himself. Shot by cinematographer Nicolas Roeg, this was Truffaut's first film in colour. The larger-scale production was difficult for Truffaut, who had worked only with small crews and budgets. The shoot was also strained by a conflict with lead actor Oscar Werner, who was unhappy with his character and stormed off set, leaving Truffaut to shoot scenes using a body double shot from behind. The film was a commercial failure, and Truffaut never worked outside France again. The film's cult standing has steadily grown, although some critics remain dubious of it as an adaptation. A 2014 consideration of the film by Charles Silver praises it.\nThrillers and \"Stolen Kisses\".\n\"Stolen Kisses\" (1968) was a continuation of the Antoine Doinel Cycle starring Claude Jade as Antoine's fianc\u00e9e and later wife Christine Darbon. During its filming Truffaut fell in love with Jade and was briefly engaged to her. It was a big hit on the international art circuit. A short time later Jade made her Hollywood debut in Hitchcock's \"Topaz\".\nTruffaut worked on projects with varied subjects. \"The Bride Wore Black\" (1968), a brutal tale of revenge, is a stylish homage to the films of Alfred Hitchcock (once again starring Moreau). \"Mississippi Mermaid\" (1969), with Catherine Deneuve and Jean-Paul Belmondo, is an identity-bending romantic thriller. Both films are based on novels by Cornell Woolrich.\n\"The Wild Child\" (1970) included Truffaut's acting debut in the lead role of 18th-century physician Jean Marc Gaspard Itard.\nDoinel marries Christine.\n\"Bed and Board\" (1970) was another Antoine Doinel film, also with Jade, now L\u00e9aud's on-screen-wife.\n\"Two English Girls\" (1971) is the female reflection of the same love story as \"Jules et Jim\". It is based on a story by Henri-Pierre Roch\u00e9, who wrote \"Jules and Jim\", about a man who falls equally in love with two sisters, and their love affair over a period of years.\n\"Such a Gorgeous Kid Like Me\" (1972) was a screwball comedy that was not well received.\n\"Day for Night\".\n\"Day for Night\" won Truffaut a Best Foreign Film Oscar. The film is probably his most reflective work. It is the story of a film crew trying to finish a film while dealing with the personal and professional problems that accompany making a movie. Truffaut plays the director of the fictional film being made. This film features scenes from his previous films. It is considered his best film since his earliest work. \"Time\" magazine placed it on its list of 100 Best Films of the Century (along with \"The 400 Blows\").\nIn 1975, Truffaut gained more notoriety with \"The Story of Ad\u00e8le H.\"; Isabelle Adjani in the title role earned a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Actress. His 1976 film \"Small Change\" was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film.\nThe late 1970s and the last Doinel.\n\"The Man Who Loved Women\" (1977), a romantic drama, was a minor hit.\nTruffaut also appeared in Steven Spielberg's 1977 \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" as scientist Claude Lacombe.\n\"The Green Room\" (1978) starred Truffaut in the lead. It was a box-office flop, so he made \"Love on the Run\" (1979) starring L\u00e9aud and Jade as the final movie of the Doinel Cycle.\n\"The Last Metro\".\nOne of Truffaut's final films gave him an international revival. \"The Last Metro\" (1980) garnered 12 C\u00e9sar Award nominations and 10 wins, including Best Director.\nFinal films and legacy.\nTruffaut's last film was shot in black and white, giving his career a sense of having bookends. \"Confidentially Yours\" is Truffaut's tribute to his favourite director, Hitchcock. It deals with numerous Hitchcockian themes, such as private guilt versus public innocence, a woman investigating a murder, and anonymous locations.\nA keen reader, Truffaut adapted many literary works, including two novels by Henri-Pierre Roch\u00e9, Ray Bradbury's \"Fahrenheit 451\", Henry James's \"The Altar of the Dead\", filmed as \"The Green Room\", and several American detective novels.\nTruffaut's other films were from original screenplays, often co-written by the screenwriters Suzanne Schiffman or Jean Gruault. They featured diverse subjects, the sombre \"The Story of Ad\u00e8le H.\" inspired by the life of the daughter of Victor Hugo, with Isabelle Adjani; \"Day for Night\", shot at the Victorine Studios, depicting the ups and downs of filmmaking; and \"The Last Metro\", set during the German occupation of France during World War II, a film rewarded by ten C\u00e9sar Awards.\nKnown as a lifelong cinephile, Truffaut once (according to the 1993 documentary film \"\") threw a hitchhiker out of his car after learning that he didn't like films.\nMany filmmakers admire Truffaut, and tributes to his work have appeared in films such as \"Almost Famous\", \"Face\" and \"The Diving Bell and the Butterfly\", as well as novelist Haruki Murakami's \"Kafka on the Shore\". In conversation with Michael Ondaatje, film editor Walter Murch mentions the influence Truffaut had on him as a young man, saying he was \"electrified\" by the freeze-frame at the end of \"The 400 Blows\", and that Godard's \"Breathless\" and Truffaut's \"Shoot the Piano Player\" reinforced the idea that he could make films.\nRoger Ebert included \"The 400 Blows\" in his canon of Great Movies, and concludes: \"one of his most curious, haunting films is \"The Green Room\" (1978), based on the Henry James story 'The Altar of the Dead,' about a man and a woman who share a passion for remembering their dead loved ones. Jonathan Rosenbaum, who thinks \"The Green Room\" may be Truffaut's best film, told me he thinks of it as the director's homage to the auteur theory. That theory, created by Bazin and his disciples (Truffaut, Godard, Resnais, Chabrol, Rohmer, Malle), declared that the director was the true author of a film\u2014not the studio, the screenwriter, the star, the genre. If the figures in the green room stand for the great directors of the past, perhaps there is a shrine there now to Truffaut. One likes to think of the ghost of Antoine Doinel lighting a candle before it.\" \nCommentary of other filmmakers.\nTruffaut expressed his admiration for filmmakers such as Luis Bu\u00f1uel, Ingmar Bergman, Robert Bresson, Roberto Rossellini, and Alfred Hitchcock. He wrote \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\", a book about Hitchcock, based on a lengthy series of interviews.\nOf Jean Renoir, he said: \"I think Renoir is the only filmmaker who's practically infallible, who has never made a mistake on film. And I think if he never made mistakes, it's because he always found solutions based on simplicity\u2014human solutions. He's one film director who never pretended. He never tried to have a style, and if you know his work\u2014which is very comprehensive, since he dealt with all sorts of subjects\u2014when you get stuck, especially as a young filmmaker, you can think of how Renoir would have handled the situation, and you generally find a solution\".\nTruffaut called German filmmaker Werner Herzog \"the most important film director alive.\"\nTruffaut and Jean-Luc Godard, his colleague from \"Les Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\", worked together closely during their start as film directors although they had different working methods. Tensions came to the surface after May 68: Godard wanted a more political, specifically Marxist cinema, Truffaut was critical of creating films for primarily political purposes. In 1973, Godard wrote Truffaut a lengthy and raucous private letter peppered with accusations and insinuations, several times stating that as a filmmaker \"you're a liar\" and that his latest film (\"Day for Night\") had been unsatisfying, lying and evasive: \"You're a liar, because the scene between you and Jacqueline Bisset last week at \"Francis\" [a Paris restaurant] isn't included in your movie, and one also can't help wondering why the director is the only guy who isn't sleeping around in \"Day for Night\"\" (Truffaut directed the film, wrote it and played the director on the film set in the film). Godard also implied that Truffaut had gone commercial and easy.\nTruffaut replied with an angry 20-page letter in which he accused Godard of being a radical-chic hypocrite, a man who believed everyone to be \"equal\" in theory only. \"The Ursula Andress of militancy\u2014like Brando\u2014a piece of shit on a pedestal.\" Godard later tried to reconcile with Truffaut, but they never spoke to or saw each other again. After Truffaut's death, Godard wrote the introduction to a generous selection of his correspondence, and included his own 1973 letter. He also offered a long tribute in his film \"Histoire(s) du cin\u00e9ma\".\nPersonal life.\nTruffaut was married to Madeleine Morgenstern from 1957 to 1965, and they had two daughters, Laura (born 1959) and Eva (born 1961). Madeleine was the daughter of Ignace Morgenstern, managing director of one of France's largest film distribution companies, Cocinor, and was largely responsible for securing funding for Truffaut's first films.\nIn 1968 Truffaut was engaged to actress Claude Jade (\"Stolen Kisses\", \"Bed and Board\", \"Love on the Run\"); he and Fanny Ardant (\"The Woman Next Door\", \"Confidentially Yours\") lived together from 1981 to 1984 and had a daughter, Jos\u00e9phine Truffaut (born 28 September 1983).\nTruffaut was an atheist, but had great respect for the Catholic Church and requested a Requiem Mass for his funeral.\nDeath.\nIn July 1983, following his first stroke and being diagnosed with a brain tumour, Truffaut rented France Gall's and Michel Berger's house outside Honfleur, Normandy. He was expected to attend his friend Milo\u0161 Forman's \"Amadeus\" premiere when he died on 21 October 1984, aged 52, at the American Hospital of Paris in Neuilly-sur-Seine in France.\nAt the time of his death, he had numerous films in preparation. He had intended to make 30 films and then retire to write books for the remainder of his life. He was five films short of that aim. He is buried in Montmartre Cemetery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10772", "revid": "17218984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10772", "title": "Fair use", "text": "Legal doctrine on copyright\nFair use is a doctrine in United States law that permits limited use of copyrighted material without having to first acquire permission from the copyright holder. Fair use is one of the limitations to copyright intended to balance the interests of copyright holders with the public interest in the wider distribution and use of creative works by allowing as a defense to copyright infringement claims certain limited uses that might otherwise be considered infringement. Unlike \"fair dealing\" rights that exist in most countries with a British legal history, the fair use right is a general exception that applies to all different kinds of uses with all types of works and turns on a flexible proportionality test that examines the purpose of the use, the amount used, and the impact on the market of the original work.\nThe doctrine of \"fair use\" originated in common law during the 18th and 19th centuries as a way of preventing copyright law from being too rigidly applied and \"stifling the very creativity which [copyright] law is designed to foster.\" Though originally a common law doctrine, it was enshrined in statutory law when the U.S. Congress passed the Copyright Act of 1976. The U.S. Supreme Court has issued several major decisions clarifying and reaffirming the fair use doctrine since the 1980s, most recently in the 2021 decision \"Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc.\"\nHistory.\nThe 1710 Statute of Anne, an act of the Parliament of Great Britain, created copyright law to replace a system of private ordering enforced by the Stationers' Company. The Statute of Anne did not provide for legal unauthorized use of material protected by copyright. In \"Gyles v Wilcox\", the Court of Chancery established the doctrine of \"fair abridgement\", which permitted unauthorized abridgement of copyrighted works under certain circumstances. Over time, this doctrine evolved into the modern concepts of fair use and fair dealing. Fair use was a common-law doctrine in the U.S. until it was incorporated into the Copyright Act of 1976, \u00a0\u00a7\u00a0107.\nThe term \"fair use\" originated in the United States. Although related, the limitations and exceptions to copyright for teaching and library archiving in the U.S. are located in a different section of the statute. A similar-sounding principle, fair dealing, exists in some other common law jurisdictions but in fact it is more similar in principle to the enumerated exceptions found under civil law systems. Civil law jurisdictions have other limitations and exceptions to copyright.\nIn response to perceived over-expansion of copyrights, several electronic civil liberties and free expression organizations began in the 1990s to add fair use cases to their dockets and concerns. These include the Electronic Frontier Foundation (\"EFF\"), the American Civil Liberties Union, the National Coalition Against Censorship, the American Library Association, numerous clinical programs at law schools, and others. The \"Chilling Effects\" archive was established in 2002 as a coalition of several law school clinics and the EFF to document the use of cease and desist letters. In 2006 Stanford University began an initiative called \"The Fair Use Project\" (FUP) to help artists, particularly filmmakers, fight lawsuits brought against them by large corporations.\nU.S. fair use factors.\nExamples of fair use in United States copyright law include commentary, search engines, criticism, parody, news reporting, research, and scholarship. Fair use provides for the legal, unlicensed citation or incorporation of copyrighted material in another author's work under a four-factor test.\nThe U.S. Supreme Court has traditionally characterized fair use as an affirmative defense, but in \"Lenz v. Universal Music Corp.\" (2015) (the \"dancing baby\" case), the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit concluded that fair use was not merely a defense to an infringement claim, but was an expressly authorized right, and an exception to the exclusive rights granted to the author of a creative work by copyright law: \"Fair use is therefore distinct from affirmative defenses where a use infringes a copyright, but there is no liability due to a valid excuse, e.g., misuse of a copyright.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe four factors of analysis for fair use set forth above derive from the opinion of Joseph Story in \"Folsom v. Marsh\", in which the defendant had copied 353 pages from the plaintiff's 12-volume biography of George Washington in order to produce a separate two-volume work of his own. The court rejected the defendant's fair use defense with the following explanation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[A] reviewer may fairly cite largely from the original work, if his design be really and truly to use the passages for the purposes of fair and reasonable criticism. On the other hand, it is as clear, that if he thus cites the most important parts of the work, with a view, not to criticize, but to supersede the use of the original work, and substitute the review for it, such a use will be deemed in law a piracy ...\nIn short, we must often ... look to the nature and objects of the selections made, the quantity and value of the materials used, and the degree in which the use may prejudice the sale, or diminish the profits, or supersede the objects, of the original work.\nThe statutory fair use factors quoted above come from the Copyright Act of 1976, which is codified at \u00a0\u00a7\u00a0107. They were intended by Congress to restate, but not replace, the prior judge-made law. As Judge Pierre N. Leval has written, the statute does not \"define or explain [fair use's] contours or objectives.\" While it \"leav[es] open the possibility that other factors may bear on the question, the statute identifies none.\" That is, courts are entitled to consider other factors in addition to the four statutory factors.\n1. Purpose and character of the use.\nThe first factor is \"the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes.\" To justify the use as fair, one must demonstrate how it either advances knowledge or the progress of the arts through the addition of something new.\nIn the 1841 copyright case \"Folsom v. Marsh\", Justice Joseph Story wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA key consideration in later fair use cases is the extent to which the use is \"transformative\". In the 1994 decision \"Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc\", the U.S. Supreme Court held that when the purpose of the use is transformative, this makes the first factor more likely to favor fair use. Before the \"Campbell\" decision, federal Judge Pierre Leval argued that transformativeness is central to the fair use analysis in his 1990 article, Toward a Fair Use Standard. \"Blanch v. Koons\" is another example of a fair use case that focused on transformativeness. In 2006, Jeff Koons used a photograph taken by commercial photographer Andrea Blanch in a collage painting. Koons appropriated a central portion of an advertisement she had been commissioned to shoot for a magazine. Koons prevailed in part because his use was found transformative under the first fair use factor.\nThe \"Campbell\" case also addressed the subfactor mentioned in the quotation above, \"whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes.\" In an earlier case, \"Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc.\", the Supreme Court had stated that \"every commercial use of copyrighted material is presumptively ... unfair.\" In \"Campbell\", the court clarified that this is not a \"hard evidentiary presumption\" and that even the tendency that commercial purpose will \"weigh against a finding of fair use ... will vary with the context.\" The \"Campbell\" court held that hip-hop group 2 Live Crew's parody of the song \"Oh, Pretty Woman\" was fair use, even though the parody was sold for profit. Thus, having a commercial purpose does not preclude a use from being found fair, even though it makes it less likely.\nLikewise, the noncommercial purpose of a use makes it more likely to be found a fair use, but it does not make it a fair use automatically. For instance, in \"L.A. Times v. Free Republic\", the court found that the noncommercial use of \"Los Angeles Times\" content by the Free Republic website was not fair use, since it allowed the public to obtain material at no cost that they would otherwise pay for. Richard Story similarly ruled in \"Code Revision Commission and State of Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc.\" that despite the fact that it is a non-profit and didn't sell the work, the service profited from its unauthorized publication of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated because of \"the attention, recognition, and contributions\" it received in association with the work.\nAnother factor is whether the use fulfills any of the preamble purposes, also mentioned in the legislation above, as these have been interpreted as \"illustrative\" of transformative use.\nIn determining that Prince's appropriation art could constitute fair use and that many of his works were transformative fair uses of Cariou's photographs, the Second Circuit in \"Cariou v. Prince\", 714 F.3d 694 (2d. Cir. 2013) shed light on the lens which transformative use is determined from. \"What is critical is how the work in question appears to the reasonable observer, not simply what an artist might say about a particular piece or body of work.\" Yet, the district court based its conclusion that Prince's work was not transformative in large part on Prince's deposition testimony that he \"do[es]n't really have a message,\" and that he was not \"trying to create anything with a new meaning or a new message.\" However, the artist's subjective message \"is not dispositive.\" Instead, how the artworks are \"reasonably be perceived\" is the focus of the transformative use inquiry.\nThe transformativeness inquiry is a deceptively simple test to determine whether a new work has a different purpose and character from an original work. However, courts have not been consistent in deciding whether something is transformative. For instance, in Seltzer v. Green Day, Inc., 725 F.3d 1170 (9th Cir. 2013), the court found that Green Day's use of Seltzer's copyrighted Scream Icon was transformative. The court held that Green Day's modifications to the original Scream Icon conveyed new information and aesthetics from the original piece.\nConversely, the Second Circuit came to the opposite conclusion in a similar situation in Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc. v. Goldsmith, 11 F.4th 26 (2d. Cir. 2021). In that case, the Warhol Foundation sought a declaratory judgment that Warhol's use of one of Goldsmith's celebrity photographs was fair use. The court held that Warhol's use was not transformative because Warhol merely imposed his own style on Goldsmith's photograph and retained the photograph's essential elements.\n2. Nature of the copyrighted work.\nAlthough the Supreme Court has ruled that the availability of copyright protection should not depend on the artistic quality or merit of a work, fair use analyses consider certain aspects of the work to be relevant, such as whether it is fictional or non-fictional.\nTo prevent the private ownership of work that rightfully belongs in the public domain, facts and ideas are not protected by copyright\u2014only their particular expression or fixation merits such protection. On the other hand, the social usefulness of freely available information can weigh against the appropriateness of copyright for certain fixations. The Zapruder film of the assassination of President Kennedy, for example, was purchased and copyrighted by \"Time\" magazine. Yet its copyright was not upheld, in the name of the public interest, when \"Time\" tried to enjoin the reproduction of stills from the film in a history book on the subject in \"Time Inc v. Bernard Geis Associates\".\nIn the decisions of the Second Circuit in \"Salinger v. Random House\" and in \"New Era Publications Int'l v. Henry Holt &amp; Co\", the aspect of whether the copied work has been previously published was considered crucial, assuming the right of the original author to control the circumstances of the publication of his work or preference not to publish at all. However, Judge Pierre N. Leval views this importation of certain aspects of France's \"droit moral d'artiste\" (moral rights of the artist) into American copyright law as \"bizarre and contradictory\" because it sometimes grants greater protection to works that were created for private purposes that have little to do with the public goals of copyright law, than to those works that copyright was initially conceived to protect. This is not to claim that unpublished works, or, more specifically, works not intended for publication, do not deserve legal protection, but that any such protection should come from laws about privacy, rather than laws about copyright. The statutory fair use provision was amended in response to these concerns by adding a final sentence: \"The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the above factors.\"\n3. Amount and substantiality.\nThe third factor assesses the amount and substantiality of the copyrighted work that has been used. In general, the less that is used in relation to the whole, the more likely the use will be considered fair.\nUsing most or all of a work does not bar a finding of fair use. It simply makes the third factor less favorable to the defendant. For instance, in \"Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc.\" copying entire television programs for private viewing was upheld as fair use, at least when the copying is done for the purposes of time-shifting. In \"Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corporation\", the Ninth Circuit held that copying an entire photo to use as a thumbnail in online search results did not even weigh against fair use, \"if the secondary user only copies as much as is necessary for his or her intended use\".\nHowever, even the use of a small percentage of a work can make the third factor unfavorable to the defendant, because the \"substantiality\" of the portion used is considered in addition to the amount used. For instance, in \"Harper &amp; Row v. Nation Enterprises\", the U.S. Supreme Court held that a news article's quotation of fewer than 400 words from President Ford's 200,000-word memoir was sufficient to make the third fair use factor weigh against the defendants, because the portion taken was the \"heart of the work\". This use was ultimately found not to be fair.\n4. Effect upon work's value.\nThe fourth factor measures the effect that the allegedly infringing use has had on the copyright owner's ability to exploit his original work. The court not only investigates whether the defendant's specific use of the work has significantly harmed the copyright owner's market, but also whether such uses in general, if widespread, would harm the potential market of the original. The burden of proof here rests on the copyright owner, who must demonstrate the impact of the infringement on commercial use of the work.\nFor example, in \"Sony Corp v. Universal City Studios\", the copyright owner, Universal, failed to provide any empirical evidence that the use of Betamax had either reduced their viewership or negatively impacted their business. In \"Harper &amp; Row,\" the case regarding President Ford's memoirs, the Supreme Court labeled the fourth factor \"the single most important element of fair use\" and it has enjoyed some level of primacy in fair use analyses ever since. Yet the Supreme Court's more recent announcement in \"Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc\" that \"all [four factors] are to be explored, and the results weighed together, in light of the purposes of copyright\" has helped modulate this emphasis in interpretation.\nIn evaluating the fourth factor, courts often consider two kinds of harm to the potential market for the original work.\nCourts recognize that certain kinds of market harm do not negate fair use, such as when a parody or negative review impairs the market of the original work. Copyright considerations may not shield a work against adverse criticism.\nAdditional factors.\nAs explained by Judge Leval, courts are permitted to include additional factors in their analysis.\nOne such factor is acknowledgement of the copyrighted source. Giving the name of the photographer or author may help, but it does not automatically make a use fair. While plagiarism and copyright infringement are related matters, they are not identical. Plagiarism (using someone's words, ideas, images, etc. without acknowledgment) is a matter of professional ethics, while copyright is a matter of law, and protects exact expression, \"not\" ideas. One can plagiarize even a work that is not protected by copyright, for example by passing off a line from Shakespeare as one's own. Conversely, attribution prevents accusations of plagiarism, but it does not prevent infringement of copyright. For example, reprinting a copyrighted book without permission, while citing the original author, would be copyright infringement but not plagiarism.\nU.S. fair use procedure and practice.\nThe U.S. Supreme Court described fair use as an affirmative defense in \"Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc.\" This means that in litigation on copyright infringement, the defendant bears the burden of raising and proving that the use was fair and not an infringement. Thus, fair use need not even be raised as a defense unless the plaintiff first shows (or the defendant concedes) a case of copyright infringement. If the work was not copyrightable, the term had expired, or the defendant's work borrowed only a small amount, for instance, then the plaintiff cannot make out a case of infringement, and the defendant need not even raise the fair use defense. In addition, fair use is only one of many limitations, exceptions, and defenses to copyright infringement. Thus, a case can be defeated without relying on fair use. For instance, the Audio Home Recording Act establishes that it is legal, using certain technologies, to make copies of audio recordings for non-commercial personal use.\nSome copyright owners claim infringement even in circumstances where the fair use defense would likely succeed, in hopes that the user will refrain from the use rather than spending resources in their defense. Strategic lawsuit against public participation (SLAPP) cases that allege copyright infringement, patent infringement, defamation, or libel may come into conflict with the defendant's right to freedom of speech, and that possibility has prompted some jurisdictions to pass anti-SLAPP legislation that raises the plaintiff's burdens and risk.\nAlthough fair use ostensibly permits certain uses without liability, many content creators and publishers try to avoid a potential court battle by seeking a legally unnecessary license from copyright owners for \"any\" use of non-public domain material, even in situations where a fair use defense would likely succeed. The simple reason is that the license terms negotiated with the copyright owner may be much less expensive than defending against a copyright suit, or having the mere possibility of a lawsuit threaten the publication of a work in which a publisher has invested significant resources.\nFair use rights take precedence over the author's interest. Thus the copyright holder cannot use a non-binding disclaimer, or notification, to revoke the right of fair use on works. However, binding agreements such as contracts or licence agreements may take precedence over fair use rights.\nThe practical effect of the fair use doctrine is that a number of conventional uses of copyrighted works are not considered infringing. For instance, quoting from a copyrighted work in order to criticize or comment upon it or teach students about it, is considered a fair use. Certain well-established uses cause few problems. A teacher who prints a few copies of a poem to illustrate a technique will have no problem on all four of the above factors (except possibly on amount and substantiality), but some cases are not so clear. All the factors are considered and balanced in each case: a book reviewer who quotes a paragraph as an example of the author's style will probably fall under fair use even though they may sell their review commercially; but a non-profit educational website that reproduces whole articles from technical magazines will probably be found to infringe if the publisher can demonstrate that the website affects the market for the magazine, even though the website itself is non-commercial.\nFair use is decided on a case-by-case basis, on the entirety of circumstances. The same act done by different means or for a different purpose can gain or lose fair use status.\nFair use in particular areas.\nComputer code.\nThe \"Oracle America, Inc. v. Google, Inc.\" case revolves around the use of application programming interfaces (APIs) used to define functionality of the Java programming language, created by Sun Microsystems and now owned by Oracle Corporation. Google used the APIs' definition and their structure, sequence and organization (SSO) in creating the Android operating system to support the mobile device market. Oracle had sued Google in 2010 over both patent and copyright violations, but after two cycles, the case matter was narrowed down to whether Google's use of the definition and SSO of Oracle's Java APIs (determined to be copyrightable) was within fair use. The Federal Circuit Court of Appeals has ruled against Google, stating that while Google could defend its use in the nature of the copyrighted work, its use was not transformative, and more significantly, it commercially harmed Oracle as they were also seeking entry to the mobile market. However, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed this decision, deciding that Google's actions satisfy all four tests for fair use, and that granting Oracle exclusive rights to use Java APIs on mobile markets \"would interfere with, not further, copyright's basic creativity objectives.\"\nDocumentary films.\nIn April 2006, the filmmakers of the \"Loose Change\" series were served with a lawsuit by Jules and G\u00e9d\u00e9on Naudet over the film's use of their footage, specifically footage of the firefighters discussing the collapse of the World Trade Center.\nWith the help of an intellectual property lawyer, the creators of Loose Change successfully argued that a majority of the footage used was for historical purposes and was significantly transformed in the context of the film. They agreed to remove a few shots that were used as B-roll and served no purpose to the greater discussion. The case was settled and a potential multimillion-dollar lawsuit was avoided.\n\"This Film Is Not Yet Rated\" also relied on fair use to feature several clips from copyrighted Hollywood productions. The director had originally planned to license these clips from their studio owners but discovered that studio licensing agreements would have prohibited him from using this material to criticize the entertainment industry. This prompted him to invoke the fair use doctrine, which permits limited use of copyrighted material to provide analysis and criticism of published works.\nFile sharing.\nIn 2009, fair use appeared as a defense in lawsuits against filesharing. Charles Nesson argued that file-sharing qualifies as fair use in his defense of alleged filesharer Joel Tenenbaum. Kiwi Camara, defending alleged filesharer Jammie Thomas, announced a similar defense.\nHowever, the Court in the case at bar rejected the idea that file-sharing is fair use.\nInternet publication.\nA U.S. court case from 2003, \"Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp.,\" provides and develops the relationship between thumbnails, inline linking, and fair use. In the lower District Court case on a motion for summary judgment, Arriba Soft's use of thumbnail pictures and inline linking from Kelly's website in Arriba Soft's image search engine was found not to be fair use. That decision was appealed and contested by Internet rights activists such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation, who argued that it was fair use.\nOn appeal, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals found in favor of the defendant, Arriba Soft. In reaching its decision, the court utilized the statutory four-factor analysis. First, it found the purpose of creating the thumbnail images as previews to be sufficiently transformative, noting that they were not meant to be viewed at high resolution as the original artwork was. Second, the photographs had already been published, diminishing the significance of their nature as creative works. Third, although normally making a \"full\" replication of a copyrighted work may appear to violate copyright, here it was found to be reasonable and necessary in light of the intended use. Lastly, the court found that the market for the original photographs would not be substantially diminished by the creation of the thumbnails. To the contrary, the thumbnail searches could increase the exposure of the originals. In looking at all these factors as a whole, the court found that the thumbnails were fair use and remanded the case to the lower court for trial after issuing a revised opinion on July 7, 2003. The remaining issues were resolved with a default judgment after Arriba Soft had experienced significant financial problems and failed to reach a negotiated settlement.\nIn August 2008, Judge Jeremy Fogel of the Northern District of California ruled in \"Lenz v. Universal Music Corp.\" that copyright holders cannot order a deletion of an online file without determining whether that posting reflected \"fair use\" of the copyrighted material. The case involved Stephanie Lenz, a writer and editor from Gallitzin, Pennsylvania, who made a home video of her thirteen-month-old son dancing to Prince's song \"Let's Go Crazy\" and posted the video on YouTube. Four months later, Universal Music, the owner of the copyright to the song, ordered YouTube to remove the video under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Lenz notified YouTube immediately that her video was within the scope of fair use, and she demanded that it be restored. YouTube complied after six weeks, rather than the two weeks required by the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Lenz then sued Universal Music in California for her legal costs, claiming the music company had acted in bad faith by ordering removal of a video that represented fair use of the song. On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that a copyright owner must affirmatively consider whether the complained of conduct constituted fair use before sending a takedown notice under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, rather than waiting for the alleged infringer to assert fair use. 801 F.3d 1126 (9th Cir. 2015). \"Even if, as Universal urges, fair use is classified as an 'affirmative defense,' we hold\u2014for the purposes of the DMCA\u2014fair use is uniquely situated in copyright law so as to be treated differently than traditional affirmative defenses. We conclude that because 17 U.S.C. \u00a7\u00a0107 created a type of non-infringing use, fair use is \"authorized by the law\" and a copyright holder must consider the existence of fair use before sending a takedown notification under \u00a7\u00a0512(c).\"\nIn June 2011, Judge Philip Pro of the District of Nevada ruled in \"Righthaven v. Hoehn\" that the posting of an entire editorial article from the \"Las Vegas Review-Journal\" in a comment as part of an online discussion was unarguably fair use. Judge Pro noted that \"Noncommercial, nonprofit use is presumptively fair. ... Hoehn posted the Work as part of an online discussion. ... This purpose is consistent with comment, for which 17 U.S.C. \u00a7\u00a0107 provides fair use protection. ... It is undisputed that Hoehn posted the entire work in his comment on the Website. ... wholesale copying does not preclude a finding of fair use. ... there is no genuine issue of material fact that Hoehn's use of the Work was fair and summary judgment is appropriate.\" On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that Righthaven did not even have the standing needed to sue Hoehn for copyright infringement in the first place.\nProfessional communities.\nIn addition to considering the four fair use factors, courts deciding fair use cases also look to the standards and practices of the professional community where the case comes from. Among the communities are documentarians, librarians, makers of Open Courseware, visual art educators, and communications professors.\nSuch codes of best practices have permitted communities of practice to make more informed risk assessments in employing fair use in their daily practice. For instance, broadcasters, cablecasters, and distributors typically require filmmakers to obtain errors and omissions insurance before the distributor will take on the film. Such insurance protects against errors and omissions made during the copyright clearance of material in the film. Before the \"Documentary Filmmakers' Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use\" was created in 2005, it was nearly impossible to obtain errors and omissions insurance for copyright clearance work that relied in part on fair use. This meant documentarians had either to obtain a license for the material or to cut it from their films. In many cases, it was impossible to license the material because the filmmaker sought to use it in a critical way. Soon after the best practices statement was released, all errors and omissions insurers in the U.S. shifted to begin offering routine fair use coverage.\nMusic sampling.\nBefore 1991, sampling in certain genres of music was accepted practice and the copyright considerations were viewed as largely irrelevant. The strict decision against rapper Biz Markie's appropriation of a Gilbert O'Sullivan song in the case \"Grand Upright Music, Ltd. v. Warner Bros. Records Inc.\" changed practices and opinions overnight. Samples now had to be licensed, as long as they rose \"to a level of legally cognizable appropriation.\" This left the door open for the \"de minimis\" doctrine, for short or unrecognizable samples; such uses would not rise to the level of copyright infringement, because under the \"de minimis\" doctrine, \"the law does not care about trifles.\" However, three years later, the Sixth Circuit effectively eliminated the \"de minimis\" doctrine in the \"Bridgeport Music, Inc. v. Dimension Films\" case, holding that artists must \"get a license or do not sample\". The Court later clarified that its opinion did not apply to fair use, but between \"Grand Upright\" and \"Bridgeport\", practice had effectively shifted to eliminate unlicensed sampling.\nParody.\nProducers or creators of parodies of a copyrighted work have been sued for infringement by the targets of their ridicule, even though such use may be protected as fair use. These fair use cases distinguish between parodies, which use a work in order to poke fun at or comment on the work itself, and satire, which comments on something else. Courts have been more willing to grant fair use protections to parodies than to satires, but the ultimate outcome in either circumstance will turn on the application of the four fair use factors.\nFor example, when Tom Forsythe appropriated Barbie dolls for his photography project \"Food Chain Barbie\" (depicting several copies of the doll naked and disheveled and about to be baked in an oven, blended in a food mixer, and the like), Mattel lost its copyright infringement lawsuit against him because his work effectively parodies Barbie and the values she represents. In \"Rogers v. Koons\", Jeff Koons tried to justify his appropriation of Art Rogers' photograph \"Puppies\" in his sculpture \"String of Puppies\" with the same parody defense. Koons lost because his work was not presented as a parody of Rogers' photograph in particular, but as a satire of society at large. This was insufficient to render the use fair.\nIn \"Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music Inc\" the U.S. Supreme Court recognized parody as a potential fair use, even when done for profit. Roy Orbison's, Acuff-Rose Music, had sued 2 Live Crew in 1989 for their use of Orbison's \"Oh, Pretty Woman\" in a mocking rap version with altered lyrics. The Supreme Court viewed 2 Live Crew's version as a ridiculing commentary on the earlier work, and ruled that when the parody was itself the product rather than mere advertising, commercial nature did not bar the defense. The \"Campbell\" court also distinguished parodies from satire, which they described as a broader social critique not intrinsically tied to ridicule of a specific work and so not deserving of the same use exceptions as parody because the satirist's ideas are capable of expression without the use of the other particular work.\nA number of appellate decisions have recognized that a parody may be a protected fair use, including the Second (\"Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp.\"); the Ninth (\"Mattel v. Walking Mountain Productions\"); and the Eleventh Circuits (\"Suntrust Bank v. Houghton Mifflin Co.\"). In the 2001 \"Suntrust Bank\" case, Suntrust Bank and the Margaret Mitchell estate unsuccessfully brought suit to halt the publication of \"The Wind Done Gone\", which reused many of the characters and situations from \"Gone with the Wind\" but told the events from the point of view of the enslaved people rather than the slaveholders. The Eleventh Circuit, applying \"Campbell\", found that \"The Wind Done Gone\" was fair use and vacated the district court's injunction against its publication.\nCases in which a satirical use was found to be fair include \"Blanch v. Koons\" and \"Williams v. Columbia Broadcasting Systems\".\nText and data mining.\nThe transformative nature of computer based analytical processes such as text mining, web mining and data mining has led many to form the view that such uses would be protected under fair use. This view was substantiated by the rulings of Judge Denny Chin in \"Authors Guild, Inc. v. Google, Inc.\", a case involving mass digitisation of millions of books from research library collections. As part of the ruling that found the book digitisation project was fair use, the judge stated \"Google Books is also transformative in the sense that it has transformed book text into data for purposes of substantive research, including data mining and text mining in new areas\".\nText and data mining was subject to further review in \"Authors Guild v. HathiTrust\", a case derived from the same digitization project mentioned above. Judge Harold Baer, in finding that the defendant's uses were transformative, stated that 'the search capabilities of the [HathiTrust Digital Library] have already given rise to new methods of academic inquiry such as text mining.\"\nReverse engineering.\nThere is a substantial body of fair use law regarding reverse engineering of computer software, hardware, network protocols, encryption and access control systems.\nSocial media.\nIn May 2015, artist Richard Prince released an exhibit of photographs at the Gagosian Gallery in New York, entitled \"New Portraits\". His exhibit consisted of screenshots of Instagram users' pictures, which were largely unaltered, with Prince's commentary added beneath. Although no Instagram users authorized Prince to use their pictures, Prince argued that the addition of his own commentary the pictures constituted fair use, such that he did not need permission to use the pictures or to pay royalties for his use. One of the pieces sold for $90,000. With regard to the works presented by Painter, the gallery where the pictures were showcased posted notices that \"All images are subject to copyright.\" Several lawsuits were filed against Painter over the New Portraits exhibit.\nInfluence internationally.\nWhile U.S. fair use law has been influential in some countries, some countries have fair use criteria drastically different from those in the U.S., and some countries do not have a fair use framework at all. Some countries have the concept of fair dealing instead of fair use, while others use different systems of limitations and exceptions to copyright. Many countries have some reference to an exemption for educational use, though the extent of this exemption varies widely.\nSources differ on whether fair use is fully recognized by countries other than the United States. American University's \"infojustice.org\" published a compilation of portions of over 40 nations' laws that explicitly mention fair use or fair dealing, and asserts that some of the fair dealing laws, such as Canada's, have evolved (such as through judicial precedents) to be quite close to those of the United States. This compilation includes fair use provisions from Bangladesh, Israel, South Korea, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Uganda, and the United States. However, Paul Geller's 2009 \"International Copyright Law and Practice\" says that while some other countries recognize similar exceptions to copyright, only the United States and Israel fully recognize the concept of fair use.\nThe International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA), a lobby group of U.S. copyright industry bodies, has objected to international adoption of U.S.-style fair use exceptions, alleging that such laws have a dependency on common law and long-term legal precedent that may not exist outside the United States.\nIsrael.\nIn November 2007, the Israeli Knesset passed a new copyright law that included a U.S.-style fair use exception. The law, which took effect in May 2008, permits the fair use of copyrighted works for purposes such as private study, research, criticism, review, news reporting, quotation, or instruction or testing by an educational institution. The law sets up four factors, similar to the U.S. fair use factors (see above), for determining whether a use is fair.\nOn September 2, 2009, the Tel Aviv District court ruled in \"The Football Association Premier League Ltd. v. Ploni\" that fair use is a user right. The court also ruled that streaming of live soccer games on the Internet is fair use. In doing so, the court analyzed the four fair use factors adopted in 2007 and cited U.S. case law, including \"Kelly v. Arriba Soft Corp.\" and \"Perfect 10, Inc. v. Amazon.com, Inc.\".\nMalaysia.\nAn amendment in 2012 to the section 13(2)(a) of the Copyright Act 1987 created an exception called 'fair dealing' which is not restricted in its purpose. The four factors for fair use as specified in US law are included.\nPoland.\nFair use exists in Polish law and is covered by the Polish copyright law articles 23 to 35.\nCompared to the United States, Polish fair use distinguishes between private and public use. In Poland, when the use is public, its use risks fines. The defendant must also prove that his use was private when accused that it was not, or that other mitigating circumstances apply. Finally, Polish law treats all cases in which private material was made public as a potential copyright infringement, where fair use can apply, but has to be proven by reasonable circumstances.\nSingapore.\nSection 35 of the Singaporean Copyright Act 1987 has been amended in 2004 to allow a 'fair dealing' exception for any purpose. The four fair use factors similar to US law are included in the new section 35.\nSouth Korea.\nThe Korean Copyright Act was amended to include a fair use provision, Article 35\u20133, in 2012. The law outlines a four-factor test similar to that used under U.S. law:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFair dealing.\nFair dealing allows specific exceptions to copyright protections. The open-ended concept of fair use is generally not observed in jurisdictions where fair dealing is in place, although this does vary. Fair dealing is established in legislation in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Singapore, India, South Africa and the United Kingdom, among others.\nAustralia.\nWhile Australian copyright exceptions are based on the Fair Dealing system, since 1998 a series of Australian government inquiries have examined, and in most cases recommended, the introduction of a \"flexible and open\" Fair Use system into Australian copyright law. From 1998 to 2017 there have been eight Australian government inquiries which have considered the question of whether fair use should be adopted in Australia. Six reviews have recommended Australia adopt a \"Fair Use\" model of copyright exceptions: two enquiries specifically into the Copyright Act (1998, 2014); and four broader reviews (both 2004, 2013, 2016). One review (2000) recommended against the introduction of fair use and another (2005) issued no final report. Two of the recommendations were specifically in response to the stricter copyright rules introduced as part of the Australia\u2013United States Free Trade Agreement (AUSFTA), while the most recent two, by the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) and the Productivity Commission (PC) were with reference to strengthening Australia's \"digital economy\".\nCanada.\nThe \"Copyright Act of Canada\" establishes fair dealing in Canada, which allows specific exceptions to copyright protection. In 1985, the Sub-Committee on the Revision of Copyright rejected replacing fair dealing with an open-ended system, and in 1986 the Canadian government agreed that \"the present fair dealing provisions should not be replaced by the substantially wider 'fair use' concept\". Since then, the Canadian fair dealing exception has broadened. It is now similar in effect to U.S. fair use, even though the frameworks are different.\n\"CCH Canadian Ltd v. Law Society of Upper Canada\" [2004] 1 S.C.R. 339,2004 13 is a landmark Supreme Court of Canada case that establishes the bounds of fair dealing in Canadian copyright law. The Law Society of Upper Canada was sued for copyright infringement for providing photocopy services to researchers. The Court unanimously held that the Law Society's practice fell within the bounds of fair dealing.\nUnited Kingdom.\nWithin the United Kingdom, fair dealing is a legal doctrine that provides an exception to the nation's copyright law in cases where the copyright infringement is for the purposes of non-commercial research or study, criticism or review, or for the reporting of current events.\nPolicy arguments about fair use.\nA balanced copyright law provides an economic benefit to many high-tech businesses such as search engines and software developers. Fair use is also crucial to non-technology industries such as insurance, legal services, and newspaper publishers.\nOn September 12, 2007, the Computer and Communications Industry Association (CCIA), a group representing companies including Google Inc., Microsoft Inc., Oracle Corporation, Sun Microsystems, Yahoo! and other high-tech companies, released a study that found that fair use exceptions to US copyright laws were responsible for more than $4.5\u00a0trillion in annual revenue for the United States economy representing one-sixth of the total US GDP. The study was conducted using a methodology developed by the World Intellectual Property Organization.\nThe study found that fair use dependent industries are directly responsible for more than eighteen percent of US economic growth and nearly eleven million American jobs. \"As the United States economy becomes increasingly knowledge-based, the concept of fair use can no longer be discussed and legislated in the abstract. It is the very foundation of the digital age and a cornerstone of our economy,\" said Ed Black, President and CEO of CCIA. \"Much of the unprecedented economic growth of the past ten years can actually be credited to the doctrine of fair use, as the Internet itself depends on the ability to use content in a limited and unlicensed manner.\"\nFair Use Week.\nFair Use Week is an international event that celebrates fair use and fair dealing. Fair Use Week was first proposed on a Fair Use Allies listserv, which was an outgrowth of the Library Code of Best Practices Capstone Event, celebrating the development and promulgation of ARL's \"Code of Best Practices in Fair Use for Academic and Research Libraries\". While the idea was not taken up nationally, Copyright Advisor at Harvard University, launched the first ever Fair Use Week at Harvard University in February 2014, with a full week of activities celebrating fair use. The first Fair Use Week included blog posts from national and international fair use experts, live fair use panels, fair use workshops, and a Fair Use Stories Tumblr blog, where people from the world of art, music, film, and academia shared stories about the importance of fair use to their community. The first Fair Use Week was so successful that in 2015 ARL teamed up with Courtney and helped organize the Second Annual Fair Use Week, with participation from many more institutions. ARL also launched an official Fair Use Week website, which was transferred from Pia Hunter, who attended the Library Code of Best Practices Capstone Event and had originally purchased the domain name fairuseweek.org.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10773", "revid": "1715997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10773", "title": "Flying car", "text": "Car that can be flown in much the same way as a car may be driven\nA flying car or roadable aircraft is a type of vehicle which can function both as a road vehicle and as an aircraft. As used here, this includes vehicles which drive as motorcycles when on the road. The term \"flying car\" is also sometimes used to include hovercars and/or VTOL personal air vehicles. Many prototypes have been built since the early 20th century, using a variety of flight technologies. Most have been designed to take off and land conventionally using a runway. Although VTOL projects are increasing, none has yet been built in more than a handful of numbers.\nTheir appearance is often predicted by futurologists, and many concept designs have been promoted. Their failure to become a practical reality has led to the catchphrase \"Where's my flying car?\", as a paradigm for the failure of predicted technologies to appear. Flying cars are also a popular theme in fantasy and science fiction stories.\nHistory.\nEarly 20th century.\nIn the late 1800s, American immigrant Gustave Whitehead designed aircraft with wheels and a gasoline-powered engine, including his no.21 model built in 1901. Consensus among historians is that Whitehead's no. 21 did not achieve sustained self-powered flight. Some historians continue to assert Whitehead's craft flew at various dates prior to the Wright Brothers' craft, based on a series of unverifiable and contradictory eye-witness accounts.\nAircraft designer Glenn Curtiss built his Autoplane in 1917. It had a pusher propeller for flight, with removable flight surfaces including a triplane wing, canard foreplane and twin tails. It was able to hop, but not fly.\nIn 1935, Constantinos Vlachos built a prototype of a 'tri-phibian' vehicle with a circular wing, but it caught fire after the engine exploded while he was demonstrating it in Washington, D.C. Vlachos was badly injured and spent several months in hospital. The machine is most notable for a newsreel that captured the incident.\nThe Autogiro Company of America AC-35 was a prototype roadable autogyro, flown on 26 March 1936 by test pilot James G. Ray. Forward thrust was initially provided by twin counter-rotating propellers for thrust, later replaced with a single propeller. On 26 October 1936, the aircraft was converted to roadable configuration. Ray drove it to the main entrance of the Commerce Building, Washington, D.C., where it was accepted by John H. Geisse, chief of the Aeronautics Branch. Although it had been successfully tested, it did not enter production.\nThe first fixed wing roadable aircraft to fly was built by Waldo Waterman. Waterman was associated with Curtiss while Curtiss was pioneering amphibious aircraft at North Island on San Diego Bay in the 1910s. On 21 March 1937, Waterman's Arrowbile first took to the air. The Arrowbile was a development of Waterman's tailless aircraft, the Whatsit. It had a wingspan of and a length of . On the ground and in the air it was powered by a Studebaker engine. It could fly at and drive at .\nIn 1942, the British army built the Hafner Rotabuggy, an experimental roadable autogyro that was developed with the intention of producing a way of air-dropping off-road vehicles. Although initial tests showed that the Rotabuggy was prone to severe vibration at speeds greater than , with improvements the Rotabuggy achieved a flight speed of . However, the introduction of gliders that could carry vehicles (such as the Waco Hadrian and Airspeed Horsa) led to the project's cancellation.\nLate 20th century.\nAlthough several designs (such as the ConVairCar) have flown, none have enjoyed commercial success, and those that have flown are not widely known by the general public. The most successful example, in that several were made and one is still flying, is the 1949 Taylor Aerocar.\nIn 1946, the Fulton FA-2 Airphibian was an American made flying car designed by Robert Edison Fulton Jr., it was an aluminum-bodied car, built with independent suspension, aircraft-sized wheels, and a six-cylinder 165\u00a0hp engine. The fabric wings were easily attached to the fuselage, converting the car into a plane. Four prototypes were built. Charles Lindbergh flew it 1950 and, although it was not a commercial success (financial costs of airworthiness certification forced him to relinquish control of the company, which never developed it further), it is now in the Smithsonian.\nThe Aerocar, designed and built by Molt Taylor, made a successful flight in December 1949, and in following years versions underwent a series of road and flying tests. Chuck Berry featured the concept in his 1956 song \"You Can't Catch Me\", and in December 1956 the Civil Aviation Authority approved the design for mass production, but despite wide publicity and an improved version produced in 1989, Taylor did not succeed in getting the flying car into production. In total, six Aerocars were built. It is considered to be one of the first practical flying cars.\nOne notable design was Henry Smolinski's Mizar, made by mating the rear end of a Cessna Skymaster with a Ford Pinto, but it disintegrated during test flights killing Smolinski and the pilot.\nMoller began developing VTOL craft in the late 1960s, but no Moller vehicle has ever achieved free flight out of ground effect. The Moller Skycar M400 was a project for a personal VTOL (vertical take-off and landing) aircraft which is powered by four pairs of in-tandem Wankel rotary engines. The proposed Autovolantor model had an all-electric version powered by Altairnano batteries. The company has been dormant since 2015.\nIn the mid-1980s, former Boeing engineer Fred Barker founded Flight Innovations Inc. and began the development of the Sky Commuter, a small duct fans-based VTOL aircraft. It was a compact, two-passenger and was made primarily of composite materials. In 2008, the remaining prototype was sold for \u00a386k on eBay.\n21st century.\nIn 2009 the U.S., the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) initiated the $65 million Transformer program to develop a four-person roadable aircraft by 2015. The vehicle was to have had VTOL capability and a range. AAI Corporation and Lockheed Martin were awarded contracts. The program was cancelled in 2013.\nThe Parajet Skycar utilises a paramotor for propulsion and a parafoil for lift. The main body consists of a modified dune buggy. It has a top speed of and a maximum range of in flight. On the ground it has a top speed of and a maximum range of . Parajet flew and drove its prototype from London to Timbuktu in January 2009.\nThe Maverick Flying Dune Buggy was designed by the Indigenous People's Technology and Education Center of Florida as an off-road vehicle that could unfurl an advanced parachute and then travel by air over impassable terrain when roadways were no longer usable. The 'Maverick' vehicle is powered by a engine that can also drive a five-bladed pusher propeller. It was initially conceived in order to help minister to remote Amazon rainforest communities, but will also be marketed for visual pipeline inspection and other similar activities in desolate areas or difficult terrain.\nThe Plane Driven PD-1 Roadable Glastar is a modification to the Glastar Sportsman GS-2 to make a practical roadable aircraft. The approach is novel in that it uses a mostly stock aircraft with a modified landing gear \"pod\" that carries the engine for road propulsion. The wings fold along the side, and the main landing gear and engine pod slide aft in driving configuration to compensate for the rearward center of gravity with the wings folded, and provide additional stability for road travel.\nThe Super Sky Cycle was an American homebuilt roadable gyroplane designed and manufactured by The Butterfly Aircraft LLC. It is a registered motorcycle.\nAt the 2014 Pioneers Festival at Wien (Austria) AeroMobil presented their version 3.0 of their flying car. The prototype was conceived as a vehicle that can be converted from an automobile to an aircraft. The version 2.5 proof-of-concept took 20 years to develop and first flew in 2013. CEO Juraj Vaculik said that the company planned to move flying cars to market: \"the plan is that in 2017 we'll be able to announce\u00a0... the first flying roadster.\" In 2016, AeroMobil was test-flying a prototype that obtained Slovak ultralight certification. When the final product will be available or how much it will cost is not yet specified. In 2018, it unveiled a concept that resembled a flying sportscar with VTOL capability. \nThe Aeromobil 2.5 has folding wings and a Rotax 912 engine. It can travel at with a range of , and flew for the first time in 2013. On 29 October 2014, Slovak startup AeroMobil s.r.o. unveiled AeroMobil 3.0 \nat Vienna Pioneers Festival.\nKlein Vision in Slovakia have developed a prototype AirCar, which drives like a sports car and for flight has a pusher propeller with twin tailbooms, and foldout wings. In June 2021, the prototype carried out a 35-minute flight between airports. It was type certified as an aircraft in January 2022.\nThe Terrafugia Transition is a roadable aircraft intended to be classed as a Personal Air Vehicle. It can fold its wings in 30 seconds and drive the front wheels, enabling it to operate both as a traditional road vehicle and as a general aviation aeroplane with a range of . An operational prototype was displayed at Oshkosh in 2008 and its first flight took place on 2009-03-05. It will carry two people plus luggage and its Rotax 912S engine operates on premium unleaded gas. It was approved by the FAA in June 2010.\nThe production-ready single-engine, roadable PAL-V Liberty autogyro, or gyrocopter, debuted at the Geneva Motor Show in March 2018, then became the first flying car in production, and was set to launch in 2020, with full production scheduled for 2021 in Gujarat, India. the PAL-V ONE is a hybrid of a gyrocopter with a leaning 3-wheel motorcycle. It has two seats and a 160\u00a0kW flight certified gasoline engine. It has a top speed of on land and in air, and weighs max.\nOn 15 April 2021, Los Altos, California, became home to the world's first consumer flying car showroom. However, as yet there are no certified flying cars in production.\nDesign.\nA flying car must be capable of safe and reliable operation both on public roads and in the air. For mass adoption, it will also need to be environmentally friendly, able to fly without a fully qualified pilot at the controls, and come at affordable purchase and running costs.\nDesign configurations vary widely, from modified road vehicles such as the AVE Mizar at one extreme to modified aircraft such as the Plane Driven PD-1 at the other. Most are dedicated flying car designs. While wheeled propulsion is necessary on the road, in the air lift may be generated by fixed wings, helicopter rotors or direct engine power. The Alef Model A project offers an unusual configuration in which the body of the car is hollow and the sides are slabs; in the air it rolls sideways so that the slabs become a biplane wing. The cabin remains upright.\nLift.\nLike other aircraft, lift in flight is provided by a fixed wing, spinning rotor or direct powered lift. The powered helicopter rotor and direct lift both offer VTOL capability, while the fixed wing and autogyro rotor take off conventionally from a runway.\nThe simplest and earliest approach was to take a driveable car and attach removable flying surfaces and propeller. However when on the road, such a design must either tow its removable parts on a separate trailer or leave them behind and drive back to them before taking off again.\nOther conventional takeoff fixed-wing designs, such as the Terrafugia Transition, include folding wings that the car carries with it when driven on the road.\nVertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) is attractive, as it avoids the need for a runway and greatly increases operational flexibility. Typical designs include rotorcraft and ducted fan powered lift configurations. Most design concepts have inherent problems.\nRotorcraft include helicopters with powered rotors and autogyros with free-spinning rotors. For road use, a rotor must, like many naval helicopters, be either two-bladed or foldable. The quadcopter requires only a simple control system with no tail. The autogyro relies on a separate thrust system to build up airspeed, spin the rotor and generate lift. However, some autogyros have rotors that can be spun up on the ground and then disengaged, allowing the aircraft to jump-start vertically. The PAL-V Liberty is an example of the autogyro type.\nDucted-fan aircraft such as the Moller Skycar tend to easily lose stability and have been unable to travel at greater than 30\u201340 knots.\nPower.\nThe flying car places unique demands on the vehicle power train. For a given all-up weight, an aero engine must deliver higher power than its typical road equivalent. However on the road the vehicle must handle well and not be overpowered. Power must also be diverted between the airborne and road drive mechanisms. Some designs therefore have multiple engines, with the road engine being supplemented, or even replaced by, additional flight engines.\nAs with other vehicles, power has traditionally been supplied by internal combustion engines, but electric power is undergoing rapid development. It is coming into increasing use on road vehicles, but the weight of the batteries currently makes it unsuited to aircraft. However its low environmental signature makes it attractive for the short trips and dense urban environments envisaged for the flying car.\nOn the road, most flying cars drive the road wheels in the conventional way. A few use the aircraft propeller in similar manner to an airboat, but this is inefficient.\nIn the air, a flying car will typically obtain forward thrust from one or more propellers or ducted fans. A few have a powered helicopter rotor. Jet engines are not used due to the ground hazard posed by the hot, high-velocity exhaust stream.\nSafety.\nIn order to operate safely, a flying car must be certified independently as both a road vehicle and an aircraft, by the respective authorities. The person controlling the vehicle must also be licensed as both driver and pilot, and the vehicle maintained according to both regimes.\nMechanically, the requirements of powered flight are so challenging that every opportunity must be taken to keep weight to a minimum. A typical airframe is therefore lightweight and easily damaged. On the other hand, a road vehicle must be able to withstand significant impact loads from casual incidents while stationary, as well as low-speed and high-speed impacts, and the high strength this demands can add considerable weight. A practical flying car must be both strong enough to pass road safety standards and light enough to fly. Any propeller or rotor blade also creates a hazard to passers-by when on the ground, especially if it is spinning; they must be permanently shrouded, or folded away on landing.\nFor widespread adoption, as envisaged in the near future, it will not be practicable for every driver to qualify as a pilot and the rigorous maintenance currently demanded for aircraft will be uneconomic. Flying cars will have to become largely autonomous and highly reliable. The density of traffic will require automated routing and collision-avoidance systems. To manage the inevitable periodic failures and emergency landings, there will need to be sufficient designated landing sites across built-up areas. In addition, poor weather conditions could make the craft unsafe to fly.\nRegulatory regimes are being developed in anticipation of a large increase in the numbers of autonomous flying cars and personal air vehicles in the near future, and compliance with these regimes will be necessary for safe flight.\nControl.\nA basic flying car requires the person at the controls to be both a qualified road driver and aircraft pilot. This is impractical for the majority of people and so wider adoption will require computer systems to de-skill piloting. These skills include aircraft manoeuvring, navigation and emergency procedures, all in potentially crowded airspace. The onboard control system will also need to interact with other systems such as air traffic control and collision-risk monitoring. A practical flying car may need to be capable of full autonomy, in which people are present only as passengers.\nEnvironment.\nA flying car capable of widespread use must operate acceptably within a heavily populated urban environment. The lift and propulsion systems must be quiet enough not to cause a nuisance, and must not create excessive pollution. For example, pollution emissions standards for road vehicles must be met.\nThe clear environmental benefits of electric power are a strong incentive for its development.\nCost.\nThe needs for the propulsion system to be both small and powerful, the vehicle structure both light and strong, and the control systems fully integrated and autonomous, can only be met at present, if at all, using advanced and expensive technologies. This may prove a significant barrier to widespread adoption.\nFlying cars are used for relatively short distances at high frequency. They travel at lower speeds and altitudes than conventional passenger aircraft. However optimal fuel efficiency for aeroplanes is obtained at higher speeds and altitudes, so a flying car's energy efficiency will be lower than that of a conventional aircraft. Similarly, the flying car's road performance is compromised by the requirements of flight and the need to carry around the various extra parts, so it is also less economical than a conventional motor car.\nIndustry groups.\nIn April 2012, the International Flying Car Association was established to be the \"central resource center for information and communication between the flying car industry, news networks, governments, and those seeking further information worldwide\". Because flying cars need practical regulations that are mostly dealt with on a regional level, several regional associations were established as well, with the European Flying Car Association (EFCA) representing these national member associations on a pan-European level (51 independent countries, including the European Union Member States, the Accession Candidates and Russia, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine). The associations are also organizing racing competitions for roadable aircraft in Europe, the European Roadable Aircraft Prix (ERAP), mainly to increase awareness about this type of aircraft among a broader audience.\nPopular culture.\nThe flying car was and remains a common feature of conceptions of the future, both predicted and imaginary.\nAnticipation.\nFlying cars have been under development since the early days of motor transport and aviation, and many futurologists have predicted their imminent arrival. Aircraft manufacturer Glenn Curtiss unveiled his unflyable Autoplane in 1917. In 1940, vehicle manufacturer Henry Ford predicted that; \"Mark my word: a combination airplane and motorcar is coming. You may smile, but it will come.\u201d\nFrom 1945, industrial designer Norman Bel Geddes promoted his concept for a streamlined flying car with folding wings. In the late 1950s, Ford's Advanced Design studio publicised a 3/8 scale concept car model, the Volante Tri-Athodyne. It featured three ducted fans, each with its own motor, that would lift it off the ground and move it through the air. Ford admitted that \"the day where there will be an aero-car in every garage is still some time off\", also suggesting that \"the Volante indicates one direction that the styling of such a vehicle would take\".\nWhere's my flying car?\nDespite a century of anticipation, no flying car has yet proved a practical proposition and they remain an experimental curiosity. This long-term failure to make any impact on society has led to the meme, \"Where's my flying car?\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here we are, less than a month until the turn of the millennium, and what I want to know is, what happened to the flying cars? We're about to become Americans of the 21st century. People have been predicting what we'd be like for more than 100 years, and our accoutrements don't entirely live up to expectations.\u00a0... Our failure to produce flying cars seems like a particular betrayal since it was so central to our image.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This new millennium sucks! It's exactly the same as the old millennium! You know why? No flying cars!\nThe question \"Where's my flying car?\" has become emblematic of the wider failure of many modern technologies to match futuristic visions that were promoted in earlier decades.\nFictional flying cars.\nThe flying car has been depicted in many works of fantasy and science fiction. Some notable examples include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10774", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10774", "title": "French language/Proven", "text": ""}
{"id": "10775", "revid": "28796187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10775", "title": "Film editing", "text": "Creative and technical part of the post-production process of filmmaking\nFilm editing is both a creative and a technical part of the post-production process of filmmaking. The term is derived from the traditional process of working with film which increasingly involves the use of digital technology. When putting together some sort of video composition, typically, you\u2019d need a collection of shots and footage that vary from one another. The act of adjusting the shots you\u2019ve already taken, and turning them into something new is known as film editing.\nThe film editor works with raw footage, selecting shots and combining them into sequences which create a finished motion picture. Film editing is described as an art or skill, the only art that is unique to cinema, separating filmmaking from other art forms that preceded it, although there are close parallels to the editing process in other art forms such as poetry and novel writing. Film editing is often referred to as the \"invisible art\" because when it is well-practiced, the viewer can become so engaged that they are not aware of the editor's work. Film editing is an extremely important tool when attempting to intrigue a viewer. When done properly, a film\u2019s editing can captivate a viewer and fly completely under the radar. Because of this, film editing has been given the name \u201cthe invisible art.\u201d\nOn its most fundamental level, film editing is the art, technique and practice of assembling shots into a coherent sequence. The job of an editor is not simply to mechanically put pieces of a film together, cut off film slates or edit dialogue scenes. A film editor must creatively work with the layers of images, story, dialogue, music, pacing, as well as the actors' performances to effectively \"re-imagine\" and even rewrite the film to craft a cohesive whole. Editors usually play a dynamic role in the making of a film. An editor must select only the most quality shots, removing all unnecessary frames to ensure the shot is clean. Sometimes, auteurist film directors edit their own films, for example, Akira Kurosawa, Bahram Beyzai, Steven Soderbergh, and the Coen brothers.\nAccording to \u201cFilm Art, An Introduction\u201d, by Bordwell and Thompson, there are four basic areas of film editing that the editor has full control over. The first dimension is the graphic relations between a shot A and shot B. The shots are analyzed in terms of their graphic configurations, including light and dark, lines and shapes, volumes and depths, movement and stasis. The director makes deliberate choices regarding the composition, lighting, color, and movement within each shot, as well as the transitions between them. There are several techniques used by editors to establish graphic relations between shots. These include maintaining overall brightness consistency, keeping important elements in the center of the frame, playing with color differences, and creating visual matches or continuities between shots.\nThe second dimension is the rhythmic relationship between shot A and shot B. The duration of each shot, determined by the number of frames or length of film, contributes to the overall rhythm of the film. The filmmaker has control over the editing rhythm by adjusting the length of shots in relation to each other. Shot duration can be used to create specific effects and emphasize moments in the film. For example, a brief flash of white frames can convey a sudden impact or a violent moment. On the other hand, lengthening or adding seconds to a shot can allow for audience reaction or to accentuate an action. The length of shots can also be used to establish a rhythmic pattern, such as creating a steady beat or gradually slowing down or accelerating the tempo.\nThe third dimension is the spatial relationship between shot A and shot B. Editing allows the filmmaker to construct film space and imply a relationship between different points in space. The filmmaker can juxtapose shots to establish spatial holes or construct a whole space out of component parts. For example, the filmmaker can start with a shot that establishes a spatial hole and then follow it with a shot of a part of that space, creating an analytical breakdown.\nThe final dimension that an editor has control over is the temporal relation between shot A and shot B. Editing plays a crucial role in manipulating the time of action in a film. It allows filmmakers to control the order, duration, and frequency of events, thus shaping the narrative and influencing the audience's perception of time. Through editing, shots can be rearranged, flashbacks and flash-forwards can be employed, and the duration of actions can be compressed or expanded. The main point is that editing gives filmmakers the power to control and manipulate the temporal aspects of storytelling in film.\nBetween graphic, rhythmic, spatial, and temporal relationships between two shots, an editor has various ways to add a creative element to the film, and enhance the overall viewing experience.\nWith the advent of digital editing in non-linear editing systems, film editors and their assistants have become responsible for many areas of filmmaking that used to be the responsibility of others. For instance, in past years, picture editors dealt only with just that\u2014picture. Sound, music, and (more recently) visual effects editors dealt with the practicalities of other aspects of the editing process, usually under the direction of the picture editor and director. However, digital systems have increasingly put these responsibilities on the picture editor. It is common, especially on lower budget films, for the editor to sometimes cut in temporary music, mock up visual effects and add temporary sound effects or other sound replacements. These temporary elements are usually replaced with more refined final elements produced by the sound, music and visual effects teams hired to complete the picture. he importance of an editor has become increasingly pivotal to the quality and success of a film due to the multiple roles that have been added to their job.\nHistory.\nEarly films were short films that were one long, static, and locked-down shot. Motion in the shot was all that was necessary to amuse an audience, so the first films simply showed activity such as traffic moving along a city street. There was no story and no editing. Each film ran as long as there was film in the camera.\nThe first edited film was released in 1898. Robert W. Paul\u2019s Come Along, Do! was the first film that used a variety of shots, with one scene being put after another. Over time, directors and different producers began using stylistic approaches to their editing. For example, in his films, Wes Anderson likes leaving the shot relatively symmetrical. He also likes using different filters and unique lighting when shooting, all unique aspects of his film editing style. \nThe use of film editing to establish continuity, involving action moving from one sequence into another, is attributed to British film pioneer Robert W. Paul's \"Come Along, Do!\", made in 1898 and one of the first films to feature more than one shot. In the first shot, an elderly couple is outside an art exhibition having lunch and then follow other people inside through the door. The second shot shows what they do inside. Paul's 'Cinematograph Camera No. 1' of 1896 was the first camera to feature reverse-cranking, which allowed the same film footage to be exposed several times and thereby to create super-positions and multiple exposures. One of the first films to use this technique, Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s's \"The Four Troublesome Heads\" from 1898, was produced with Paul's camera.\nThe further development of action continuity in multi-shot films continued in 1899\u20131900 at the Brighton School in England, where it was definitively established by George Albert Smith and James Williamson. In that year, Smith made \"As Seen Through a Telescope\", in which the main shot shows street scene with a young man tying the shoelace and then caressing the foot of his girlfriend, while an old man observes this through a telescope. There is then a cut to close shot of the hands on the girl's foot shown inside a black circular mask, and then a cut back to the continuation of the original scene.\nEven more remarkable was James Williamson's \"Attack on a China Mission Station\", made around the same time in 1900. The first shot shows the gate to the mission station from the outside being attacked and broken open by Chinese Boxer rebels, then there is a cut to the garden of the mission station where a pitched battle ensues. An armed party of British sailors arrived to defeat the Boxers and rescue the missionary's family. The film used the first \"reverse angle\" cut in film history.\nJames Williamson concentrated on making films taking action from one place shown in one shot to the next shown in another shot in films like \"Stop Thief!\" and \"Fire!\", made in 1901, and many others. He also experimented with the close-up, and made perhaps the most extreme one of all in \"The Big Swallow\", when his character approaches the camera and appears to swallow it. These two filmmakers of the Brighton School also pioneered the editing of the film; they tinted their work with color and used trick photography to enhance the narrative. By 1900, their films were extended scenes of up to 5 minutes long.\nOther filmmakers then took up all these ideas including the American Edwin S. Porter, who started making films for the Edison Company in 1901. Porter worked on a number of minor films before making \"Life of an American Fireman\" in 1903. The film was the first American film with a plot, featuring action, and even a closeup of a hand pulling a fire alarm. The film comprised a continuous narrative over seven scenes, rendered in a total of nine shots. He put a dissolve between every shot, just as Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s was already doing, and he frequently had the same action repeated across the dissolves. His film, \"The Great Train Robbery\" (1903), had a running time of twelve minutes, with twenty separate shots and ten different indoor and outdoor locations. He used cross-cutting editing method to show simultaneous action in different places.\nThese early film directors discovered important aspects of motion picture language: that the screen image does not need to show a complete person from head to toe and that splicing together two shots creates in the viewer's mind a contextual relationship. These were the key discoveries that made all non-live or non live-on-videotape narrative motion pictures and television possible\u2014that shots (in this case, whole scenes since each shot is a complete scene) can be photographed at widely different locations over a period of time (hours, days or even months) and combined into a narrative whole. That is, \"The Great Train Robbery\" contains scenes shot on sets of a telegraph station, a railroad car interior, and a dance hall, with outdoor scenes at a railroad water tower, on the train itself, at a point along the track, and in the woods. But when the robbers leave the telegraph station interior (set) and emerge at the water tower, the audience believes they went immediately from one to the other. Or that when they climb on the train in one shot and enter the baggage car (a set) in the next, the audience believes they are on the same train.\nSometime around 1918, Russian director Lev Kuleshov did an experiment that proves this point. (See Kuleshov Experiment) He took an old film clip of a headshot of a noted Russian actor and intercut the shot with a shot of a bowl of soup, then with a child playing with a teddy bear, then with a shot an elderly woman in a casket. When he showed the film to people they praised the actor's acting\u2014the hunger in his face when he saw the soup, the delight in the child, and the grief when looking at the dead woman. Of course, the shot of the actor was years before the other shots and he never \"saw\" any of the items. The simple act of juxtaposing the shots in a sequence made the relationship.\nFilm editing technology.\nBefore the widespread use of digital non-linear editing systems, the initial editing of all films was done with a positive copy of the film negative called a film workprint (cutting copy in UK) by physically cutting and splicing together pieces of film. Strips of footage would be hand cut and attached together with tape and then later in time, glue. Editors were very precise; if they made a wrong cut or needed a fresh positive print, it cost the production money and time for the lab to reprint the footage. Additionally, each reprint put the negative at risk of damage. With the invention of a splicer and threading the machine with a viewer such as a Moviola, or \"flatbed\" machine such as a K.-E.-M. or Steenbeck, the editing process sped up a little bit and cuts came out cleaner and more precise. The Moviola editing practice is non-linear, allowing the editor to make choices faster, a great advantage to editing episodic films for television which have very short timelines to complete the work. All film studios and production companies who produced films for television provided this tool for their editors. Flatbed editing machines were used for playback and refinement of cuts, particularly in feature films and films made for television because they were less noisy and cleaner to work with. \nThey were used extensively for documentary and drama production within the BBC's Film Department. Operated by a team of two, an editor and assistant editor, this tactile process required significant skill but allowed for editors to work extremely efficiently.\nModern film editing has evolved significantly since it was first introduced to the film and entertainment industry. Some other new aspects of editing have been introduced such as color grading and digital workflows. As mentioned earlier, over the course of time, new technology has exponentially enhanced the quality of pictures in films. One of the most important steps in this process was transitioning from analog to digital filmmaking. By doing this, it gives the ability editors to immediately playback scenes, duplication and much more. Additionally digital has simplified and reduced the cost of filmmaking. Digital film is not only cheaper, but lasts longer, is safer, and is overall more efficient. Color grading is a post production process, where the editor manipulates or enhances the color of images, or environments in order to create a color tone. Doing this can alter the setting, tone, and mood of the entirety of scenes, and can enhance reactions that would otherwise have the possibility of being dull or out of place. Color grading is vital to the film editing process, and is technology that allows editors to enhance a story. \nToday, most films are edited digitally (on systems such as Media Composer, Final Cut Pro X or Premiere Pro) and bypass the film positive workprint altogether. In the past, the use of a film positive (not the original negative) allowed the editor to do as much experimenting as he or she wished, without the risk of damaging the original. With digital editing, editors can experiment just as much as before except with the footage completely transferred to a computer hard drive.\nWhen the film workprint had been cut to a satisfactory state, it was then used to make an edit decision list (EDL). The negative cutter referred to this list while processing the negative, splitting the shots into rolls, which were then contact printed to produce the final film print or answer print. Today, production companies have the option of bypassing negative cutting altogether. With the advent of digital intermediate (\"DI\"), the physical negative does not necessarily need to be physically cut and hot spliced together; rather the negative is optically scanned into the computer(s) and a cut list is confirmed by a DI editor.\nWomen in film editing.\nIn the early years of film, editing was considered a technical job; editors were expected to \"cut out the bad bits\" and string the film together. Indeed, when the Motion Picture Editors Guild was formed, they chose to be \"below the line\", that is, not a creative guild, but a technical one. Women were not usually able to break into the \"creative\" positions; directors, cinematographers, producers, and executives were almost always men. Editing afforded creative women a place to assert their mark on the filmmaking process. The history of film has included many women editors such as Dede Allen, Anne Bauchens, Margaret Booth, Barbara McLean, Anne V. Coates, Adrienne Fazan, Verna Fields, Blanche Sewell and Eda Warren.\nPost-production.\nPost-production editing may be summarized by three distinct phases commonly referred to as the editor's cut, the director's cut, and the final cut.\nThere are several editing stages and the editor's cut is the first. An editor's cut (sometimes referred to as the \"Assembly edit\" or \"Rough cut\") is normally the first pass of what the final film will be when it reaches picture lock. The film editor usually starts working while principal photography starts. Sometimes, prior to cutting, the editor and director will have seen and discussed \"dailies\" (raw footage shot each day) as shooting progresses. As production schedules have shortened over the years, this co-viewing happens less often. Screening dailies give the editor a general idea of the director's intentions. Because it is the first pass, the editor's cut might be longer than the final film. The editor continues to refine the cut while shooting continues, and often the entire editing process goes on for many months and sometimes more than a year, depending on the film. The editor's cut is an opportunity for the editor to shape the story and present their vision of how the film should unfold. It provides a solid foundation for further collaboration with the director, allowing them to assess the initial assembly and provide feedback or guidance on the creative direction.\nWhen shooting is finished, the director can then turn his or her full attention to collaborating with the editor and further refining the cut of the film. This is the time that is set aside where the film editor's first cut is molded to fit the director's vision. In the United States, under the rules of the Directors Guild of America, directors receive a minimum of ten weeks after completion of principal photography to prepare their first cut. While collaborating on what is referred to as the \"director's cut\", the director and the editor go over the entire movie in great detail; scenes and shots are re-ordered, removed, shortened and otherwise tweaked. Often it is discovered that there are plot holes, missing shots or even missing segments which might require that new scenes be filmed. Because of this time working closely and collaborating\u00a0\u2013 a period that is normally far longer and more intricately detailed than the entire preceding film production\u00a0\u2013 many directors and editors form a unique artistic bond. The goal is to align the film with the director's artistic vision and narrative objectives. The director's cut typically involves multiple iterations and discussions until both the director and editor are satisfied with the overall direction of the film.\nOften after the director has had their chance to oversee a cut, the subsequent cuts are supervised by one or more producers, who represent the production company or movie studio. There have been several conflicts in the past between the director and the studio, sometimes leading to the use of the \"Alan Smithee\" credit signifying when a director no longer wants to be associated with the final release. The final cut is the last stage of post-production editing and represents the definitive version of the film. It is the result of the collaborative efforts between the director, editor, and other key stakeholders. The final cut reflects the agreed-upon creative decisions and serves as the basis for distribution and exhibition.\nMise en Scene vs Editing.\nMise en scene is the term used to describe all of the lighting, music, placement, costume design, and other elements of a shot. Film editing and Mise en scene go hand in hand with one another. A major part of film editing is the use of filters and adjusting the lighting in a shot. Film editing contributes to the mise en scene of a given shot. When shooting a film, you typically get shots from multiple angles. The angles at which you shoot from are all part of the film\u2019s mise en scene.\nMethods of montage.\nIn motion picture terminology, a montage (from the French for \"putting together\" or \"assembly\") is a film editing technique.\nThere are at least three senses of the term:\nAlthough film director D. W. Griffith was not part of the montage school, he was one of the early proponents of the power of editing\u00a0\u2014 mastering cross-cutting to show parallel action in different locations, and codifying film grammar in other ways as well. Griffith's work in the teens was highly regarded by Lev Kuleshov and other Soviet filmmakers and greatly influenced their understanding of editing.\nKuleshov was among the first to theorize about the relatively young medium of the cinema in the 1920s. For him, the unique essence of the cinema\u00a0\u2014 that which could be duplicated in no other medium\u00a0\u2014 is editing. He argues that editing a film is like constructing a building. Brick-by-brick (shot-by-shot) the building (film) is erected. His often-cited Kuleshov Experiment established that montage can lead the viewer to reach certain conclusions about the action in a film. Montage works because viewers infer meaning based on context. Sergei Eisenstein was briefly a student of Kuleshov's, but the two parted ways because they had different ideas of montage. Eisenstein regarded montage as a dialectical means of creating meaning. By contrasting unrelated shots he tried to provoke associations in the viewer, which were induced by shocks. But Eisenstein did not always do his own editing, and some of his most important films were edited by Esfir Tobak.\nA montage sequence consists of a series of short shots that are edited into a sequence to condense narrative. It is usually used to advance the story as a whole (often to suggest the passage of time), rather than to create symbolic meaning. In many cases, a song plays in the background to enhance the mood or reinforce the message being conveyed. One famous example of montage was seen in the 1968 film \"\", depicting the start of man's first development from apes to humans. Another example that is employed in many films is the sports montage. The sports montage shows the star athlete training over a period of time, each shot having more improvement than the last. Classic examples include Rocky and the Karate Kid.\nThe word's association with Sergei Eisenstein is often condensed\u2014too simply\u2014into the idea of \"juxtaposition\" or into two words: \"collision montage,\" whereby two adjacent shots that oppose each other on formal parameters or on the content of their images are cut against each other to create a new meaning not contained in the respective shots: Shot a + Shot b = New Meaning c.\nThe association of collision montage with Eisenstein is not surprising. He consistently maintained that the mind functions dialectically, in the Hegelian sense, that the contradiction between opposing ideas (thesis versus antithesis) is resolved by a higher truth, synthesis. He argued that conflict was the basis of \"all\" art, and never failed to see montage in other cultures. For example, he saw montage as a guiding principle in the construction of \"Japanese hieroglyphics in which two independent ideographic characters ('shots') are juxtaposed and \"explode\" into a concept. Thus:\n Eye + Water = Crying\n Door + Ear = Eavesdropping\n Child + Mouth = Screaming\n Mouth + Dog = Barking\n Mouth + Bird = Singing.\"\nHe also found montage in Japanese haiku, where short sense perceptions are juxtaposed and synthesized into a new meaning, as in this example:\n A lonely crow\n On a leafless bough\n One autumn eve.\n\u2014 Matsuo Basho\nAs Dudley Andrew notes, \"The collision of attractions from line to line produces the unified psychological effect which is the hallmark of haiku and montage.\"\nContinuity editing and alternatives.\nContinuity editing, developed in the early 1900s, aimed to create a coherent and smooth storytelling experience in films. It relied on consistent graphic qualities, balanced composition, and controlled editing rhythms to ensure narrative continuity and engage the audience. For example, whether an actor's costume remains the same from one scene to the next, or whether a glass of milk held by a character is full or empty throughout the scene. Because films are typically shot out of sequence, the script supervisor will keep a record of continuity and provide that to the film editor for reference. The editor may try to maintain continuity of elements, or may intentionally create a discontinuous sequence for stylistic or narrative effect.\nThe technique of continuity editing, part of the classical Hollywood style, was developed by early European and American directors, in particular, D.W. Griffith in his films such as \"The Birth of a Nation\" and \"Intolerance\". The classical style embraces temporal and spatial continuity as a way of advancing the narrative, using such techniques as the 180 degree rule, Establishing shot, and Shot reverse shot. The 180-degree system in film editing ensures consistency in shot composition by keeping relative positions of characters or objects in the frame consistent. It also maintains consistent eye-lines and screen direction to avoid disorientation and confusion for the audience, allowing for clear spatial delineation and a smooth narrative experience. Often, continuity editing means finding a balance between literal continuity and perceived continuity. For instance, editors may condense action across cuts in a non-distracting way. A character walking from one place to another may \"skip\" a section of floor from one side of a cut to the other, but the cut is constructed to appear continuous so as not to distract the viewer.\nEarly Russian filmmakers such as Lev Kuleshov (already mentioned) further explored and theorized about editing and its ideological nature. Sergei Eisenstein developed a system of editing that was unconcerned with the rules of the continuity system of classical Hollywood that he called Intellectual montage.\nAlternatives to traditional editing were also explored by early surrealist and Dada filmmakers such as Luis Bu\u00f1uel (director of the 1929 \"Un Chien Andalou\") and Ren\u00e9 Clair (director of 1924's \"Entr'acte\" which starred famous Dada artists Marcel Duchamp and Man Ray).\nFilmmakers have explored alternatives to continuity editing, focusing on graphic and rhythmic possibilities in their films. Experimental filmmakers like Stan Brakhage and Bruce Conner have used purely graphic elements to join shots, emphasizing light, texture, and shape rather than narrative coherence. Non-narrative films have prioritized rhythmic relations among shots, even employing single-frame shots for extreme rhythmic effects. Narrative filmmakers, such as Busby Berkeley and Yasujiro Ow, have occasionally subordinated narrative concerns to graphic or rhythmic patterns, while films influenced by music videos often feature pulsating rhythmic editing that de-emphasizes spatial and temporal dimensions.\nThe French New Wave filmmakers such as Jean-Luc Godard and Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut and their American counterparts such as Andy Warhol and John Cassavetes also pushed the limits of editing technique during the late 1950s and throughout the 1960s. French New Wave films and the non-narrative films of the 1960s used a carefree editing style and did not conform to the traditional editing etiquette of Hollywood films. Like its Dada and surrealist predecessors, French New Wave editing often drew attention to itself by its lack of continuity, its demystifying self-reflexive nature (reminding the audience that they were watching a film), and by the overt use of jump cuts or the insertion of material not often related to any narrative. Three of the most influential editors of French New Wave films were the women who (in combination) edited 15 of Godard's films: Francoise Collin, Agnes Guillemot, and Cecile Decugis, and another notable editor is Marie-Jos\u00e8phe Yoyotte, the first black woman editor in French cinema and editor of \"The 400 Blows\".\nSince the late 20th century Post-classical editing has seen faster editing styles with nonlinear, discontinuous action.\nSignificance.\nVsevolod Pudovkin noted that the editing process is the one phase of production that is truly unique to motion pictures. Every other aspect of filmmaking originated in a different medium than film (photography, art direction, writing, sound recording), but editing is the one process that is unique to film. Filmmaker Stanley Kubrick was quoted as saying: \"I love editing. I think I like it more than any other phase of filmmaking. If I wanted to be frivolous, I might say that everything that precedes editing is merely a way of producing a film to edit.\"\nFilm editing is significant because it shapes the narrative structure, visual and aesthetic impact, rhythm and pacing, emotional resonance, and overall storytelling of a film. Editors possess a unique creative power to manipulate and arrange shots, allowing them to craft a cinematic experience that engages, entertains, and emotionally connects with the audience. Film editing is a distinct art form within the filmmaking process, enabling filmmakers to realize their vision and bring stories to life on the screen.\nAccording to writer-director Preston Sturges: [T]here is a law of natural cutting and that this replicates what an audience in a legitimate theater does for itself. The more nearly the film cutter approaches this law of natural interest, the more invisible will be his cutting. If the camera moves from one person to another at the exact moment that one in the legitimate theatre would have turned his head, one will not be conscious of a cut. If the camera misses by a quarter of a second, one will get a jolt. There is one other requirement: the two shots must be approximate of the same tone value. If one cuts from black to white, it is jarring. At any given moment, the camera must point at the exact spot the audience wishes to look at. To find that spot is absurdly easy: one has only to remember where one was looking at the time the scene was made.\nAssistant editors.\nAssistant editors aid the editor and director in collecting and organizing all the elements needed to edit the film. The Motion Picture Editors Guild defines an assistant editor as \"a person who is assigned to assist an Editor. His or her duties shall be such as are assigned and performed under the immediate direction, supervision, and responsibility of the editor.\" When editing is finished, they oversee the various lists and instructions necessary to put the film into its final form. Editors of large budget features will usually have a team of assistants working for them. The first assistant editor is in charge of this team and may do a small bit of picture editing as well, if necessary. Assistant editors are responsible for collecting, organizing, and managing all the elements needed for the editing process. This includes footage, sound files, music tracks, visual effects assets, and other media assets. They ensure that everything is properly labeled, logged, and stored in an organized manner, making it easier for the editor to access and work with the materials efficiently. Assistant editors serve as a bridge between the editing team and other departments, facilitating communication and collaboration. They often work closely with the director, editor, visual effects artists, sound designers, and other post-production professionals, relaying information, managing deliverables, and coordinating schedules. Often assistant editors will perform temporary sound, music, and visual effects work. The other assistants will have set tasks, usually helping each other when necessary to complete the many time-sensitive tasks at hand. In addition, an apprentice editor may be on hand to help the assistants. An apprentice is usually someone who is learning the ropes of assisting.\nTelevision shows typically have one assistant per editor. This assistant is responsible for every task required to bring the show to the final form. Lower budget features and documentaries will also commonly have only one assistant. Higher budget films and shows tend to have more than one assistant editor, and in some cases, there can be a full team of assistants.\nThe organizational aspects job could best be compared to database management. When a film is shot, every piece of picture or sound is coded with numbers and timecode. It is the assistant's job to keep track of these numbers in a database, which, in non-linear editing, is linked to the computer program. The editor and director cut the film using digital copies of the original film and sound, commonly referred to as an \"offline\" edit. When the cut is finished, it is the assistant's job to bring the film or television show \"online\". They create lists and instructions that tell the picture and sound finishers how to put the edit back together with the high-quality original elements. Assistant editing can be seen as a career path to eventually becoming an editor. Many assistants, however, do not choose to pursue advancement to the editor, and are very happy at the assistant level, working long and rewarding careers on many films and television shows.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading\nExternal links.\nWikibooks\nWikiversity"}
{"id": "10776", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10776", "title": "Freestyle", "text": "Freestyle may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10777", "revid": "3771501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10777", "title": "Friedrich W\u00f6hler", "text": "German chemist (1800\u20131882)\nFriedrich W\u00f6hler (]) FRS(For) HonFRSE (31 July 1800\u00a0\u2013 23 September 1882) was a German chemist known for his work in both organic and inorganic chemistry, being the first to isolate the chemical elements beryllium and yttrium in pure metallic form. He was the first to prepare several inorganic compounds, including silane and silicon nitride.\nW\u00f6hler is also known for seminal contributions in organic chemistry, in particular, the W\u00f6hler synthesis of urea. His synthesis of the organic compound urea in the laboratory from inorganic substances contradicted the belief that organic compounds could only be produced by living organisms due to a \"life force\". However, the exact extent of W\u00f6hler's role in diminishing the belief in vitalism is considered by some to be questionable.\nBiography.\nFriedrich W\u00f6hler was born in Eschersheim, Germany, and was the son of a veterinarian. As a boy, he showed interest in mineral collecting, drawing, and science. His secondary education was at the Frankfurt Gymnasium. During his time at the gymnasium, W\u00f6hler began chemical experimentation in a home laboratory provided by his father. He began his higher education at Marburg University in 1820.\nOn 2 September 1823, W\u00f6hler passed his examinations as a Doctor of Medicine, Surgery, and Obstetrics at Heidelberg University, having studied in the laboratory of chemist Leopold Gmelin. Gmelin encouraged him to focus on chemistry and arranged for W\u00f6hler to conduct research under the direction of chemist Jacob Berzelius in Stockholm, Sweden. W\u00f6hler's time in Stockholm with Berzelius marked the beginning of a long personal and professional relationship between the two scientists. W\u00f6hler translated many of Berzelius's scientific writings into German for international publication. In his lifetime, W\u00f6hler wrote about 275 books, editions, and papers.\nFrom 1826 to 1831, W\u00f6hler taught chemistry at the Polytechnic School in Berlin. From 1831 until 1836, he taught at the Polytechnic School at Kassel. In the spring of 1836, W\u00f6hler became Friedrich Stromeyer's successor as an Ordinary Professor of Chemistry at the University of G\u00f6ttingen, where he occupied the chair of chemistry for 46 years, until his death in 1882. During his time at G\u00f6ttingen approximately 8000 research students were trained in his laboratory. In 1834, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nContributions to chemistry.\nInorganic chemistry.\nW\u00f6hler investigated more than twenty\u2010five chemical elements during his career. Hans Christian \u00d8rsted was the first to separate the element aluminium in 1825, using a reduction of aluminium chloride with a potassium amalgam. Although \u00d8rsted published his findings on the isolation of aluminium in the form of small particles, no other investigators successfully replicated his findings until 1936. \u00d8rsted is now credited with discovering aluminium. \u00d8rsted's findings on aluminium preparation were developed further by W\u00f6hler, with \u00d8rsted's permission. W\u00f6hler modified \u00d8rsted's methods, substituting potassium metal for potassium amalgam for the reduction of aluminium chloride. Using this improved method, W\u00f6hler isolated aluminium powder in pure form on 22 October 1827. He showed that the aluminium powder could convert to solid balls of pure metallic aluminium in 1845. For this work, W\u00f6hler is credited with the first isolation of aluminium metal in pure form.\nIn 1828 W\u00f6hler was the first to isolate the element beryllium in pure metallic form (also independently isolated by Antoine Bussy). In the same year, he became the first to isolate the element yttrium in pure metallic form. He achieved these preparations by heating the anhydrous chlorides of beryllium and yttrium with potassium metal.\nIn 1850, W\u00f6hler determined that what was believed until then to be metallic titanium was a mixture of titanium, carbon, and nitrogen, from which he derived the purest form isolated to that time. (Elemental titanium was later isolated in completely pure form in 1910 by Matthew A. Hunter.) He also developed a chemical synthesis of calcium carbide and silicon nitride.\nW\u00f6hler, working with French chemist Sainte Claire Deville, isolated the element boron in a crystalline form. He also isolated the element silicon in a crystalline form. Crystalline forms of these two elements were previously unknown. In 1856, working with Heinrich Buff, W\u00f6hler prepared the inorganic compound silane (SiH4). He prepared the first samples of boron nitride by melting together boric acid and potassium cyanide. He also developed a method for the preparation of calcium carbide.\nW\u00f6hler had an interest in the chemical composition of meteorites. He showed that some meteoric stones contain organic matter. He analyzed meteorites, and for many years wrote the digest on the literature of meteorites in the \"Jahresberichte \u00fcber die Fortschritte der Chemie\". W\u00f6hler accumulated the best private collection of meteoric stones and irons that existed.\nOrganic chemistry.\nIn 1832, lacking his own laboratory facilities at Kassel, W\u00f6hler worked with Justus Liebig in his Giessen laboratory. In that year, W\u00f6hler and Liebig published an investigation of the oil of bitter almonds. Through their detailed analysis of the chemical composition of this oil, they proved by their experiments that a group of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms can behave chemically as if it were the equivalent of a single atom, take the place of an atom in a chemical compound, and be exchanged for other atoms in chemical compounds. Specifically, their research on the oil of bitter almonds showed that a group of elements with the chemical composition C7H5O can be thought of as a single functional group, which came to be known as a benzoyl radical. In this way, the investigations of W\u00f6hler and Liebig established a new concept in organic chemistry referred to as compound radicals, which had a profound influence on the development of organic chemistry. Many more functional groups were later identified by subsequent investigators with wide utility in chemistry.\nLiebig and W\u00f6hler explored the concept of chemical isomerism, the idea that two chemical compounds with identical chemical compositions could be different substances because of different arrangements of the atoms in the chemical structure. Aspects of chemical isomerism originated in the research of Berzelius. Liebig and W\u00f6hler investigated silver fulminate and silver cyanate. These two compounds have the same chemical composition yet are chemically different. Silver fulminate is explosive, while silver cyanate is a stable compound. Liebig and W\u00f6hler recognized these as examples of structural isomerism, which was a significant advance in understanding chemical isomerism.\nW\u00f6hler has also been regarded as a pioneering researcher in organic chemistry as a result of his 1828 demonstration of the laboratory synthesis of urea from ammonium cyanate, in a chemical reaction that came to be known as the \"W\u00f6hler synthesis\". Urea and ammonium cyanate are further examples of structural isomers of chemical compounds. Heating ammonium cyanate converts it into urea, which is its isomer. In a letter to Swedish chemist J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius the same year, he wrote, 'In a manner of speaking, I can no longer hold my chemical water. I must tell you that I can make urea without the use of kidneys of any animal, be it man or dog.'\nW\u00f6hler's demonstration of urea synthesis has become regarded as a refutation of vitalism, the hypothesis that living things are alive because of some special \"vital force\".\nIt was the beginning of the end for one popular vitalist hypothesis, the idea that \"organic\" compounds could be made only by living things.\nIn responding to W\u00f6hler, J\u00f6ns Jakob Berzelius acknowledged that W\u00f6hler's results were highly significant for the understanding of organic chemistry, calling the findings a \"jewel\" for W\u00f6hler's \"laurel wreath\". Both scientists also recognized the work's importance to the study of isomerism, a new area of research.\nW\u00f6hler's role in overturning vitalism is said to have become exaggerated over time. This tendency can be traced back to Hermann Kopp's \"History of Chemistry\" (in four volumes, 1843\u20131847). He emphasized the importance of W\u00f6hler's research as a refutation of vitalism but ignored its importance in understanding chemical isomerism, setting a tone for subsequent writers.\nThe notion that W\u00f6hler single-handedly overturned vitalism also gained popularity after it appeared in a popular history of chemistry published in 1931, which, \"ignoring all pretense of historical accuracy, turned W\u00f6hler into a crusader\".\nContrary to what was thought in W\u00f6hler's time, cyanate is not a purely inorganic anion, as it is formed in various metabolic pathways. Thus the conversion of ammonium cyanate into urea was not an example of production of an organic compound from an inorganic precursor.\nEducation Reform.\nOnce W\u00f6hler became a professor at the University of G\u00f6ttingen, students traveled from around the world to be instructed by him. W\u00f6hler saw particular success in his students after giving them hands-on experience in the lab. This practice was later adopted around the world, becoming the chemistry lab co-requisite that is required at most universities today.\nW\u00f6hler also allowed his student to participate and aid him in his research, which was not typical at the time. This practice became nearly universal, normalizing the undergraduate and graduate-level research that is a requirement for numerous degrees today.\nFinal days and legacy.\nW\u00f6hler's discoveries had a significant influence on the theoretical basis of chemistry. The journals of every year from 1820 to 1881 contain his original scientific contributions. The \"Scientific American\" supplement for 1882 stated that \"for two or three of his researches he deserves the highest honor a scientific man can obtain, but the sum of his work is overwhelming. Had he never lived, the aspect of chemistry would be very different from that it is now\".\nW\u00f6hler's notable research students included chemists Georg Ludwig Carius, Heinrich Limpricht, Rudolph Fittig, Adolph Wilhelm Hermann Kolbe, Albert Niemann, Vojt\u011bch \u0160afa\u0159\u00edk, Wilhelm K\u00fchne, and Augustus Voelcker.\nW\u00f6hler was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1854. He was an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. In 1862, W\u00f6hler was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society.\n\"The Life and Work of Friedrich W\u00f6hler (1800\u20131882)\" (2005) by Robin Keen is considered to be \"the first detailed scientific biography\" of W\u00f6hler.\nOn the 100th anniversary of W\u00f6hler's death, the West German government issued a stamp depicting the structure of urea with its synthesis formula listed directly below.\nFamily.\nW\u00f6hler's first marriage was in 1828, to his cousin Franziska Maria W\u00f6hler (1811\u20131832). The couple had two children, a son (August) and a daughter (Sophie). After Franziska's death, he married Julie Pfeiffer (1813\u20131886) in 1834, with whom he had four daughters: Fanny, Helene, Emilie, and Pauline.\nFurther works.\nFurther works from W\u00f6hler:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10778", "revid": "38907238", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10778", "title": "Funk", "text": "1960s music genre\nFunk is a music genre that originated in Black American communities in the mid-1960s when musicians created a rhythmic, danceable new form of music through a mixture of various music genres that were popular among African Americans in the mid-20th century. It deemphasizes melody and chord progressions and focuses on a strong rhythmic groove of a bassline played by an electric bassist and a drum part played by a percussionist, often at slower tempos than other popular music. Funk typically consists of a complex percussive groove with rhythm instruments playing interlocking grooves that create a \"hypnotic\" and \"danceable\" feel. It uses the same richly colored extended chords found in bebop jazz, such as minor chords with added sevenths and elevenths, and dominant seventh chords with altered ninths and thirteenths.\nFunk originated in the mid-1960s, with James Brown's development of a signature groove that emphasized the downbeat\u2014with a heavy emphasis on the first beat of every measure (\"The One\"), and the application of swung 16th notes and syncopation on all basslines, drum patterns, and guitar riffs\u2014and rock and psychedelia-influenced musicians Sly and the Family Stone and Jimi Hendrix, fostering improvisation in funk. Other musical groups, including Kool and the Gang, Parliament-Funkadelic, Ohio Players, Fatback Band, Jimmy Castor Bunch, Earth, Wind &amp; Fire, B.T. Express, Shalamar, One Way, Lakeside, Dazz Band, The Gap Band, Slave, Aurra, Roger Troutman &amp; Zapp, Con Funk Shun, Cameo, Bar-Kays and Chic began adopting and developing Brown's innovations during the 1970s and the 1980s. \nFunk derivatives include avant-funk, an avant-garde strain of funk; boogie, a hybrid of electronic music and funk; funk metal; G-funk, a mix of gangsta rap and funk; Timba, a form of funky Cuban dance music; and funk jam. It is also the main influence of Washington go-go, a funk sub-genre. Funk samples and breakbeats have been used extensively in hip hop and electronic dance music.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"funk\" initially referred (and still refers) to a strong odor. It is originally derived from Latin \"fumigare\" (which means \"to smoke\") via Old French \"fungiere\" and, in this sense, it was first documented in English in 1620. In 1784 \"funky\" meaning \"musty\" was first documented, which, in turn, led to a sense of \"earthy\" that was taken up around 1900 in early jazz slang for something \"deeply or strongly felt\". Even though in white culture, the term \"funk\" can have negative connotations of odor or being in a bad mood (\"in a funk\"), in African communities, the term \"funk\", while still linked to body odor, had the positive sense that a musician's hard-working, honest effort led to sweat, and from their \"physical exertion\" came an \"exquisite\" and \"superlative\" performance.\nIn early jam sessions, musicians would encourage one another to \"get down\" by telling one another, \"Now, put some \"stank\" on it!\" At least as early as 1907, jazz songs carried titles such as \"Funky\". The first example is an unrecorded number by Buddy Bolden, remembered as either \"Funky Butt\" or \"Buddy Bolden's Blues\" with improvised lyrics that were, according to Donald M. Marquis, either \"comical and light\" or \"crude and downright obscene\" but, in one way or another, referring to the sweaty atmosphere at dances where Bolden's band played. As late as the 1950s and early 1960s, when \"funk\" and \"funky\" were used increasingly in the context of jazz music, the terms still were considered indelicate and inappropriate for use in polite company. According to one source, New Orleans-born drummer Earl Palmer \"was the first to use the word 'funky' to explain to other musicians that their music should be made more syncopated and danceable.\" The style later evolved into a rather hard-driving, insistent rhythm, implying a more \"carnal quality\". This early form of the music set the pattern for later musicians. The music was identified as slow, sexy, loose, riff-oriented and danceable.\nThe meaning of \"funk\" continues to captivate the genre of black music, feeling, and knowledge. Recent scholarship in black studies has taken the term \"funk\" in its many iterations to consider the range of black movement and culture. In particular, L.H. Stallings's \"Funk the Erotic: Transaesthetics and Black Sexual Cultures\" explores these multiple meanings of \"funk\" as a way to theorize sexuality, culture, and western hegemony within the many locations of \"funk\": \"street parties, drama/theater, strippers and strip clubs, pornography, and self-published fiction.\"\nCharacteristics.\nRhythm and tempo.\nLike soul, funk is based on dance music, so it has a strong \"rhythmic role\". The sound of funk is as much based on the \"spaces between the notes\" as the notes that are played; as such, rests between notes are important. While there are rhythmic similarities between funk and disco, funk has a \"central dance beat that's slower, sexier and more syncopated than disco\", and funk rhythm section musicians add more \"subtextures\", complexity and \"personality\" onto the main beat than a programmed synth-based disco ensemble.\nBefore funk, most pop music was based on sequences of eighth notes, because the fast tempos made further subdivisions of the beat infeasible. The innovation of funk was that by using slower tempos (surely influenced by the revival of blues at early 60s), funk \"created space for further rhythmic subdivision, so a bar of 4/4 could now accommodate possible 16 note placements.\" Specifically, by having the guitar and drums play in \"motoring\" sixteenth-note rhythms, it created the opportunity for the other instruments to play \"more syncopated, broken-up style\", which facilitated a move to more \"liberated\" basslines. Together, these \"interlocking parts\" created a \"hypnotic\" and \"danceable feel\".\nA great deal of funk is rhythmically based on a two-celled onbeat/offbeat structure, which originated in sub-Saharan African music traditions. New Orleans appropriated the bifurcated structure from the Afro-Cuban mambo and conga in the late 1940s, and made it its own. New Orleans funk, as it was called, gained international acclaim largely because James Brown's rhythm section used it to great effect.\nHarmony.\nFunk uses the same richly colored extended chords found in bebop jazz, such as minor chords with added sevenths and elevenths, or dominant seventh chords with altered ninths. Some examples of chords used in funk are minor eleventh chords (e.g., F minor 11th); dominant seventh with added sharp ninth and a suspended fourth (e.g., C7 (#9) sus 4); dominant ninth chords (e.g., F9); and minor sixth chords (e.g., C minor 6). The six-ninth chord is used in funk (e.g., F 6/9); it is a major chord with an added sixth and ninth. In funk, minor seventh chords are more common than minor triads because minor triads were found to be too thin-sounding. Some of the best known and most skillful soloists in funk have jazz backgrounds. Trombonist Fred Wesley and saxophonists Pee Wee Ellis and Maceo Parker are among the most notable musicians in the funk music genre, having worked with James Brown, George Clinton and Prince.\nUnlike bebop jazz, with its complex, rapid-fire chord changes, funk virtually abandoned chord changes, creating static single chord vamps (often alternating a minor seventh chord and a related dominant seventh chord, such as A minor to D7) with melodo-harmonic movement and a complex, driving rhythmic feel. Even though some funk songs are mainly one-chord vamps, the rhythm section musicians may embellish this chord by moving it up or down a semitone or a tone to create chromatic passing chords. For example, \"Play that funky music\" (by Wild Cherry) mainly uses an E ninth chord, but it also uses F#9 and F9.\nThe chords used in funk songs typically imply a Dorian or Mixolydian mode, as opposed to the major or natural minor tonalities of most popular music. Melodic content was derived by mixing these modes with the blues scale. In the 1970s, jazz music drew upon funk to create a new subgenre of jazz-funk, which can be heard in recordings by Miles Davis (\"Live-Evil\", \"On the Corner\"), and Herbie Hancock (\"Head Hunters\").\nImprovisation.\nFunk continues the African musical tradition of improvisation, in that in a funk band, the group would typically \"feel\" when to change, by \"jamming\" and \"grooving\", even in the studio recording stage, which might only be based on the skeleton framework for each song. Funk uses \"collective improvisation\", in which musicians at rehearsals would have what was metaphorically a musical \"conversation\", an approach which extended to the onstage performances.\nInstruments.\nBass.\nFunk creates an intense groove by using strong guitar riffs and basslines played on electric bass. Like Motown recordings, funk songs use basslines as the centerpiece of songs. Indeed, funk has been called the style in which the bassline is most prominent in the songs, with the bass playing the \"hook\" of the song. Early funk basslines used syncopation (typically syncopated eighth notes), but with the addition of more of a \"driving feel\" than in New Orleans funk, and they used blues scale notes along with the major third above the root. Later funk basslines use sixteenth note syncopation, blues scales, and repetitive patterns, often with leaps of an octave or a larger interval.\nFunk basslines emphasize repetitive patterns, locked-in grooves, continuous playing, and slap and popping bass. Slapping and popping uses a mixture of thumb-slapped low notes (also called \"thumped\") and finger \"popped\" (or plucked) high notes, allowing the bass to have a drum-like rhythmic role, which became a distinctive element of funk. Notable slap and funky players include Bernard Edwards (Chic), Robert \"Kool\" Bell, Mark Adams (Slave), Johnny Flippin (Fatback) and Bootsy Collins. While slap and funky is important, some influential bassists who play funk, such as Rocco Prestia (from Tower of Power), did not use the approach, and instead used a typical fingerstyle method based on James Jamerson's Motown playing style. Larry Graham from Sly and the Family Stone is an influential bassist.\nFunk bass has an \"earthy, percussive kind of feel\", in part due to the use of muted, rhythmic ghost notes (also called \"dead notes\"). Some funk bass players use electronic effects units to alter the tone of their instrument, such as \"envelope filters\" (an auto-wah effect that creates a \"gooey, slurpy, quacky, and syrupy\" sound) and imitate keyboard synthesizer bass tones (e.g., the Mutron envelope filter) and overdriven fuzz bass effects, which are used to create the \"classic fuzz tone that sounds like old school Funk records\". Other effects that are used include the flanger and bass chorus. Collins also used a Mu-Tron Octave Divider, an octave pedal that, like the Octavia pedal popularized by Hendrix, can double a note an octave above and below to create a \"futuristic and fat low-end sound\".\nDrums.\nFunk drumming creates a groove by emphasizing the drummer's \"feel and emotion\", which including \"occasional tempo fluctuations\", the use of swing feel in some songs (e.g., \"Cissy Strut\" by The Meters and \"I'll Take You There\" by The Staple Singers, which have a half-swung feel), and less use of fills (as they can lessen the groove). Drum fills are \"few and economical\", to ensure that the drumming stays \"in the pocket\", with a steady tempo and groove. These playing techniques are supplemented by a set-up for the drum kit that often includes muffled bass drums and toms and tightly tuned snare drums. Double bass drumming sounds are often done by funk drummers with a single pedal, an approach which \"accents the second note... [and] deadens the drumhead's resonance\", which gives a short, muffled bass drum sound.\nJames Brown used two drummers such as Clyde Stubblefield and John 'Jabo' Starks in recording and soul show By using two drummers, the JB band was able to maintain a \"solid syncopated\" rhythmic sound, which contributed to the band's distinctive \"Funky Drummer\" rhythm.\nIn Tower of Power drummer David Garibaldi's playing, there are many \"ghost notes\" and rim shots. A key part of the funk drumming style is using the hi-hat, with opening and closing the hi-hats during playing (to create \"splash\" accent effects) being an important approach. Two-handed sixteenth notes on the hi-hats, sometimes with a degree of swing feel, is used in funk.\nJim Payne states that funk drumming uses a \"wide-open\" approach to improvisation around rhythmic ideas from Latin music, ostinatos, that are repeated \"with only slight variations\", an approach which he says causes the \"mesmerizing\" nature of funk. Payne states that funk can be thought of as \"rock played in a more syncopated manner\", particularly with the bass drum, which plays syncopated \"eighth note\" and \"sixteenth note\" patterns that were innovated by drummer Clive Williams (with Joe Tex); George Brown (with Kool &amp; the Gang) and James \"Diamond\" Williams (with The Ohio Players). As with rock, the snare backbeats on beats two and four are still used in most funk (albeit with additional soft ghost notes).\nElectric guitar.\nIn funk, guitarists often mix playing chords of a short duration (nicknamed \"stabs\") with faster rhythms and riffs. Guitarists playing rhythmic parts often play sixteenth notes, including with percussive \"ghost notes\". Chord extensions are favored, such as ninth chords. Typically, funk uses \"two interlocking [electric] guitar parts\", with a rhythm guitarist and a \"tenor guitarist\" who plays single notes. The two guitarists trade off their lines to create a \"call-and-response, intertwined pocket.\" If a band only has one guitarist, this effect may be recreated by overdubbing in the studio, or, in a live show, by having a single guitarist play both parts, to the degree that this is possible.\nIn funk bands, guitarists typically play in a percussive style, using a style of picking called the \"chank\" or \"chicken scratch\", in which the guitar strings are pressed lightly against the fingerboard and then quickly released just enough to get a muted \"scratching\" sound that is produced by rapid rhythmic strumming of the opposite hand near the bridge. Earliest examples of that technic used on rhythm and blues is listened on Johnny Otis song \"Willie and the Hand Jive\" in 1957, with the future James Brown band guitar player Jimmy Nolen. The technique can be broken down into three approaches: the \"chika\", the \"chank\" and the \"choke\". With the \"chika\" comes a muted sound of strings being hit against the fingerboard; \"chank\" is a staccato attack done by releasing the chord with the fretting hand after strumming it; and \"choking\" generally uses all the strings being strummed and heavily muted. \nThe result of these factors was a rhythm guitar sound that seemed to float somewhere between the low-end thump of the electric bass and the cutting tone of the snare and hi-hats, with a rhythmically melodic feel that fell deep in the pocket. Guitarist Jimmy Nolen, longtime guitarist for James Brown, developed this technique. On Brown's \"Give It Up or Turnit a Loose\" (1969), however, Jimmy Nolen's guitar part has a bare bones tonal structure. The pattern of attack-points is the emphasis, not the pattern of pitches. The guitar is used the way that an African drum, or idiophone would be used. Nolen created a \"clean, trebly tone\" by using \"hollow-body jazz guitars with single-coil P-90 pickups\" plugged into a Fender Twin Reverb amp with the mid turned down low and the treble turned up high.\nFunk guitarists playing rhythm guitar generally avoid distortion effects and amp overdrive to get a clean sound, and given the importance of a crisp, high sound, Fender Stratocasters and Telecasters were widely used for their cutting treble tone. The mids are often cut by guitarists to help the guitar sound different from the horn section, keyboards and other instruments. Given the focus on providing a rhythmic groove, and the lack of emphasis on instrumental guitar melodies and guitar solos, sustain is not sought out by funk rhythm guitarists. Funk rhythm guitarists use compressor volume-control effects to enhance the sound of muted notes, which boosts the \"clucking\" sound and adds \"percussive excitement to funk rhythms\" (an approach used by Nile Rodgers).\nGuitarist Eddie Hazel from Funkadelic is notable for his solo improvisation (particularly for the solo on \"Maggot Brain\") and guitar riffs, the tone of which was shaped by a Maestro FZ-1 Fuzz-Tone pedal. Hazel, along with guitarist Ernie Isley of the Isley Brothers, was influenced by Jimi Hendrix's improvised, wah-wah infused solos. Ernie Isley was tutored at an early age by Hendrix, when Hendrix was a part of the Isley Brothers backing band and temporarily lived in the Isleys' household. Funk guitarists use the wah-wah sound effect along with muting the notes to create a percussive sound for their guitar riffs. The phaser effect is often used in funk and R&amp;B guitar playing for its filter sweeping sound effect, an example being the Isley Brothers' song \"Who's That Lady\". Michael Hampton, another P-Funk guitarist, was able to play Hazel's virtuosic solo on \"Maggot Brain\", using a solo approach that added in string bends and Hendrix-style feedback.\nKeyboards.\nA range of keyboard instruments are used in funk. Acoustic piano is used in funk, including in \"September\" by Earth Wind &amp; Fire and \"Will It Go Round in Circles\" by Billy Preston. The electric piano is used on songs such as Herbie Hancock's \"Chameleon\" (a Fender Rhodes) and \"Mercy, Mercy, Mercy\" by Joe Zawinul (a Wurlitzer). The clavinet is used for its percussive tone, and it can be heard in songs such as Stevie Wonder's \"Superstition\" and \"Higher Ground\" and Bill Withers' \"Use Me\". The Hammond B-3 organ is used in funk, in songs such as \"Cissy Strut\" by The Meters and \"Love the One You're With\" (with Aretha Franklin singing and Billy Preston on keyboards).\nBernie Worrell's range of keyboards from his recordings with Parliament Funkadelic demonstrate the wide range of keyboards used in funk, as they include the Hammond organ (\"Funky Woman\", \"Hit It and Quit It\", \"Wars of Armageddon\"); RMI electric piano (\"I Wanna Know If It's Good to You?\", \"Free Your Mind\", \"Loose Booty\"); acoustic piano (\"Funky Dollar Bill\", \"Jimmy's Got a Little Bit of Bitch in Him\"); clavinet (\"Joyful Process\", \"Up for the Down Stroke\", \"Red Hot Mama\"); Minimoog synthesizer (\"Atmosphere\", \"Flash Light\", \"Aqua Boogie\", \"Knee Deep\", \"Let's Take It to the Stage\"); and ARP string ensemble synth (\"Chocolate City\", \"Give Up the Funk (Tear the Roof off the Sucker)\", \"Undisco Kidd\").\nSynthesizers were used in funk both to add to the deep sound of the electric bass, or even to replace the electric bass altogether in some songs. Funk synthesizer bass, most often a Minimoog, was used because it could create layered sounds and new electronic tones that were not feasible on electric bass.\nVocals and lyrics.\nIn the 1970s, funk used many of the same vocal styles that were used in African-American music in the 1960s, including singing influences from blues, gospel, jazz and doo-wop. Like these other African-American styles, funk used \"[y]ells, shouts, hollers, moans, humming, and melodic riffs\", along with styles such as Call and Response and narration of stories (like the African oral tradition approach). The call and response in funk can be between the lead singer and the band members who act as backup vocalists.\nAs funk emerged from soul, the vocals in funk share soul's approach; however, funk vocals tend to be \"more punctuated, energetic, rhythmically percussive[,] and less embellished\" with ornaments, and the vocal lines tend to resemble horn parts and have \"pushed\" rhythms. Funk bands such as Earth, Wind &amp; Fire have harmony vocal parts. Songs like \"Super Bad\" by James Brown included \"double-voice\" along with \"yells, shouts and screams\". Funk singers used a \"black aesthetic\" to perform that made use of \"colorful and lively exchange of gestures, facial expressions, body posture, and vocal phrases\" to create an engaging performance.\nThe lyrics in funk music addressed issues faced by the African American community in the United States during the 1970s, which arose due to the move away from an industrial, working-class economy to an information economy, which harmed the Black working class. Funk songs by The Ohio Players, Earth, Wind &amp; Fire, and James Brown raised issues faced by lower-income Blacks in their song lyrics, such as poor \"economic conditions and themes of poor inner-city life in the black communities\".\nThe Funkadelic song \"One Nation Under A Groove\" (1978) is about the challenges that Blacks overcame during the 1960s civil rights movement, and it includes an exhortation for Blacks in the 1970s to capitalize on the new \"social and political opportunities\" that had become available in the 1970s. The Isley Brothers song \"Fight the Power\" (1975) has a political message. Parliament's song \"Chocolate City\" (1975) metaphorically refers to Washington D.C. and other US cities that have a mainly Black population, and it draws attention to the potential power that Black voters wield and suggests that a Black President be considered in the future.\nThe political themes of funk songs and the aiming of the messages to a Black audience echoed the new image of Blacks that was created in Blaxploitation films, which depicted \"African-American men and women standing their ground and fighting for what was right\". Both funk and Blaxploitation films addressed issues faced by Blacks and told stories from a Black perspective. Another link between 1970s funk and Blaxploitation films is that many of these films used funk soundtracks (e.g., Curtis Mayfield for \"Superfly\"; James Brown and Fred Wesley for \"Black Caesar\" and War for \"Youngblood\").\nFunk songs included metaphorical language that was understood best by listeners who were \"familiar with the black aesthetic and [black] vernacular\". For example, funk songs included expressions such as \"shake your money maker\", \"funk yourself right out\" and \"move your boogie body\". Another example is the use of \"bad\" in the song \"Super Bad\" (1970), which black listeners knew meant \"good\" or \"great\".\nIn the 1970s, to get around radio obscenity restrictions, funk artists would use words that sounded like non-allowed words and double entendres to get around these restrictions. For example, The Ohio Players had a song entitled \"Fopp\" which referred to \"Fopp me right, don't you fopp me wrong/We'll be foppin' all night long...\". Some funk songs used made-up words which suggested that they were \"writing lyrics in a constant haze of marijuana smoke\", such as Parliament's \"Aqua Boogie (A Psychoalphadiscobetabioaquadoloop)\", which includes words such as \"bioaquadooloop\". The mainstream white listener base was often not able to understand funk's lyrical messages, which contributed to funk's lack of popular music chart success with white audiences during the 1970s.\nOther instruments.\nHorn section arrangements with groups of brass instruments are often used in funk songs. Funk horn sections could include saxophone (often tenor sax), trumpet, trombone, and for larger horn sections, such as quintets and sextets, a baritone sax. Horn sections played \"rhythmic and syncopated\" parts, often with \"offbeat phrases\" that emphasize \"rhythmic displacement\". Funk song introductions are an important place for horn arrangements.\nFunk horn sections performed in a \"rhythmic percussive style\" that mimicked the approach used by funk rhythm guitarists. Horn sections would \"punctuate\" the lyrics by playing in the spaces between vocals, using \"short staccato rhythmic blast[s]\". Notable funk horn players included Alfred \"PeeWee\" Ellis, trombonist Fred Wesley, and alto sax player Maceo Parker. Notable funk horn sections including the \"Phoenix Horns\" (with Earth, Wind &amp; Fire), the \"Horny Horns\" (with Parliament), the \"Memphis Horns\" (with Isaac Hayes), and \"MFSB\" (with Curtis Mayfield).\nThe instruments in funk horn sections varied. If there were two horn players, it could be trumpet and sax, trumpet and trombone, or two saxes. A standard horn trio would consist of trumpet, sax, and trombone, but trios of one trumpet with two saxes, or two trumpets with one sax were also fairly common. A quartet would be the set up the same as a standard horn trio, but with an extra trumpet, sax, or (less frequently) trombone player. Quintets would either be a trio of saxes (typically alto/tenor/baritone, or tenor/tenor/baritone) with a trumpet and a trombone, or a pair each of trumpets and saxes with one trombone. With six instruments, the horn section would usually be two trumpets, three saxes, and a trombone. \nNotable songs with funk horn sections include:\nIn bands or shows where hiring a horn section is not feasible, a keyboardist can play the horn section parts on a synthesizer with \"keyboard brass patches\", however, choosing an authentic-sounding synthesizer and brass patch is important. In the 2010s, with micro-MIDI synths, it may even be possible to have another instrumentalist play the keyboard brass parts, thus enabling the keyboardist to continue to comp throughout the song.\nCostumes and style.\nFunk bands in the 1970s adopted Afro-American fashion and style, including \"Bell-bottom pants, platform shoes, hoop earring[s], Afros [hairstyles], leather vests... beaded necklaces\", dashiki shirts, jumpsuits and boots. In contrast to earlier bands such as The Temptations, which wore \"matching suits\" and \"neat haircuts\" to appeal to white mainstream audiences, funk bands adopted an \"African spirit\" in their outfits and style. George Clinton and Parliament are known for their imaginative costumes and \"freedom of dress\", which included bedsheets acting as robes and capes.\nHistory.\nFunk was formed through a mixture of various music genres that were popular among African Americans in the mid-20th century. Musicologist Anne Danielsen wrote that funk might be placed in the lineage of rhythm and blues, jazz, and soul. Sociologist Darby E. Southgate wrote that funk is \"an amalgam of gospel, soul, jazz fusion, rhythm and blues, and black rock.\"\nThe distinctive characteristics of African-American musical expression are rooted in sub-Saharan African music traditions, and find their earliest expression in spirituals, work chants/songs, praise shouts, gospel, blues, and \"body rhythms\" (hambone, patting juba, and ring shout clapping and stomping patterns).\nLike other styles of African-American musical expression including jazz, soul music and R&amp;B, funk music accompanied many protest movements during and after the Civil Rights Movement. Funk allowed everyday experiences to be expressed to challenge daily struggles and hardships fought by lower and working class communities.\nNew Orleans.\nGerhard Kubik notes that with the exception of New Orleans, early blues lacked complex polyrhythms, and there was a \"very specific absence of asymmetric time-line patterns (key patterns) in virtually all early twentieth century African-American music\u00a0... only in some New Orleans genres does a hint of simple time line patterns occasionally appear in the form of transient so-called 'stomp' patterns or stop-time chorus. These do not function in the same way as African time lines.\"\nIn the late 1940s this changed somewhat when the two-celled time line structure was brought into New Orleans blues. New Orleans musicians were especially receptive to Afro-Cuban influences precisely at the time when R&amp;B was first forming. Dave Bartholomew and Professor Longhair (Henry Roeland Byrd) incorporated Afro-Cuban instruments, as well as the clave pattern and related two-celled figures in songs such as \"Carnival Day\" (Bartholomew 1949) and \"Mardi Gras In New Orleans\" (Longhair 1949). Robert Palmer reports that, in the 1940s, Professor Longhair listened to and played with musicians from the islands and \"fell under the spell of Perez Prado's mambo records.\" Professor Longhair's particular style was known locally as \"rumba-boogie\".\nOne of Longhair's great contributions was his particular approach of adopting two-celled, clave-based patterns into New Orleans rhythm and blues (R&amp;B). Longhair's rhythmic approach became a basic template of funk. According to Dr. John (Malcolm John \"Mac\" Rebennack Jr.), the Professor \"put funk into music\u00a0... Longhair's thing had a direct bearing I'd say on a large portion of the funk music that evolved in New Orleans.\" In his \"Mardi Gras in New Orleans\", the pianist employs the 2-3 clave onbeat/offbeat motif in a rumba-boogie \"guajeo\".\nThe syncopated, but straight subdivision feel of Cuban music (as opposed to swung subdivisions) took root in New Orleans R&amp;B during this time. Alexander Stewart states: \"Eventually, musicians from outside of New Orleans began to learn some of the rhythmic practices [of the Crescent City]. Most important of these were James Brown and the drummers and arrangers he employed. Brown's early repertoire had used mostly shuffle rhythms, and some of his most successful songs were 12/8 ballads (e.g. 'Please, Please, Please' (1956), 'Bewildered' (1961), 'I Don't Mind' (1961)). Brown's change to a funkier brand of soul required 4/4 metre and a different style of drumming.\" Stewart makes the point: \"The singular style of rhythm &amp; blues that emerged from New Orleans in the years after World War II played an important role in the development of funk. In a related development, the underlying rhythms of American popular music underwent a basic, yet generally unacknowledged transition from triplet or shuffle feel to even or straight eighth notes.\"\n1960s.\nJames Brown.\nJames Brown credited Little Richard's 1950s R&amp;B road band, The Upsetters from New Orleans, as \"the first to put the funk into the rhythm\" of rock and roll. Following his temporary exit from secular music to become an evangelist in 1957, some of Little Richard's band members joined Brown and the Famous Flames, beginning a long string of hits for them in 1958. By the mid-1960s, James Brown had developed his signature groove that emphasized the downbeat\u2014with heavy emphasis on the first beat of every measure to etch his distinctive sound, rather than the backbeat that typified African-American music. Brown often cued his band with the command \"On the one!,\" changing the percussion emphasis/accent from the one-two-three-four backbeat of traditional soul music to the one-two-three-four downbeat \u2013 but with an even-note syncopated guitar rhythm (on quarter notes two and four) featuring a hard-driving, repetitive brassy swing. This one-three beat launched the shift in Brown's signature music style, starting with his 1964 hit single, \"Out of Sight\" and his 1965 hits, \"Papa's Got a Brand New Bag\" and \"I Got You (I Feel Good)\".\nBrown's style of funk was based on interlocking, contrapuntal parts: syncopated basslines, 16th beat drum patterns, and syncopated guitar riffs. The main guitar ostinatos for \"Ain't it Funky\" (c. late 1960s) are an example of Brown's refinement of New Orleans funk\u2014 an irresistibly danceable riff, stripped down to its rhythmic essence. On \"Ain't it Funky\" the tonal structure is barebones. Brown's innovations led to him and his band becoming the seminal funk act; they also pushed the funk music style further to the forefront with releases such as \"Cold Sweat\" (1967), \"Mother Popcorn\" (1969) and \"Get Up (I Feel Like Being A) Sex Machine\" (1970), discarding even the twelve-bar blues featured in his earlier music. Instead, Brown's music was overlaid with \"catchy, anthemic vocals\" based on \"extensive vamps\" in which he also used his voice as \"a percussive instrument with frequent rhythmic grunts and with rhythm-section patterns\u00a0... [resembling] West African polyrhythms\" \u2013 a tradition evident in African-American work songs and chants. Throughout his career, Brown's frenzied vocals, frequently punctuated with screams and grunts, channeled the \"ecstatic ambiance of the black church\" in a secular context.\nAfter 1965, Brown's bandleader and arranger was Alfred \"Pee Wee\" Ellis. Ellis credits Clyde Stubblefield's adoption of New Orleans drumming techniques, as the basis of modern funk: \"If, in a studio, you said 'play it funky' that could imply almost anything. But 'give me a New Orleans beat' \u2013 you got exactly what you wanted. And Clyde Stubblefield was just the epitome of this funky drumming.\" Stewart states that the popular feel was passed along from \"New Orleans\u2014through James Brown's music, to the popular music of the 1970s.\" Concerning the various funk motifs, Stewart states that this model \"...is different from a time line (such as clave and tresillo) in that it is not an exact pattern, but more of a loose organizing principle.\"\nIn a 1990 interview, Brown offered his reason for switching the rhythm of his music: \"I changed from the upbeat to the downbeat\u00a0... Simple as that, really.\" According to Maceo Parker, Brown's former saxophonist, playing on the downbeat was at first hard for him and took some getting used to. Reflecting back to his early days with Brown's band, Parker reported that he had difficulty playing \"on the one\" during solo performances, since he was used to hearing and playing with the accent on the second beat.\nParliament-Funkadelic.\nA new group of musicians began to further develop the \"funk rock\" approach. Innovations were prominently made by George Clinton, with his bands Parliament and Funkadelic. Together, they produced a new kind of funk sound heavily influenced by jazz and psychedelic rock. The two groups shared members and are often referred to collectively as \"Parliament-Funkadelic\". The breakout popularity of Parliament-Funkadelic gave rise to the term \"P-Funk\", which referred to the music by George Clinton's bands, and defined a new subgenre. Clinton played a principal role in several other bands, including Parlet, the Horny Horns, and the Brides of Funkenstein, all part of the P-Funk conglomerate. \"P-funk\" also came to mean something in its quintessence, of superior quality, or \"sui generis\".\nFollowing the work of Jimi Hendrix in the late 1960s, artists such as Sly and the Family Stone combined the psychedelic rock of Hendrix with funk, borrowing wah pedals, fuzz boxes, echo chambers, and vocal distorters from the former, as well as blues rock and jazz. In the following years, groups such as Clinton's Parliament-Funkadelic continued this sensibility, employing synthesizers and rock-oriented guitar work.\nLate 1960s \u2013 early 1970s.\nOther musical groups picked up on the rhythms and vocal style developed by James Brown and his band, and the funk style began to grow. Dyke and the Blazers, based in Phoenix, Arizona, released \"Funky Broadway\" in 1967, perhaps the first record of the soul music era to have the word \"funky\" in the title. In 1969 Jimmy McGriff released \"Electric Funk\", featuring his distinctive organ over a blazing horn section. Meanwhile, on the West Coast, Charles Wright &amp; the Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band was releasing funk tracks beginning with its first album in 1967, culminating in the classic single \"Express Yourself\" in 1971. Also from the West Coast area, more specifically Oakland, California, came the band Tower of Power (TOP), which formed in 1968. Their debut album \"East Bay Grease\", released 1970, is considered an important milestone in funk. Throughout the 1970s, TOP had many hits, and the band helped to make funk music a successful genre, with a broader audience.\nIn 1970, Sly &amp; the Family Stone's \"Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin)\" reached #1 on the charts, as did \"Family Affair\" in 1971. Notably, these afforded the group and the genre crossover success and greater recognition, yet such success escaped comparatively talented and moderately popular funk band peers. The Meters defined funk in New Orleans, starting with their top ten R&amp;B hits \"Sophisticated Cissy\" and \"Cissy Strut\" in 1969. Another group who defined funk around this time were the Isley Brothers, whose funky 1969 #1 R&amp;B hit, \"It's Your Thing\", signaled a breakthrough in African-American music, bridging the gaps of the jazzy sounds of Brown, the psychedelic rock of Jimi Hendrix, and the upbeat soul of Sly &amp; the Family Stone and Mother's Finest. The Temptations, who had previously helped to define the \"Motown Sound\" \u2013 a distinct blend of pop-soul \u2013 adopted this new psychedelic sound towards the end of the 1960s as well. Their producer, Norman Whitfield, became an innovator in the field of psychedelic soul, creating hits with a newer, funkier sound for many Motown acts, including \"War\" by Edwin Starr, \"Smiling Faces Sometimes\" by the Undisputed Truth and \"Papa Was A Rollin' Stone\" by the Temptations. Motown producers Frank Wilson (\"Keep On Truckin'\") and Hal Davis (\"Dancing Machine\") followed suit. Stevie Wonder and Marvin Gaye also adopted funk beats for some of their biggest hits in the 1970s, such as \"Superstition\" and \"You Haven't Done Nothin'\", and \"I Want You\" and \"Got To Give It Up\", respectively.\n1970s.\nThe 1970s were the era of highest mainstream visibility for funk music. In addition to Parliament Funkadelic, artists like Sly and the Family Stone, Rufus &amp; Chaka Khan, Bootsy's Rubber Band, the Isley Brothers, Ohio Players, Con Funk Shun, Kool and the Gang, the Bar-Kays, Commodores, Roy Ayers, Curtis Mayfield, and Stevie Wonder, among others, were successful in getting radio play. Disco music owed a great deal to funk. Many early disco songs and performers came directly from funk-oriented backgrounds. Some disco music hits, such as all of Barry White's hits, \"Kung Fu Fighting\" by Biddu and Carl Douglas, Donna Summer's \"Love To Love You Baby\", Diana Ross' \"Love Hangover\", KC and the Sunshine Band's \"I'm Your Boogie Man\", \"I'm Every Woman\" by Chaka Khan (also known as the Queen of Funk), and Chic's \"Le Freak\" conspicuously include riffs and rhythms derived from funk. In 1976, Rose Royce scored a number-one hit with a purely dance-funk record, \"Car Wash\". Even with the arrival of disco, funk became increasingly popular well into the early 1980s.\nFunk music was also exported to Africa, and it melded with African singing and rhythms to form Afrobeat. Nigerian musician Fela Kuti, who was heavily influenced by James Brown's music, is credited with creating the style and terming it \"Afrobeat\".\nJazz funk.\nJazz-funk is a subgenre of jazz music characterized by a strong back beat (groove), electrified sounds and an early prevalence of analog synthesizers. The integration of funk, soul, and R&amp;B music and styles into jazz resulted in the creation of a genre whose spectrum is quite wide and ranges from strong jazz improvisation to soul, funk or disco with jazz arrangements, jazz riffs, and jazz solos, and sometimes soul vocals. Jazz-funk is primarily an American genre, where it was popular throughout the 1970s and the early 1980s, but it also achieved noted appeal on the club-circuit in England during the mid-1970s. Similar genres include soul jazz and jazz fusion, but neither entirely overlap with jazz-funk. Notably jazz-funk is less vocal, more arranged and featured more improvisation than soul jazz, and retains a strong feel of groove and R&amp;B versus some of the jazz fusion production.\n1980s synth-funk.\nIn the 1980s, largely as a reaction against what was seen as the over-indulgence of disco, many of the core elements that formed the foundation of the P-Funk formula began to be usurped by electronic instruments, drum machines and synthesizers. Horn sections of saxophones and trumpets were replaced by synth keyboards, and the horns that remained were given simplified lines, and few horn solos were given to soloists. The classic electric keyboards of funk, like the Hammond B3 organ, the Hohner Clavinet and/or the Fender Rhodes piano began to be replaced by the new digital synthesizers such as the Prophet-5, Oberheim OB-X, and Yamaha DX7. Electronic drum machines such as the Roland TR-808, Linn LM-1, and Oberheim DMX began to replace the \"funky drummers\" of the past, and the slap and pop style of bass playing were often replaced by synth keyboard basslines. Lyrics of funk songs began to change from suggestive double entendres to more graphic and sexually explicit content.\nInfluenced by Kraftwerk, the Afroamerican rap DJ Afrika Bambaataa developed electro-funk, a minimalist machine-driven style of funk with his single \"Planet Rock\" in 1982. Also known simply as electro, this style of funk was driven by synthesizers and the electronic rhythm of the TR-808 drum machine. The single \"Renegades of Funk\" followed in 1983. Michael Jackson was also influenced by electro-funk. In 1980, techno-funk music used the TR-808 programmable drum machine, while Kraftwerk's sound influenced later electro-funk artists such as Mantronix.\nRick James was the first funk musician of the 1980s to assume the funk mantle dominated by P-Funk in the 1970s. His 1981 album \"Street Songs\", with the singles \"Give It to Me Baby\" and \"Super Freak\", resulted in James becoming a star, and paved the way for the future direction of explicitness in funk.\nPrince formed the Time, originally conceived as an opening act for him and based on his \"Minneapolis sound\", a hybrid mixture of funk, R&amp;B, rock, pop and new wave. Eventually, the band went on to define their own style of stripped-down funk based on tight musicianship and sexual themes.\nSimilar to Prince, other bands emerged during the P-Funk era and began to incorporate uninhibited sexuality, dance-oriented themes, synthesizers and other electronic technologies to continue to craft funk hits. These included Cameo, Zapp, the Gap Band, the Bar-Kays, and the Dazz Band, who all found their biggest hits in the early 1980s. By the latter half of the 1980s, pure funk had lost its commercial impact; however, pop artists from Michael Jackson to Culture Club often used funk beats.\nLate 1980s to 2000s nu-funk.\nWhile funk was driven away from radio by slick commercial hip hop, contemporary R&amp;B and new jack swing, its influence continued to spread. Artists like Steve Arrington and Cameo still received major airplay and had huge global followings. Rock bands began adopting elements of funk into their sound, creating new combinations of \"funk rock\" and \"funk metal\". Extreme, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Living Colour, Jane's Addiction, Prince, Primus, Urban Dance Squad, Fishbone, Faith No More, Rage Against the Machine, Infectious Grooves, and Incubus spread the approach and styles garnered from funk pioneers to new audiences in the mid-to-late 1980s and the 1990s. These bands later inspired the underground mid-1990s funkcore movement and current funk-inspired artists like Outkast, Malina Moye, Van Hunt, and Gnarls Barkley.\nIn the 1990s, artists like Me'shell Ndegeocello, Brooklyn Funk Essentials and the (predominantly UK-based) acid jazz movement including artists and bands such as Jamiroquai, Incognito, Galliano, Omar, Los Tetas and the Brand New Heavies carried on with strong elements of funk. However, they never came close to reaching the commercial success of funk in its heyday\u2014with the exception of Jamiroquai, whose album \"Travelling Without Moving\" sold about 11.5\u00a0million units worldwide and remains the best-selling funk album in history. Meanwhile, in Australia and New Zealand, bands playing the pub circuit, such as Supergroove, Skunkhour and the Truth, preserved a more instrumental form of funk.\nSince the late 1980s hip hop artists have regularly sampled old funk tunes. James Brown is said to be the most sampled artist in the history of hip hop, while P-Funk is the second most sampled artist; samples of old Parliament and Funkadelic songs formed the basis of West Coast G-funk.\nOriginal beats that feature funk-styled bass or rhythm guitar riffs are also not uncommon. Dr. Dre (considered the progenitor of the G-funk genre) has freely acknowledged to being heavily influenced by George Clinton's psychedelia: \"Back in the 70s that's all people were doing: getting high, wearing Afros, bell-bottoms and listening to Parliament-Funkadelic. That's why I called my album \"The Chronic\" and based my music and the concepts like I did: because his shit was a big influence on my music. Very big\". Digital Underground was a large contributor to the rebirth of funk in the 1990s by educating their listeners with knowledge about the history of funk and its artists. George Clinton branded Digital Underground as \"Sons of the P\", as their second full-length release is also titled. DU's first release, Sex Packets, was full of funk samples, with the most widely known \"The Humpty Dance\" sampling Parliament's \"Let's Play House\". A very strong funk album of DU's was their 1996 release \"Future Rhythm\". Much of contemporary club dance music, drum and bass in particular has heavily sampled funk drum breaks.\nFunk is a major element of certain artists identified with the jam band scene of the late 1990s and 2000s. In the late 1990s, the band Phish developed a live sound called \"cow funk\" (aka \"space funk\"), which consisted of extended danceable deep bass grooves, and often emphasized heavy \"wah\" pedal and other psychedelic effects from the guitar player and layered Clavinet from the keyboard player. Phish began playing funkier jams in their sets around 1996, and 1998's \"The Story of the Ghost\" was heavily influenced by funk. While Phish's funk was traditional in the sense that it often accented beat 1 of the 4/4 time signature, it was also highly exploratory and involved building jams towards energetic peaks before transitioning into highly composed progressive rock and roll.\nMedeski Martin &amp; Wood, Robert Randolph &amp; the Family Band, Galactic, Jam Underground, Soulive, and Karl Denson's Tiny Universe all drew heavily from the funk tradition. Dumpstaphunk builds upon the New Orleans tradition of funk, with their gritty, low-ended grooves and soulful four-part vocals. \nSince the mid-1990s the nu-funk or funk revivalist scene, centered on the deep funk collectors scene, is producing new material influenced by the sounds of rare funk 45s. Labels include Desco, Soul Fire, Daptone, Timmion, Neapolitan, Bananarama, Kay-Dee, and Tramp. These labels often release on 45\u00a0rpm records. Although specializing in music for rare funk DJs, there has been some crossover into the mainstream music industry, such as Sharon Jones' 2005 appearance on \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\". Those who mix acid jazz, acid house, trip hop, and other genres with funk include Tom Tom Club, Brainticket, Groove Armada, et al.\n2010s funktronica.\nDuring the 2000s and early 2010s, some punk funk bands such as Out Hud and Mongolian MonkFish performed in the indie rock scene. Indie band Rilo Kiley, in keeping with their tendency to explore a variety of rockish styles, incorporated funk into their song \"The Moneymaker\" on the album \"Under the Blacklight\". Prince, with his later albums, gave a rebirth to the funk sound with songs like \"The Everlasting Now\", \"Musicology\", \"Ol' Skool Company\", and \"Black Sweat\". Particle, for instance, is part of a scene which combined the elements of digital music made with computers, synthesizers, and samples with analog instruments, sounds, and improvisational and compositional elements of funk.\nDerivatives.\nFrom the early 1970s onwards, funk has developed various subgenres. While George Clinton and the Parliament were making a harder variation of funk, bands such as Kool and the Gang, Ohio Players and Earth, Wind and Fire were making disco-influenced funk music.\nFunk rock.\nFunk rock (also written as \"funk-rock\" or \"funk/rock\") fuses funk and rock elements. Its earliest incarnation was heard in the late '60s through the mid-'70s by musicians such as Jimi Hendrix, Frank Zappa, Gary Wright, David Bowie, Mother's Finest, and Funkadelic on their earlier albums.\nMany instruments may be incorporated into funk rock, but the overall sound is defined by a definitive bass or drum beat and electric guitars. The bass and drum rhythms are influenced by funk music but with more intensity, while the guitar can be funk- or rock-influenced, usually with distortion. Prince, Jesse Johnson, Red Hot Chili Peppers and Fishbone are major artists in funk rock.\nAvant-funk.\nThe term \"avant-funk\" has been used to describe acts who combined funk with art rock's concerns. Simon Frith described the style as an application of progressive rock mentality to rhythm rather than melody and harmony. Simon Reynolds characterized avant-funk as a kind of psychedelia in which \"oblivion was to be attained not through rising above the body, rather through immersion in the physical, self loss through animalism.\"\nActs in the genre include German krautrock band Can, American funk artists Sly Stone and George Clinton, and a wave of early 1980s UK and US artists (including Public Image Ltd, Talking Heads, the Pop Group, Gang of Four, Bauhaus, Cabaret Voltaire, Defunkt, A Certain Ratio, and 23 Skidoo) who embraced black dance music styles such as disco and funk. The artists of the late 1970s New York no wave scene also explored avant-funk, influenced by figures such as Ornette Coleman. Reynolds noted these artists' preoccupations with issues such as alienation, repression and technocracy of Western modernity.\nGo-go.\nGo-go originated in the Washington, D.C. area with which it remains associated, along with other spots in the Mid-Atlantic. Inspired by singers such as Chuck Brown, the \"Godfather of Go-go\", it is a blend of funk, rhythm and blues, and early hip hop, with a focus on lo-fi percussion instruments and in-person jamming in place of dance tracks. As such, it is primarily a dance music with an emphasis on live audience call and response. Go-go rhythms are also incorporated into street percussion.\nBoogie.\nBoogie is an electronic music mainly influenced by funk and post-disco. The minimalist approach of boogie, consisting of synthesizers and keyboards, helped to establish electro and house music. Boogie, unlike electro, emphasizes the slapping techniques of bass guitar but also bass synthesizers. Artists include Vicky \"D\", Komiko, Peech Boys, Kashif, and later Evelyn King.\nElectro funk.\nElectro funk is a hybrid of electronic music and funk. It essentially follows the same form as funk, and retains funk's characteristics, but is made entirely (or partially) with a use of electronic instruments such as the TR-808. Vocoders or talkboxes were commonly implemented to transform the vocals. The pioneering electro band Zapp commonly used such instruments in their music. Bootsy Collins also began to incorporate a more electronic sound on later solo albums. Other artists include Herbie Hancock, Afrika Bambaataa, Egyptian Lover, Vaughan Mason &amp; Crew, Midnight Star and Cybotron.\nFunk metal.\nFunk metal (sometimes typeset differently such as \"funk-metal\") is a fusion genre of music which emerged in the 1980s, as part of the alternative metal movement. It typically incorporates elements of funk and heavy metal (often thrash metal), and in some cases other styles, such as punk and experimental music. It features hard-driving heavy metal guitar riffs, the pounding bass rhythms characteristic of funk, and sometimes hip hop-style rhymes into an alternative rock approach to songwriting. A primary example is the all-African-American rock band Living Colour, who have been said to be \"funk-metal pioneers\" by \"Rolling Stone\". During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the style was most prevalent in California \u2013 particularly Los Angeles and San Francisco.\nG-funk.\nG-funk is a fusion genre of music which combines gangsta rap and funk. It is generally considered to have been invented by West Coast rappers and made famous by Dr. Dre. It incorporates multi-layered and melodic synthesizers, slow hypnotic grooves, a deep bass, background female vocals, the extensive sampling of P-Funk tunes, and a high-pitched portamento saw wave synthesizer lead. Unlike other earlier rap acts that also utilized funk samples (such as EPMD and the Bomb Squad), G-funk often used fewer, unaltered samples per song.\nTimba funk.\nTimba is a form of funky Cuban popular dance music. By 1990, several Cuban bands had incorporated elements of funk and hip-hop into their arrangements, and expanded upon the instrumentation of the traditional conjunto with an American drum set, saxophones and a two-keyboard format. Timba bands like La Charanga Habanera or Bamboleo often have horns or other instruments playing short parts of tunes by Earth, Wind and Fire, Kool and the Gang or other U.S. funk bands. While many funk motifs exhibit a clave-based structure, they are created intuitively, without a conscious intent of aligning the various parts to a guide-pattern. Timba incorporates funk motifs into an overt and intentional clave structure.\nSocial impact.\nWomen and funk.\nDespite funk's popularity in modern music, few people have examined the work of funk women. Notable funk women include Chaka Khan, Labelle, Brides of Funkenstein, Klymaxx, Mother's Finest, Lyn Collins, Betty Davis and Teena Marie. As cultural critic Cheryl Keyes explains in her essay \"She Was Too Black for Rock and Too Hard for Soul: (Re)discovering the Musical Career of Betty Mabry Davis,\" most of the scholarship around funk has focused on the cultural work of men. She states that \"Betty Davis is an artist whose name has gone unheralded as a pioneer in the annals of funk and rock. Most writing on these musical genres has traditionally placed male artists like Jimi Hendrix, George Clinton (of Parliament-Funkadelic), and bassist Larry Graham as trendsetters in the shaping of a rock music sensibility.\"\nIn \"The Feminist Funk Power of Betty Davis and Ren\u00e9e Stout\", Nikki A. Greene notes that Davis' provocative and controversial style helped her rise to popularity in the 1970s as she focused on sexually motivated, self-empowered subject matter. Furthermore, this affected the young artist's ability to draw large audiences and commercial success. Greene also notes that Davis was never made an official spokesperson or champion for the civil rights and feminist movements of the time, although more recently her work has become a symbol of sexual liberation for women of color. Davis' song \"If I'm In Luck I Just Might Get Picked Up\", on her self-titled debut album, sparked controversy, and was banned by the Detroit NAACP. Maureen Mahan, a musicologist and anthropologist, examines Davis' impact on the music industry and the American public in her article \"They Say She's Different: Race, Gender, Genre, and the Liberated Black Femininity of Betty Davis\".\nLaina Dawes, the author of \"What Are You Doing Here: A Black Woman's Life and Liberation in Heavy Metal\", believes respectability politics is the reason artists like Davis do not get the same recognition as their male counterparts: \"I blame what I call respectability politics as part of the reason the funk-rock some of the women from the '70s aren't better known. Despite the importance of their music and presence, many of the funk-rock females represented the aggressive behavior and sexuality that many people were not comfortable with.\"\nAccording to Francesca T. Royster, in Rickey Vincent's book \"Funk: The Music, The People, and The Rhythm of The One\", he analyzes the impact of Labelle but only in limited sections. Royster criticizes Vincent's analysis of the group, stating: \"It is a shame, then, that Vincent gives such minimal attention to Labelle's performances in his study. This reflects, unfortunately, a still consistent sexism that shapes the evaluation of funk music. In \"Funk\", Vincent's analysis of Labelle is brief\u2014sharing a single paragraph with the Pointer Sisters in his three-page sub chapter, 'Funky Women.' He writes that while 'Lady Marmalade' 'blew the lid off of the standards of sexual innuendo and skyrocketed the group's star status,' the band's 'glittery image slipped into the disco undertow and was ultimately wasted as the trio broke up in search of solo status\" (Vincent, 1996, 192). Many female artists who are considered to be in the genre of funk, also share songs in the disco, soul, and R&amp;B genres; Labelle falls into this category of women who are split among genres due to a critical view of music theory and the history of sexism in the United States.\nIn recent years, artists like Janelle Mon\u00e1e have opened the doors for more scholarship and analysis on the female impact on the funk music genre. Mon\u00e1e's style bends concepts of gender, sexuality, and self-expression in a manner similar to the way some male pioneers in funk broke boundaries. Her albums center around Afro-futuristic concepts, centering on elements of female and black empowerment and visions of a dystopian future. In his article, \"Janelle Mon\u00e1e and Afro-sonic Feminist Funk\", Matthew Valnes writes that Monae's involvement in the funk genre is juxtaposed with the traditional view of funk as a male-centered genre. Valnes acknowledges that funk is male-dominated, but provides insight to the societal circumstances that led to this situation.\nMon\u00e1e's influences include her mentor Prince, Funkadelic, Lauryn Hill, and other funk and R&amp;B artists, but according to Emily Lordi, \"[Betty] Davis is seldom listed among Janelle Mon\u00e1e's many influences, and certainly the younger singer's high-tech concepts, virtuosic performances, and meticulously produced songs are far removed from Davis's proto-punk aesthetic. But... like Davis, she also is closely linked with a visionary male mentor (Prince). The title of Mon\u00e1e's 2013 album, \"The Electric Lady\", alludes to Hendrix's \"Electric Ladyland\", but it also implicitly cites the coterie of women that inspired Hendrix himself: that group, called the Cosmic Ladies or Electric Ladies, was together led by Hendrix's lover Devon Wilson and Betty Davis.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10779", "revid": "20612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10779", "title": "Frequency", "text": "Number of occurrences or cycles per unit time\nFrequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating event per unit of time. It is also occasionally referred to as \"temporal frequency\" for clarity and to distinguish it from \"spatial frequency\". Frequency is measured in hertz (Hz) which is equal to one event per second. Ordinary frequency is related to \"angular frequency\" (in radians per second) by a scaling factor of 2\u03c0. The period is the interval of time between events, so the period is the reciprocal of the frequency.\nFor example, if a heart beats at a frequency of 120 times a minute (2\u00a0hertz), the period, \"T\"\u2014the interval at which the beats repeat\u2014is half a second (60\u00a0seconds divided by 120 beats). Frequency is an important parameter used in science and engineering to specify the rate of oscillatory and vibratory phenomena, such as mechanical vibrations, audio signals (sound), radio waves, and light.\nDefinitions and units.\nFor cyclical phenomena such as oscillations, waves, or for examples of simple harmonic motion, the term \"frequency\" is defined as the number of cycles or repetitions per unit of time. The conventional symbol for frequency is \"f\"; the Greek letter \"\u03bd\" (nu) is also used. The \"period\" \"T\" is the time taken to complete one cycle of an oscillation or rotation. The relation between the frequency and the period is given by the equation\nformula_1\nThe term \"temporal frequency\" is used to emphasise that the frequency is characterised by the number of occurrences of a repeating event per unit time.\nThe SI unit of frequency is the hertz (Hz), named after the German physicist Heinrich Hertz by the International Electrotechnical Commission in 1930. It was adopted by the CGPM (Conf\u00e9rence g\u00e9n\u00e9rale des poids et mesures) in 1960, officially replacing the previous name, \"cycle per second\" (cps). The SI unit for the period, as for all measurements of time, is the second. A traditional unit of frequency used with rotating mechanical devices, where it is termed \"rotational frequency\", is revolution per minute, abbreviated r/min or rpm. 60\u00a0rpm is equivalent to one hertz.\nPeriod versus frequency.\nAs a matter of convenience, longer and slower waves, such as ocean surface waves, are more typically described by wave period rather than frequency. Short and fast waves, like audio and radio, are usually described by their frequency. Some commonly used conversions are listed below:\nIn wave propagation.\nFor periodic waves in nondispersive media (that is, media in which the wave speed is independent of frequency), frequency has an inverse relationship to the wavelength, \"\u03bb\" (lambda). Even in dispersive media, the frequency \"f\" of a sinusoidal wave is equal to the phase velocity \"v\" of the wave divided by the wavelength \"\u03bb\" of the wave:\nformula_6\nIn the special case of electromagnetic waves in vacuum, then \"v\" = \"c\", where \"c\" is the speed of light in vacuum, and this expression becomes\nformula_7\nWhen monochromatic waves travel from one medium to another, their frequency remains the same\u2014only their wavelength and speed change.\nMeasurement.\nMeasurement of frequency can be done in the following ways:\nCounting.\nCalculating the frequency of a repeating event is accomplished by counting the number of times that event occurs within a specific time period, then dividing the count by the period. For example, if 71 events occur within 15 seconds the frequency is:\nformula_8\nIf the number of counts is not very large, it is more accurate to measure the time interval for a predetermined number of occurrences, rather than the number of occurrences within a specified time. The latter method introduces a random error into the count of between zero and one count, so on average half a count. This is called \"gating error\" and causes an average error in the calculated frequency of formula_9, or a fractional error of formula_10 where formula_11 is the timing interval and formula_12 is the measured frequency. This error decreases with frequency, so it is generally a problem at low frequencies where the number of counts N is small.\nStroboscope.\nAn old method of measuring the frequency of rotating or vibrating objects is to use a stroboscope. This is an intense repetitively flashing light (strobe light) whose frequency can be adjusted with a calibrated timing circuit. The strobe light is pointed at the rotating object and the frequency adjusted up and down. When the frequency of the strobe equals the frequency of the rotating or vibrating object, the object completes one cycle of oscillation and returns to its original position between the flashes of light, so when illuminated by the strobe the object appears stationary. Then the frequency can be read from the calibrated readout on the stroboscope. A downside of this method is that an object rotating at an integer multiple of the strobing frequency will also appear stationary.\nFrequency counter.\nHigher frequencies are usually measured with a frequency counter. This is an electronic instrument which measures the frequency of an applied repetitive electronic signal and displays the result in hertz on a digital display. It uses digital logic to count the number of cycles during a time interval established by a precision quartz time base. Cyclic processes that are not electrical, such as the rotation rate of a shaft, mechanical vibrations, or sound waves, can be converted to a repetitive electronic signal by transducers and the signal applied to a frequency counter. As of 2018, frequency counters can cover the range up to about 100\u00a0GHz. This represents the limit of direct counting methods; frequencies above this must be measured by indirect methods.\nHeterodyne methods.\nAbove the range of frequency counters, frequencies of electromagnetic signals are often measured indirectly utilizing heterodyning (frequency conversion). A reference signal of a known frequency near the unknown frequency is mixed with the unknown frequency in a nonlinear mixing device such as a diode. This creates a heterodyne or \"beat\" signal at the difference between the two frequencies. If the two signals are close together in frequency the heterodyne is low enough to be measured by a frequency counter. This process only measures the difference between the unknown frequency and the reference frequency. To reach higher frequencies, several stages of heterodyning can be used. Current research is extending this method to infrared and light frequencies (optical heterodyne detection).\nExamples.\nLight.\nVisible light is an electromagnetic wave, consisting of oscillating electric and magnetic fields traveling through space. The frequency of the wave determines its color: 400 THz ( Hz) is red light, 800 THz () is violet light, and between these (in the range 400\u2013800 THz) are all the other colors of the visible spectrum. An electromagnetic wave with a frequency less than will be invisible to the human eye; such waves are called infrared (IR) radiation. At even lower frequency, the wave is called a microwave, and at still lower frequencies it is called a radio wave. Likewise, an electromagnetic wave with a frequency higher than will also be invisible to the human eye; such waves are called ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Even higher-frequency waves are called X-rays, and higher still are gamma rays.\nAll of these waves, from the lowest-frequency radio waves to the highest-frequency gamma rays, are fundamentally the same, and they are all called electromagnetic radiation. They all travel through vacuum at the same speed (the speed of light), giving them wavelengths inversely proportional to their frequencies.\nformula_13\nwhere \"c\" is the speed of light (\"c\" in vacuum or less in other media), \"f\" is the frequency and \"\u03bb\" is the wavelength.\nIn dispersive media, such as glass, the speed depends somewhat on frequency, so the wavelength is not quite inversely proportional to frequency.\nSound.\nSound propagates as mechanical vibration waves of pressure and displacement, in air or other substances. In general, frequency components of a sound determine its \"color\", its timbre. When speaking about the frequency (in singular) of a sound, it means the property that most determines its pitch.\nThe frequencies an ear can hear are limited to a specific range of frequencies. The audible frequency range for humans is typically given as being between about 20\u00a0Hz and 20,000\u00a0Hz (20\u00a0kHz), though the high frequency limit usually reduces with age. Other species have different hearing ranges. For example, some dog breeds can perceive vibrations up to 60,000\u00a0Hz.\nIn many media, such as air, the speed of sound is approximately independent of frequency, so the wavelength of the sound waves (distance between repetitions) is approximately inversely proportional to frequency.\nLine current.\nIn Europe, Africa, Australia, southern South America, most of Asia, and Russia, the frequency of the alternating current in household electrical outlets is 50\u00a0Hz (close to the tone G), whereas in North America and northern South America, the frequency of the alternating current in household electrical outlets is 60\u00a0Hz (between the tones B\u266d and B; that is, a minor third above the European frequency). The frequency of the 'hum' in an audio recording can show where the recording was made, in countries using a European, or a North American, grid frequency.\nAperiodic frequency.\nAperiodic frequency is the rate of incidence or occurrence of non-cyclic phenomena, including random processes such as radioactive decay. It is expressed with the unit of reciprocal second (s\u22121) or, in the case of radioactivity, becquerels.\nIt is defined as a ratio, \"f\" = \"N\"/\"T\", involving the number of times an event happened (\"N\") during a given time duration (\"T\"); it is a physical quantity of type temporal rate.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10781", "revid": "46040481", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10781", "title": "Film festival", "text": "Event with films being shown\nA film festival is an organized, extended presentation of films in one or more cinemas or screening venues, usually in a single city or region. Increasingly, film festivals show some films outdoors. Films may be of recent date and, depending upon the festival's focus, can include international and domestic releases. Some film festivals focus on a specific filmmaker, genre of film (e.g. horror films), or subject matter. Several film festivals focus solely on presenting short films of a defined maximum length. Film festivals are typically annual events. Some film historians, including Jerry Beck, do not consider film festivals as official releases of the film.\nThe oldest film festival in the world is the Venice Film Festival.\nThe most prestigious film festivals in the world, known as the \"Big Five\", are (listed chronologically according to the date of foundation): Venice, Cannes, Berlin (the original \"Big Three\"), Toronto, and Sundance.\nHistory.\nThe Venice Film Festival in Italy began in 1932 and is the oldest film festival still running.\nMainland Europe's biggest independent film festival is \u00c9CU The European Independent Film Festival, which started in 2006 and takes place every spring in Paris, France. Edinburgh International Film Festival is the longest-running festival in Great Britain as well as the longest continually running film festival in the world.\nAustralia's first and longest-running film festival is the Melbourne International Film Festival (1952), followed by the Sydney Film Festival (1954).\nNorth America's first and longest-running short film festival is the Yorkton Film Festival, established in 1947. The first film festival in the United States was the Columbus International Film &amp; Video Festival, also known as The Chris Awards, held in 1953. According to the Film Arts Foundation in San Francisco, \"\"The Chris Awards\" (is) one of the most prestigious documentaries, educational, business and informational competitions in the U.S; (it is) the oldest of its kind in North America and celebrating its 54th year\". It was followed four years later by the San Francisco International Film Festival, held in March 1957, which emphasized feature-length dramatic films. The festival played a major role in introducing foreign films to American audiences. Films in the first year included Akira Kurosawa's \"Throne of Blood\" and Satyajit Ray's .\nToday, thousands of film festivals take place around the world\u2014from high-profile festivals such as Sundance Film Festival and Slamdance Film Festival (Park City, Utah), to horror festivals such as Terror Film Festival (Philadelphia), and the Park City Film Music Festival, the first U.S. film festival dedicated to honoring music in film.\nFilm Funding competitions such as Writers and Filmmakers were introduced when the cost of production could be lowered significantly and internet technology allowed for the collaboration of film production.\nFilm festivals have evolved significantly since the COVID-19 pandemic. Many festivals opted for virtual or hybrid festivals. The film industry, which was already in upheaval due to streaming options, has faced another major shift and movies that are showcased at festivals have an even shorter runway to online launches.\nNotable film festivals.\nThe \"Big Five\" film festivals are considered to be Venice, Cannes, Berlin, Toronto and Sundance.\nIn North America, the Toronto International Film Festival is the most popular festival. \"Time\" wrote it had \"grown from its place as the most influential fall film festival to the most influential film festival, period\".\nThe Seattle International Film Festival is credited as being the largest film festival in the United States, regularly showing over 400 films in a month across the city.\nCompetitive feature films.\nThe festivals in Berlin, Cairo, Cannes, Goa, Karlovy Vary, Locarno, Mar del Plata, Moscow, San Sebasti\u00e1n, Shanghai, Tallinn, Tokyo, Venice, and Warsaw are accredited by the International Federation of Film Producers Associations (FIAPF) in the category of competitive feature films. As a rule, for films to compete, they must first be released during the festivals and not in any other previous venue beforehand.\nExperimental films.\nAnn Arbor Film Festival started in 1963. It is the oldest continually operated experimental film festival in North America, and has become one of the premier film festivals for independent and, primarily, experimental filmmakers to showcase work.\nIndependent films.\nIn the U.S., Telluride Film Festival, Sundance Film Festival, Austin Film Festival, Austin's South by Southwest, New York City's Tribeca Film Festival, London's London Eco-Film Festival, and Slamdance Film Festival are all considered significant festivals for independent film. The Zero Film Festival is significant as the first and only festival exclusive to self-financed filmmakers. The biggest independent film festival in the UK is Raindance Film Festival. The British Urban Film Festival (which specifically caters to Black and minority interests) was officially recognized in the 2020 New Year Honours list.\nSubject specific films.\nA few film festivals have focused on highlighting specific issue topics or subjects. These festivals have included both mainstream and independent films. Some examples include military films, health-related film festivals, and human rights film festivals.\nThere are festivals, especially in the US, that highlight and promote films that are made by or are about various ethnic groups and nationalities or feature the cinema from a specific foreign country. These include , , Mexican-Americans, Arabs, Italian, German, French, Palestinian, and . The Deauville American Film Festival in France is devoted to the cinema of the United States.\nLGBTQ+ and are also popular.\nNorth American film festivals.\nThe San Francisco International Film Festival, founded by Irving \"Bud\" Levin started in 1957, is the oldest continuously annual film festival in the United States. It highlights current trends in international filmmaking and video production with an emphasis on work that has not yet secured U.S. distribution.\nThe Vancouver International Film Festival, founded in 1958, is one of the largest film festivals in North America. It focuses on East Asian film, Canadian film, and nonfiction film. In 2016, there was an audience of 133,000 and 324 films.\nThe Toronto International Film Festival, founded by Bill Marshall, Henk Van der Kolk and Dusty Cohl, is regarded as North America's most important film festival, and is the most widely attended.\nThe Ottawa Canadian Film Festival, abbreviated OCanFilmFest, was co-founded by Ottawa-based filmmakers Jith Paul, Ed Kucerak and Blair Campbell in 2015, and features films of various durations and genres from filmmakers across Canada.\nThe Sundance Film Festival founded by Sterling Van Wagenen (then head of Wildwood, Robert Redford's company), John Earle, and Cirina Hampton Catania (both serving on the Utah Film Commission at the time) is a major festival for independent film.\nThe Woodstock Film Festival was launched in 2000 by filmmakers Meira Blaustein and Laurent Rejto to bring high-quality independent films to the Hudson Valley region of New York. In 2010, Indiewire named the Woodstock Film Festival among the top 50 independent film festivals worldwide.\nThe Regina International Film Festival and Awards (RIFFA) founded by John Thimothy, one of the top leading international film festivals in western Canada (Regina, Saskatchewan) represented 35 countries in 2018 festival. RIFFA annual Award show and red carpet arrival event is getting noticed in the contemporary film and fashion industries in Western Canada.\nToronto's Hot Docs founded by filmmaker Paul Jay, is a North American documentary film festival. Toronto has the largest number of film festivals in the world, ranging from cultural, independent, and historic films.\nThe Seattle International Film Festival, which screens 270 features and approximately 150 short films, is the largest American film festival in terms of the number of feature productions.\nThe Expresi\u00f3n en Corto International Film Festival is the largest competitive film festival in Mexico. It specializes in emerging talent, and is held in the last week of each July in the two colonial cities of San Miguel de Allende and Guanajuato.\nOther Mexican festivals include the Guadalajara International Film Festival in Guadalajara, Oaxaca Film Fest, the Morelia International Film Festival in Morelia, Michoacan Mexico, and the Los Cabos International Film Festival founded by Scott Cross, Sean Cross, and Eduardo Sanchez Navarro, in Los Cabos, Baja Sur, Mexico are considered the most important film festivals in Latin America. In 2015, \"Variety\" called the Los Cabos International Film Festival the \"Cannes of Latin America\".\nSouth American film festivals.\nThe Cartagena Film Festival, founded by Victor Nieto in 1960, is the oldest in Latin America. The Festival de Gramado (or Gramado Film Festival) Gramado, Brazil.\nThe Valdivia International Film Festival is held annually in the city of Valdivia. It is arguable the most important film festival in Chile. There is also Filmambiente, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, an international festival on environmental films and videos.\nThe Caribbean.\nFor Spanish-speaking countries, the Dominican International Film Festival takes place annually in Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic. As well as the Havana Film Festival was founded in 1979 and is the oldest continuous annual film festival in the Caribbean. Its focus is on Latin American cinema.\nThe Trinidad and Tobago Film Festival, founded in 2006, is dedicated to screening the newest films from the English-, Spanish, French- and Dutch-speaking Caribbean, as well as the region's diaspora. It also seeks to facilitate the growth of Caribbean cinema by offering a wide-ranging industry programme and networking opportunities.\nThe Lusca Fantastic Film Fest (formerly Puerto Rico Horror Film Fest) was also founded in 2006 and is the first and only international fantastic film festival in the Caribbean devoted to sci-fi, thriller, fantasy, dark humor, bizarre, horror, anime, adventure, virtual reality, and animation in short and feature films.\nEuropean festivals.\nThe most important European film festivals are the Venice Film Festival (late summer to early autumn), the Cannes Film Festival (late spring to early summer), and the Berlin International Film Festival (late winter to early spring), founded in 1932, 1946, and 1951 respectively.\nAnimation.\nMany film festivals are dedicated exclusively to animation.\nA variety of regional festivals happen in various countries. Austin Film Festival is accredited by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts &amp; Sciences, which makes all their jury award-winning narrative short and animated short films eligible for an Academy Award.\nAfrican festivals.\nThere are several significant film festivals held regularly in Africa. The biannual Panafrican Film and Television Festival of Ouagadougou (FESPACO) in Burkina Faso was established in 1969 and accepts competition-only films by African filmmakers and chiefly produced in Africa. The annual Durban International Film Festival in South Africa and Zanzibar International Film Festival in Tanzania has grown in importance for the film and entertainment industry, as they often screen the African premieres of many international films. The Nairobi Film Festival (NBO), which was established in 2016, with a special focus on screening exceptional films from around the world that are rarely presented in Nairobi's mainstream cinema and spotlighting the best Kenyan films, has also been growing in popularity over the years and has improved the cinema-going culture in Kenya.\nThe Sahara International Film Festival, held annually in the Sahrawi refugee camps in western Algeria near the border of Western Sahara, is notable as the only film festival in the world to take place in a refugee camp. The festival has the two-fold aim of providing cultural entertainment and educational opportunities to refugees, and of raising awareness of the plight of the Sahrawi people, who have been exiled from their native Western Sahara for more than three decades.\nAsian film festivals.\nIndia.\nThe International Film Festival of India, organized by the government of India, was founded in 1952. Chennai International Film Festival has been organized since 2002 by the Indo Cine Appreciation Foundation (ICAF), Government of Tamil Nadu, the South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce and the Film Federation of India.\nThe Jaipur International Film Festival, founded in 2009, is the big and bedt international film festival in India. The International Film Festival of Kerala organised by the Government of Kerala held annually at Thiruvananthapuram is acknowledged as one of the leading cultural events in Indian.\nThe International Documentary and Short Film Festival of Kerala (IDSFFK), hosted by the Kerala State Chalachitra Academy, is a major documentary and short film festival.\nThe Mumbai Women's International Film Festival (MWIFF) is an annual film festival in Mumbai featuring films made by women directors and women technicians.\nThe Calcutta International Cult Films Festival (CICFF), is a popular international film festival based in Kolkata which showcases international cult films.\nYathaKatha International Film &amp; Literature Festival (YKIFLF) is an annual film &amp; literature festival in Mumbai showcasing the collaboration of literature in cinema via various constructive discussions and forums. 1st edition of festival is being held from 25\u201328 November in Mumbai, Maharashtra India.\nOthers.\nNotable festivals include the Hong Kong International Film Festival (HKIFF), Busan International Film Festival (BIFF), Kathmandu International Mountain Film Festival, Melbourne International Film Festival (MIFF) and World Film Carnival Singapore.\nArab World film festivals.\nThere are several major film festivals in the Arab world, such as the Beirut International Film Festival, Cairo International Film Festival, the only international competitive feature film festival recognized by the FIAPF in the Arab world and Africa, as well as the oldest in this category, Carthage Film Festival, the oldest festival in Africa and the Arab world, and Marrakech International Film Festival.\nFestival administration.\nBusiness model.\nAlthough there are notable for-profit festivals such as SXSW, most festivals operate on a nonprofit membership-based model, with a combination of ticket sales, membership fees, and corporate sponsorship constituting the majority of revenue. Unlike other arts nonprofits (performing arts, museums, etc.), film festivals typically receive few donations from the general public and are occasionally organized as nonprofit business associations instead of public charities. Film industry members often have significant curatorial input, and corporate sponsors are given opportunities to promote their brand to festival audiences in exchange for cash contributions. Private parties, often to raise investments for film projects, constitute significant \"fringe\" events. Larger festivals maintain year-round staffs often engaging in community and charitable projects outside the festival season.\nEntry fee.\nWhile entries from established filmmakers are usually considered pluses by the organizers, most festivals require new or relatively unknown filmmakers to pay an entry fee to have their works considered for screening. This is especially so in larger film festivals, such as the Jaipur International Film Festival in Jaipur India, Toronto International Film Festival, Sundance Film Festival, South by Southwest, Montreal World Film Festival, and even smaller \"boutique\" festivals such as the Miami International Film Festival, British Urban Film Festival in London and Mumbai Women's International Film Festival in India.\nOn the other hand, some festivals\u2014usually those accepting fewer films, and perhaps not attracting as many \"big names\" in their audiences as do Sundance and Telluride\u2014require no entry fee. Many smaller film festivals in the United States (the Stony Brook Film Festival on Long Island, the Northwest Filmmakers' Festival, and the Sicilian Film Festival in Miami), are examples.\nThe Portland International Film Festival charges an entry fee but waives it for filmmakers from the Northwestern United States, and some others with regional focuses have similar approaches.\nSeveral film festival submission portal websites exist to streamline filmmakers' entries into multiple festivals. They provide databases of festival calls for entry and offer filmmakers a convenient \"describe once, submit many\" service.\nScreening out of competition.\nThe core tradition of film festivals is competition, or judging which films are most deserving of various forms of recognition. Some festivals, such as the famous Cannes Film Festival, may screen films that are considered close to competition-quality without being included in the competition; the films are said to be screened \"out of competition\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nTop 3 Films Festival"}
{"id": "10782", "revid": "16752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10782", "title": "List of film genres", "text": ""}
{"id": "10783", "revid": "869314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10783", "title": "History of film", "text": "Chronology of branch of photography\nThe history of film chronicles the development of a visual art form created using film technologies that began in the late 19th century. The advent of film as an artistic medium is not clearly defined. However, the commercial, public screening of ten of the Lumi\u00e8re brothers' short films in Paris on 28 December 1895, can be regarded as the breakthrough of projected cinematographic motion pictures. There had been earlier cinematographic results and screenings by others, like the Skladanowsky brothers, who used their self-made Bioscop to display the first moving picture show to a paying audience on 1 November 1895, in Berlin, but they had neither the quality, financial backing, stamina, or luck to find the momentum that propelled the cin\u00e9matographe Lumi\u00e8re into worldwide success. Those earliest films were in black and white, under a minute long, without recorded sound, and consisted of a single shot from a steady camera. The first decade of motion pictures saw film move from a novelty to an established mass entertainment industry, with film production companies and studios established all over the world.\nConventions toward a general cinematic language also developed, with editing camera movements and other cinematic techniques contributing specific roles in the narrative of films.\nPopular new media, including television (mainstream since the 1950s), home video (mainstream since the 1980s), and the internet (mainstream since the 1990s), influenced the distribution and consumption of films. Film production usually responded with content to fit the new media, and with technical innovations (including widescreen (mainstream since the 1950s), 3D, and 4D film) and more spectacular films to keep theatrical screenings attractive.\nSystems that were cheaper and more easily handled (including 8mm film, video, and smartphone cameras) allowed for an increasing number of people to create films of varying qualities, for any purpose (including home movies and video art). The technical quality was usually lower than that of professional movies, but improved with digital video and affordable, high-quality digital cameras.\nImproving over time, digital production methods became more and more popular during the 1990s, resulting in increasingly realistic visual effects and popular feature-length computer animations.\nVarious film genres emerged and enjoyed variable degrees of success over time, with huge differences among, for instance, horror.\nPrecursors.\nThe use of film as an art form traces its origins to several earlier traditions in the arts such as (oral) storytelling, literature, theatre and visual arts. Cantastoria and similar ancient traditions combined storytelling with series of images that were shown or indicated one after the other. Predecessors to film that had already used light and shadows to create art before the advent of modern film technology include shadowgraphy, shadow puppetry, camera obscura, and the magic lantern.\nShadowgraphy and shadow puppetry represent early examples of the intent to use moving imagery for entertainment and storytelling. Thought to have originated in the Far East, the art form used shadows cast by hands or objects to assist in the creation of narratives. Shadow puppetry enjoyed popularity for centuries around Asia, notably in Java, and eventually spread to Europe during the Age of Enlightenment.\nBy the 16th century, entertainers often conjured images of ghostly apparitions, utilizing techniques such as camera obscura and other forms of projection to enhance their performances. Magic lantern shows developed in the latter half of the 17th century seem to have continued this tradition with images of death, monsters and other scary figures. Around 1790, this practice was developed into a type of multimedia ghost show known as phantasmagoria. These popular shows entertained audiences using mechanical slides, rear projection, mobile projectors, superimposition, dissolves, live actors, smoke (on which projections may have been cast), odors, sounds and even electric shocks. While many first magic lantern shows were intended to frighten viewers, advances by projectionists allowed for creative and even educational storytelling that could appeal to wider family audiences. Newly pioneered techniques such as the use of dissolving views and the chromatrope allowed for smoother transitions between two projected images and aided in providing stronger narratives.\nIn 1833, scientific study of a stroboscopic illusion in spoked wheels by Joseph Plateau, Michael Faraday and Simon Stampfer led to the invention of the Fantascope, also known as the stroboscopic disk or the phenakistiscope, which was popular in several European countries for a while. Plateau thought it could be further developed for use in phantasmagoria and Stampfer imagined a system for longer scenes with strips on rollers, as well as a transparent version (probably intended for projection). Plateau, Charles Wheatstone, Antoine Claudet and others tried to combine the technique with the stereoscope (introduced in 1838) and photography (introduced in 1839) for a more complete illusion of reality, but for decades such experiments were mostly hindered by the need for long exposure times, with motion blur around objects that moved while the reflected light fell on the photo-sensitive chemicals. A few people managed to get decent results from stop motion techniques, but these were only very rarely marketed and no form of animated photography had much cultural impact before the advent of chronophotography.\nMost early photographic sequences, known as chronophotography, were not initially intended to be viewed in motion and were typically presented as a serious, even scientific, method of studying locomotion. The sequences almost exclusively involved humans or animals performing a simple movement in front of the camera. Starting in 1878 with the publication of \"The Horse in Motion\" cabinet cards, photographer Eadweard Muybridge began making hundreds of chronophotographic studies of the motion of animals and humans in real-time. He was soon followed by other chronophotographers like \u00c9tienne-Jules Marey, Georges Demen\u00ff, Albert Londe and Ottomar Ansch\u00fctz. In 1879, Muybridge started lecturing on animal locomotion and used his Zoopraxiscope to project animations of the contours of his recordings, traced onto glass discs.\nIn 1887, the German inventor and photographer Ottomar Ansch\u00fctz started presenting his chronophotographic recordings in motion, using a device he called the Elektrischen Schnellseher (also known as the Electrotachyscope), which displayed short loops on a small milk glass screen. By 1891, he had started mass production of a more economical, coin-operated peep-box viewing device of the same name that was exhibited at international exhibitions and fairs. Some machines were installed for longer periods, including some at The Crystal Palace in London, and in several U.S. stores. Shifting the focus of the medium from technical and scientific interest in motion to entertainment for the masses, he recorded wrestlers, dancers, acrobats, and scenes of everyday life. Nearly 34,000 people paid to see his shows at the Berlin Exhibition Park in summer 1892. Others saw it in London or at the 1893 Chicago World's Fair.Though little evidence remains for most of these recordings, some scenes probably depicted staged comical scenes. Extant records suggest some of his output directly influenced later works by the Edison Company, such as the 1894 film \"Fred Ott's Sneeze\".\nAdvances towards motion picture projection technologies were based on the popularity of magic lanterns, chronophotographic demonstrations, and other closely related forms of projected entertainment such as illustrated songs. From October 1892 to March 1900, inventor \u00c9mile Reynaud exhibited his Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Optique (\"Optical Theatre\") film system at the Mus\u00e9e Gr\u00e9vin in Paris. Reynaud's device, which projected a series of animated stories such as \"Pauvre Pierrot\" and \"Autour d'une cabine\", was displayed to over 500,000 visitors over the course of 12,800 shows. On 25, 29 and 30 November 1894, Ottomar Ansch\u00fctz projected moving images from Electrotachyscope discs on a large screen in the darkened Grand Auditorium of a Post Office Building in Berlin. From 22 February to 30 March 1895, a commercial 1.5-hour program of 40 different scenes was screened for audiences of 300 people at the old Reichstag and received circa 4,000 visitors.\nNovelty Era (1890s- Early 1900s).\nAdvances towards projection.\nIn June 1889, American inventor Thomas Edison assigned a lab assistant, William Kennedy Dickson, to help develop a device that could produce visuals to accompany the sounds produced from the phonograph. Building upon previous machines by Muybridge, Marey, Ansch\u00fctz and others, Dickson and his team created the Kinetoscope peep-box viewer, with celluloid loops containing about half a minute of motion picture entertainment. After an early preview on 20 May 1891, Edison introduced the machine in 1893. Many of the movies presented on the Kinetoscope showcased well-known vaudeville acts performing in Edison's Black Maria studio. The Kinetoscope quickly became a global sensation with multiple viewing parlors across major cities by 1895. As the initial novelty of the images wore off, the Edison Company was slow to diversify their repertoire of films and waning public interest caused business to slow by Spring 1895. To remedy declining profits, experiments, such as \"The Dickson Experimental Sound Film\", were conducted in an attempt to achieve the device's original goal of providing visual accompaniment for sound recordings. Limitations in syncing the sound to the visuals, however, prevented widespread application. During that same period, inventors began advancing technologies towards film projection that would eventually overtake Edison's peep-box format.\nMultiple inventors including Wordsworth Donisthorpe, Louis Le Prince, and William Friese-Greene experimented with prototype motion picture projection devices in the pursuit of creating and displaying films. The scenes in these experiments were usually filmed with family, friends or passing traffic as the moving subjects. Most of these films never passed the experimental stage and their efforts garnered little public attention until after cinema had become successful.\nIn the latter half of 1895, brothers Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re filmed a number of short scenes with their invention, the Cin\u00e9matographe. On 28 December 1895, the brothers gave their first commercial screening in Paris (though evidence exists of demonstrations of the device to small audiences as early as October 1895). The screening consisted of ten films and lasted roughly 20 minutes. The program consisted mainly of actuality films such as \"Workers Leaving the Lumi\u00e8re Factory\" as truthful documents of the world, but the show also included the staged comedy \"L'Arroseur Arros\u00e9\". The most advanced demonstration of film projection thus far, the Cin\u00e9matographe was an instant success, bringing in an average of 2,500 to 3,000 francs daily by the end of January 1896. Following the first screening, the order and selection of films were changed often.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers' primary business interests were in selling cameras and film equipment to exhibitors, not the actual production of films. Despite this, filmmakers across the world were inspired by the potential of film as exhibitors brought their shows to new countries. This era of filmmaking, dubbed by film historian Tom Gunning as \"the cinema of attractions\", offered a relatively cheap and simple way of providing entertainment to the masses. Rather than focusing on stories, Gunning argues, filmmakers mainly relied on the ability to delight audiences through the \"illusory power\" of viewing sequences in motion, much as they did in the Kinetoscope era that preceded it. Despite this, early experimentation with fiction filmmaking (both in actuality film and other genres) did occur. Films were mostly screened inside temporary storefront spaces, in tents of traveling exhibitors at fairs, or as \"dumb\" acts in vaudeville programs. During this period, before the process of post-production was clearly defined, exhibitors were allowed to exercise their creative freedom in their presentations. To enhance the viewers' experience, some showings were accompanied by live musicians in an orchestra, a theatre organ, live sound effects and commentary spoken by the showman or projectionist.\nExperiments in film editing, special effects, narrative construction, and camera movement during this period by filmmakers in France, England, and the United States became influential in establishing an identity for film going forward. At both the Edison and Lumi\u00e8re studios, loose narratives such as the 1895 Edison film\", Washday Troubles,\" established short relationship dynamics and simple storylines\".\" In 1896, \"La F\u00e9e aux Choux\" (\"The Fairy of the Cabbages\") was first released. Directed and edited by Alice Guy, the story is arguably the earliest narrative film in history, as well as the first film to be directed by a woman. That same year, the Edison Manufacturing Company released \"The May Irwin Kiss\" in May to widespread financial success. The film, which featured the first kiss in cinematic history, led to the earliest known calls for film censorship.\nAnother early film producer was Australia's Limelight Department. Commencing in 1898, it was operated by The Salvation Army in Melbourne, Australia. The Limelight Department produced evangelistic material for use by the Salvation Army, including lantern slides as early as 1891, as well as private and government contracts. In its nineteen years of operation, the Limelight Department produced about 300 films of various lengths, making it one of largest film producers of its time. The Limelight Department made a 1904 film by Joseph Perry called Bushranging in North Queensland, which is believed to be the first ever film about bushrangers.\nProliferation of actualities and newsreels.\nIn its infancy, film was rarely recognized as an art form by presenters or audiences. Regarded by the upper class as a \"vulgar\" and \"lowbrow\" form of cheap entertainment, films largely appealed to the working class and were often too short to hold any strong narrative potential. Initial advertisements promoted the technologies used to screen films rather than the films themselves. As the devices became more familiar to audiences, their potential for capturing and recreating events was exploited primarily in the form of newsreels and actualities. During the creation of these films, cinematographers often drew upon aesthetic values established by past art forms such as framing and the intentional placement of the camera in the composition of their image. In a 1955 article for \"The Quarterly of Film Radio and Television,\" film producer and historian Kenneth Macgowan asserted that the intentional staging and recreation of events for newsreels \"brought storytelling to the screen\".\nWith the advertisement of film technologies over content, actualities initially began as a \"series of views\" that often contained shots of beautiful and lively places or performance acts. Following the success of their 1895 screening, The Lumi\u00e8re brothers established a company and sent cameramen across the world to capture new subjects for presentation. After the cinematographer shot scenes, they often exhibited their recordings locally and then sent back to the company factory in Lyon to make duplicate prints for sale to whoever wanted them. In the process of filming actualities, especially those of real events, filmmakers discovered and experimented with multiple camera techniques to accommodate for their unpredictable nature. Due to the short length (often only one shot) of many actualities, catalogue records indicate that production companies marketed to exhibitors by promoting multiple actualities with related subject matters that could be purchased to complement each other. Exhibitors who bought the films often presented them in a program and would provide spoken accompaniment to explain the action on screen to audiences.\nThe first paying audience for a motion picture gathered at Madison Square Garden to see a staged actuality that purported itself to be a boxing fight filmed by Woodville Latham using a device called the Eidoloscope on May 20, 1895. Commissioned by Latham, the French inventor Eugene Augustin Lauste created the device with additional expertise from William Kennedy Dickson and crafted a mechanism that came to be known as the Latham loop, which allowed for longer continuous runtimes and was less abrasive on the celluloid film.\nIn subsequent years, screenings of actualities and newsreels proved to be profitable. In 1897, \"The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight\" was released. The film was a complete recording of a heavyweight world championship boxing match at Carson City, Nevada. It generated more income in box office than in live gate receipts and was the longest film produced at the time. Audiences had probably been drawn to the Corbett-Fitzsimmons film en masse because James J. Corbett (a.k.a. Gentleman Jim) had become a matinee idol since he had played a fictionalized version of himself in a stage play.\nFrom 1910 on, regular newsreels were exhibited and soon became a popular way of discovering the news before the advent of television\u00a0\u2013 the British Antarctic Expedition to the South Pole was filmed for the newsreels as were the suffragette demonstrations that were happening at the same time. F. Percy Smith was an early nature documentary pioneer working for Charles Urban when he pioneered the use of time lapse and micro cinematography in his 1910 documentary on the growth of flowers.\nExperimentation with narrative filmmaking.\nFrance: Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s, Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res, Gaumont Film Company.\nFollowing the successful exhibition of the Cin\u00e9matographe, development of a motion picture industry rapidly accelerated in France. Multiple filmmakers experimented with the technology as they worked to attain the same success that the Lumi\u00e8re brothers had with their screening. These filmmakers established new companies such as the Star Film Company, Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res, and the Gaumont Film Company.\nThe most widely cited progenitor of narrative filmmaking is the French filmmaker, Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s. M\u00e9li\u00e8s was an illusionist who had previously used magic lantern projections to enhance his magic act. In 1895, M\u00e9li\u00e8s attended the demonstration of the Cinematographe and recognized the potential of the device to aid his act. He attempted to buy a device from the Lumi\u00e8re brothers, but they refused. Months later, he bought a camera from Robert W. Paul and began experiments with the device by creating actualities. During this period of experimentation, M\u00e9li\u00e8s discovered and implemented various special effects including the stop trick, the multiple exposure, and the use of dissolves in his films. At the end of 1896, M\u00e9li\u00e8s established the Star Film Company and started producing, directing, and distributing a body of work that would eventually contain over 500 short films. Recognizing the narrative potential afforded by combining his theater background with the newly discovered effects for the camera, M\u00e9li\u00e8s designed an elaborate stage that contained trapdoors and a fly system. The stage construction and editing techniques allowed for the development of more complex stories, such as the 1896 film, \"Le Manoir du Diable\" (\"The House of the Devil\"), regarded as a first in the horror film genre, and the 1899 film \"Cendrillon\" (\"Cinderella\"). In M\u00e9li\u00e8s' films, he based the placement of the camera on the theatrical construct of proscenium framing, the metaphorical plane or fourth wall that divides the actors and the audience. Throughout his career, M\u00e9li\u00e8s consistently placed the camera in a fixed position and eventually fell out of favor with audiences as other filmmakers experimented with more complex and creative techniques. M\u00e9li\u00e8s is most widely known today for his 1902 film, \"Le Voyage Dans La Lune (A Trip to the Moon)\", where he used his expertise in effects and narrative construction to create the first science fiction film.\nIn 1900, Charles Path\u00e9 began film production under the Path\u00e9-Fr\u00e8res brand, with Ferdinand Zecca hired to lead the creative process. Prior to this focus on production, Path\u00e9 had become involved with the industry by exhibiting and selling what were likely counterfeit versions of the Kinetoscope in his phonograph shop. With the creative leadership of Zecca and the capability to mass-produce copies of the films through a partnership with a French toolmaking company, Charles Path\u00e9 sought to make Path\u00e9-Fr\u00e8res the leading film producer in the country. Within the next few years, Path\u00e9-Fr\u00e8res became the largest film studio in the world, with satellite offices in major cities and an expanding selection of films available for presentation. The company's films were varied in content, with directors specializing in various genres for fairground presentations throughout the early 1900s.\nThe Gaumont Film Company was the main regional rival of Path\u00e9-Fr\u00e8res. Founded in 1895 by L\u00e9on Gaumont, the firm initially sold photographic equipment and began film production in 1897, under the direction of Alice Guy, the industry's first female director. Her earlier films share many characteristics and themes with her contemporary competitors, such as the Lumi\u00e8res and M\u00e9li\u00e8s. She explored dance and travel films, often combining the two, such as \"Le Bol\u00e9ro\" performed by Miss Saharet (1905) and \"Tango\" (1905). Many of Guy's early dance films were popular in music-hall attractions such as the serpentine dance films \u2013 also a staple of the Lumi\u00e8res and Thomas Edison film catalogs. In 1906, she made \"The Life of Christ\", a big-budget production for the time, which included 300 extras.\nEngland: Robert W Paul, Cecil Hepworth, The Brighton School.\nBoth Cecil Hepworth and Robert W. Paul experimented with the use of different camera techniques in their films. Paul's 'Cinematograph Camera No. 1' of 1895 was the first camera to feature reverse-cranking, which allowed the same film footage to be exposed several times, thereby creating multiple exposures. This technique was first used in his 1901 film \"Scrooge, or, Marley's Ghost\". Both filmmakers experimented with the speeds of the camera to generate new effects. Paul shot scenes from \"On a Runaway Motor Car through Piccadilly Circus\" (1899) by cranking the camera apparatus very slowly. When the film was projected at the usual 16 frames per second, the scenery appeared to be passing at great speed. Hepworth used the opposite effect in \"The Indian Chief and the Seidlitz Powder\" (1901). The Chief's movements are sped up by cranking the camera much faster than 16 frames per second, producing what modern audiences would call a \"slow motion\" effect.\nThe first films to move from single shots to successive scenes began around the turn of the 20th century. Due to the loss of many early films, a conclusive shift from static singular shots to a series of scenes can be hard to determine. Despite these limitations, Michael Brooke of the British Film Institute attributes real film continuity, involving action moving from one sequence into another, to Robert W. Paul's 1898 film, \"Come Along, Do!\". Only a still from the second shot remains extant today. Released in 1901, the British film \"Attack on a China Mission\" was one of the first films to show a continuity of action across multiple scenes. The use of the intertitle to explain actions and dialogue on screen began in the early 1900s. Filmed intertitles were first used in Robert W. Paul's film, \"Scrooge, or Marley's Ghost.\" In most countries, intertitles gradually came to be used to provide dialogue and narration for the film, thus dispensing the need for narration provided by exhibitors.\nDevelopment of continuous action across multiple shots was furthered in England by a loosely associated group of film pioneers collectively termed \"the Brighton School\". These filmmakers included George Albert Smith and James Williamson, among others. Smith and Williamson experimented with action continuity and were likely the first to incorporate the use of inserts and close-ups between shots. A basic technique for trick cinematography was the double exposure of the film in the camera. The effect was pioneered by Smith in the 1898 film, \"Photographing a Ghost\". According to Smith's catalogue records, the (now lost) film chronicles a photographer's struggle to capture a ghost on camera. Utilizing the double exposure of the film, Smith overlaid a transparent ghostly figure onto the background in a comical manner to taunt the photographer. Smith's \"The Corsican Brothers\" was described in the catalogue of the Warwick Trading Company in 1900: \"By extremely careful photography the ghost appears *quite transparent*. After indicating that he has been killed by a sword-thrust, and appealing for vengeance, he disappears. A 'vision' then appears showing the fatal duel in the snow.\" Smith also initiated the special effects technique of reverse motion. He did this by repeating the action a second time, while filming it with an inverted camera, and then joining the tail of the second negative to that of the first. The first films made using this device were \"Tipsy, Topsy, Turvy\" and \"The Awkward Sign Painter\". The earliest surviving example of this technique is Smith's \"The House That Jack Built\", made before September 1900. Cecil Hepworth took this technique further by printing the negatives of the forward motion in reverse frame by frame, producing a print in which the original action was exactly reversed. To do this he built a special printer in which the negative running through a projector was projected into the gate of a camera through a special lens giving a same-size image. This arrangement came to be called a \"projection printer\", and eventually an \"optical printer\". In 1898, George Albert Smith experimented with close-ups, filming shots of a man drinking beer and a woman using sniffing tobacco. The following year, Smith made \"The Kiss in the Tunnel,\" a sequence consisting of three shots: a train enters a tunnel; a man and a woman exchange a brief kiss in the darkness and then return to their seats; the train exits the tunnel. Smith created the scenario in response to the success of a genre known as a phantom ride. In a phantom ride film, cameras would capture the motion and surroundings from the front of a moving train. The separate shots, when edited together, formed a distinct sequence of events and established causality from one shot to the next. Following \"The Kiss in the Tunnel\", Smith more definitively experimented with continuity of action across successive shots and began utilizing inserts in his films, such as \"Grandma's Reading Glass\" and \"Mary Jane's Mishap\". In 1900, Smith made \"As Seen Through a Telescope.\" The main shot shows a street scene with a young man tying the shoelace and then caressing the foot of his girlfriend, while an old man observes this through a telescope. There is then a cut to close shot of the hands on the girl's foot shown inside a black circular mask, and then a cut back to the continuation of the original scene.\nJames Williamson perfected narrative building techniques in his 1900 film, \"Attack on a China Mission\". The film, which film historian John Barnes later described as having \"the most fully developed narrative of any film made in England up to that time\", opens as the first shot shows Chinese Boxer rebels at the gate; it then cuts to the missionary family in the garden, where a fight ensues. The wife signals to British sailors from the balcony, who come and rescue them. The film also used the first \"reverse angle\" cut in film history. The following year, Williamson created \"The Big Swallow\". In the film. a man becomes irritated by the presence of the filmmaker and \"swallows\" the camera and its operator through the use of interpolated close-up shots. He combined these effects, along with superimpositions, use of wipe transitions to denote a scene change, and other techniques to create a film language, or \"film grammar\". James Williamson's use of continuous action in his 1901 film, \"Stop Thief!\" stimulated a film genre known as the \"chase film.\" In the film, a tramp steals a leg of mutton from a butcher's boy in the first shot, is chased by the butcher's boy and assorted dogs in the following shot, and is finally caught by the dogs in the third shot.\nUnited States: The Edison Company and Edwin S. Porter.\n\"The Execution of Mary Stuart\", produced in 1895 by the Edison Company for viewing with the Kinetoscope, showed Mary Queen of Scots being executed in full view of the camera. The effect, known as the stop trick, was achieved by replacing the actor with a dummy for the final shot. The technique used in the film is seen as one of the earliest known uses of special effects in film.\nThe American filmmaker Edwin S. Porter started making films for the Edison Company in 1901. A former projectionist hired by Thomas Edison to develop his new projection model known as the Vitascope, Porter was inspired in part by the works of M\u00e9li\u00e8s, Smith, and Williamson and drew upon their newly crafted techniques to further the development of continuous narrative through editing. When he began making longer films in 1902, he put a dissolve between every shot, just as Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s was already doing, and he frequently had the same action repeated across the dissolves.\nIn 1902, Porter shot \"Life of an American Fireman\" for the Edison Manufacturing Company and distributed the film the following year. In the film, Porter combined stock footage from previous Edison films with newly shot footage and spliced them together to convey a dramatic story of the rescue of a woman and her child by heroic firemen.\nPorter's film, \"The Great Train Robbery\" (1903), had a running time of twelve minutes, with twenty separate shots and ten different indoor and outdoor locations. The film is seen as a first in the Western film genre and is significant for the use of shots suggesting simultaneous action occurring at different locations. Porter's use of both staged and real outdoor environments helped to create a sense of space while the placement of the camera in a wider shot established depth and allowed for an extended duration of motion on screen. \"The Great Train Robbery\" served as one of the vehicles that would launch the film medium into mass popularity. That same year, the Miles Brothers opened the first film exchange in the country, which allowed permanent exhibitors to rent films from the company at a lower cost than the producers that sold their films outright.\nJohn P. Harris opened the first permanent theater devoted exclusively to the presentation of films, the nickelodeon, in 1905 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The idea rapidly took off and by 1908, there were around 8,000 nickelodeon theaters across the country. With the arrival of the nickelodeon, audience demand for a larger quantity of story films with a variety of subjects and locations led to a need to hire more creative talent and caused studios to invest in more elaborate stage designs.\nIn 1908, Thomas Edison spearheaded the creation of a corporate trust between the major film companies in America known as the Motion Picture Patents Company (MPPC) to limit infringement on his patents. Members of the trust controlled every aspect of the filmmaking process from the creation of film stock, the production of films, and the distribution to cinemas through licensing arrangements. The trust lead to increased quality filmmaking spurred by internal competition and placed limits on the amount of foreign films to encourage the growth of the American film industry, but it also discouraged the creation of feature films. By 1915, the MPPC had lost most of its hold on the film industry as the companies moved towards the wider production of feature films.\nContinued international growth (1900s-1910s).\nNew film producing countries.\nWith the worldwide film boom, more countries now joined Britain, France, Germany and the United States in serious film production. In Italy, production was spread over several centers, Turin was the first major film production centre, and Milan and Naples gave birth to the first film magazines. In Turin, Ambrosio was the first company in the field in 1905, and remained the largest in the country through this period. Its most substantial rival was Cines in Rome, which started producing in 1906. The great strength of the Italian industry was historical epics, with large casts and massive scenery. As early as 1911, Giovanni Pastrone's two-reel \"La Caduta di Troia (The Fall of Troy)\" made a big impression worldwide, and it was followed by even bigger productions like \"Quo Vadis?\" (1912), which ran for 90 minutes, and Pastrone's \"Cabiria\" of 1914, which ran for two and a half hours.\nItalian companies also had a strong line in slapstick comedy, with actors like Andr\u00e9 Deed, known locally as \"Cretinetti\", and elsewhere as \"Foolshead\" and \"Gribouille\", achieving worldwide fame with his almost surrealistic gags.\nThe most important film-producing country in Northern Europe up until the First World War was Denmark. The Nordisk company was set up there in 1906 by Ole Olsen, a fairground showman, and after a brief period imitating the successes of French and British filmmakers, in 1907 he produced 67 films, most directed by Viggo Larsen, with sensational subjects like \"Den hvide Slavinde (The White Slave)\", \"Isbj\u00f8rnejagt (Polar Bear Hunt)\" and \"L\u00f8vejagten (The Lion Hunt)\". By 1910, new smaller Danish companies began joining the business, and besides making more films about the white slave trade, they contributed other new subjects. The most important of these finds was Asta Nielsen in \"Afgrunden (The Abyss)\", directed by Urban Gad for Kosmorama, This combined the circus, sex, jealousy and murder, all put over with great conviction, and pushed the other Danish filmmakers further in this direction. By 1912, the Danish film companies were multiplying rapidly.\nThe Swedish film industry was smaller and slower to get started than the Danish industry. Here, Charles Magnusson, a newsreel cameraman for the Svenskabiografteatern cinema chain, started fiction film production for them in 1909, directing a number of the films himself. Production increased in 1912, when the company engaged Victor Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m and Mauritz Stiller as directors. They started out by imitating the subjects favoured by the Danish film industry, but by 1913 they were producing their own strikingly original work, which sold very well.\nRussia began its film industry in 1908 with Path\u00e9 shooting some fiction subjects there, and then the creation of real Russian film companies by Aleksandr Drankov and Aleksandr Khanzhonkov. The Khanzhonkov company quickly became much the largest Russian film company, and remained so until 1918.\nIn Germany, Oskar Messter had been involved in film-making from 1896, but did not make a significant number of films per year until 1910. When the worldwide film boom started, he, and the few other people in the German film business, continued to sell prints of their own films outright, which put them at a disadvantage. It was only when Paul Davidson, the owner of a chain of cinemas, brought Asta Nielsen and Urban Gad to Germany from Denmark in 1911, and set up a production company, Projektions-AG \"Union\" (PAGU), that a change-over to renting prints began. Messter replied with a series of longer films starring Henny Porten, but although these did well in the German-speaking world, they were not particularly successful internationally, unlike the Asta Nielsen films. Another of the growing German film producers just before World War I was the German branch of the French \u00c9clair company, Deutsche \u00c9clair. This was expropriated by the German government, and turned into DECLA when the war started. But altogether, German producers only had a minor part of the German market in 1914.\nOverall, from about 1910, American films had the largest share of the market in all European countries except France, and even in France, the American films had just pushed the local production out of first place on the eve of World War I. Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res expanded and significantly shaped the American film business, creating many \"firsts\" in the film industry, such as adding titles and subtitles to films for the first time, releasing scrolls for the first time, introducing film posters for the first time, producing color pictures for the first time, taking out commercial bills for the first time, contacting exhibitors and studying their needs for the first time. The world's largest film supplier, Path\u00e9, is limited to the U.S. market, which has reached a saturation level, so the U.S. seeks additional profits from foreign markets. Movies are defined as \"pure\" American phenomenon in the United States.\nFilm technique.\nNew film techniques that were introduced in this period include the use of artificial lighting, fire effects and Low-key lighting (i.e. lighting in which most of the frame is dark) for enhanced atmosphere during sinister scenes.\nContinuity of action from shot to shot was also refined, such as in Path\u00e9's \"le Cheval emball\u00e9 (The Runaway Horse)\" (1907) where cross-cutting between parallel actions is used. D. W. Griffith also began using cross-cutting in the film \"The Fatal Hour\", made in July 1908. Another development was the use of the Point of View shot, first used in 1910 in Vitagraph's \"Back to Nature\". Insert shots were also used for artistic purposes; the Italian film \"La mala planta (The Evil Plant)\", directed by Mario Caserini had an insert shot of a snake slithering over the \"Evil Plant\". By 1914 it was widely held in the American film industry that cross-cutting was most generally useful because it made possible the elimination of uninteresting parts of the action that play no part in advancing the drama.\nIn 1909, 35\u00a0mm becomes the internationally recognized theatrical film gauge.\nAs films grew longer, specialist writers were employed to simplify more complex stories derived from novels or plays into a form that could be contained on one reel. Genres began to be used as categories; the main division was into comedy and drama, but these categories were further subdivided.\nIntertitles containing lines of dialogue began to be used consistently from 1908 onwards, such as in Vitagraph's \"An Auto Heroine; or, The Race for the Vitagraph Cup and How It Was Won\". The dialogue was eventually inserted into the middle of the scene and became commonplace by 1912. The introduction of dialogue titles transformed the nature of film narrative. When dialogue titles came to be always cut into a scene just after a character starts speaking, and then left with a cut to the character just before they finish speaking, then one had something that was effectively the equivalent of a present-day sound film.\nDuring World War I and industry.\nThe years of the First World War were a complex transitional period for the film industry. The exhibition of films changed from short one-reel programmes to feature films. Exhibition venues became larger and began charging higher prices.\nIn the United States, these changes brought destruction to many film companies, the Vitagraph company being an exception. Film production began to shift to Los Angeles during World War I. The Universal Film Manufacturing Company was formed in 1912 as an umbrella company. New entrants included the Jesse Lasky Feature Play Company, and Famous Players, both formed in 1913, and later amalgamated into Famous Players\u2013Lasky. The biggest success of these years was David Wark Griffith's \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915). Griffith followed this up with the even bigger \"Intolerance\" (1916), but, due to the high quality of film produced in the US, the market for their films was high.\nIn France, film production shut down due to the general military mobilization of the country at the start of the war. Although film production began again in 1915, it was on a reduced scale, and the biggest companies gradually retired from production. Italian film production held up better, although so called \"diva films\", starring anguished female leads were a commercial failure. In Denmark, the Nordisk company increased its production so much in 1915 and 1916 that it could not sell all its films, which led to a very sharp decline in Danish production, and the end of Denmark's importance on the world film scene.\nThe German film industry was seriously weakened by the war. The most important of the new film producers at the time was Joe May, who made a series of thrillers and adventure films through the war years, but Ernst Lubitsch also came into prominence with a series of very successful comedies and dramas.\nNew techniques.\nAt this time, studios were blacked out to allow shooting to be unaffected by changing sunlight. This was replaced with floodlights and spotlights. The widespread adoption of irising-in and out to begin and end scenes caught on in this period. This is the revelation of a film shot in a circular mask, which gradually gets larger until it expands beyond the frame. Other shaped slits were used, including vertical and diagonal apertures.\nA new idea taken over from still photography was \"soft focus\". This began in 1915, with some shots being intentionally thrown out of focus for expressive effect, as in Mary Pickford starrer \"Fanchon the Cricket\".\nIt was during this period that camera effects intended to convey the subjective feelings of characters in a film really began to be established. These could now be done as Point of View (POV) shots, as in Sidney Drew's \"The Story of the Glove\" (1915), where a wobbly hand-held shot of a door and its keyhole represents the POV of a drunken man. The use of anamorphic (in the general sense of distorted shape) images first appears in these years when Abel Gance directed \"la Folie du Docteur Tube (The Madness of Dr. Tube)\". In this film the effect of a drug administered to a group of people was suggested by shooting the scenes reflected in a distorting mirror of the fair-ground type.\nSymbolic effects taken over from conventional literary and artistic tradition continued to make some appearances in films during these years. In D. W. Griffith's \"The Avenging Conscience\" (1914), the title \"The birth of the evil thought\" precedes a series of three shots of the protagonist looking at a spider, and ants eating an insect. Symbolist art and literature from the turn of the century also had a more general effect on a small number of films made in Italy and Russia. The supine acceptance of death resulting from passion and forbidden longings was a major feature of this art, and states of delirium dwelt on at length were important as well.\nThe use of insert shots, i.e. close-ups of objects other than faces, had already been established by the Brighton school, but were infrequently used before 1914. It is really only with Griffith's \"The Avenging Conscience\" that a new phase in the use of the Insert Shot starts. As well as the symbolic inserts already mentioned, the film also made extensive use of large numbers of Big Close Up shots of clutching hands and tapping feet as a means of emphasizing those parts of the body as indicators of psychological tension.\nAtmospheric inserts were developed in Europe in the late 1910s. This kind of shot is one in a scene which neither contains any of the characters in the story, nor is a Point of View shot seen by one of them. An early example is when Maurice Tourneur directed \"The Pride of the Clan\" (1917), in which there is a series of shots of waves beating on a rocky shore to demonstrate the harsh lives of the fishing folk. Maurice Elvey's \"Nelson; The Story of England's Immortal Naval Hero\" (1919) has a symbolic sequence dissolving from a picture of Kaiser Wilhelm II to a peacock, and then to a battleship.\nBy 1914, continuity cinema was the established mode of commercial cinema. One of the advanced continuity techniques involved an accurate and smooth transition from one shot to another. Cutting to \"different\" angles within a scene also became well-established as a technique for dissecting a scene into shots in American films. If the direction of the shot changes by more than ninety degrees, it is called a reverse-angle cutting. The leading figure in the full development of reverse-angle cutting was Ralph Ince in his films, such as \"The Right Girl\" and \"His Phantom Sweetheart\".\nThe use of flash-back structures continued to develop in this period, with the usual way of entering and leaving a flash-back being through a dissolve. The Vitagraph company's \"The Man That Might Have Been\" (William J. Humphrey, 1914), is even more complex, with a series of reveries and flash-backs that contrast the protagonist's real passage through life with what might have been, if his son had not died.\nAfter 1914, cross cutting between parallel actions came to be used\u00a0\u2013 more so in American films than in European ones. Cross-cutting was used to get new effects of contrast, such as the cross-cut sequence in Cecil B. DeMille's \"The Whispering Chorus\" (1918), in which a supposedly dead husband is having a liaison with a Chinese prostitute in an opium den, while simultaneously his unknowing wife is being remarried in church.\nSilent film tinting, too, gained popularity during these periods. Amber tinting meant daytime, or vividly-lit nighttime, blue tints meant dawn or dimly-lit night, red tinting represented fire scenes, green tinting meant a mysterious atmosphere, and brown tints (aka sepia toning) were used usually for full-length films instead of individual scenes. D.W. Griffiths' ground-breaking epic, \"The Birth of a Nation\", the famous 1920 film \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\", and the Robert Wiene epic from the same year, \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\", are some notable examples of tinted silent films. \n\"The Photo-Drama of Creation\", first shown to audiences in 1914, was the first major screenplay to incorporate synchronized sound, moving film, and color slides. Until 1927, most motion pictures were produced without sound. This period is commonly referred to as the silent era of film.\nFilm art.\nThe general trend in the development of cinema, led from the United States, was towards using the newly developed specifically filmic devices for expression of the narrative content of film stories, and combining this with the standard dramatic structures already in use in commercial theatre. D. W. Griffith had the highest standing amongst American directors in the industry, because of the dramatic excitement he conveyed to the audience through his films. Cecil B. DeMille's \"The Cheat\" (1915), brought out the moral dilemmas facing their characters in a more subtle way than Griffith. DeMille was also in closer touch with the reality of contemporary American life. Maurice Tourneur was also highly ranked for the pictorial beauties of his films, together with the subtlety of his handling of fantasy, while at the same time he was capable of getting greater naturalism from his actors at appropriate moments, as in \"A Girl's Folly\" (1917).\nSidney Drew was the leader in developing \"polite comedy\", while slapstick was refined by Fatty Arbuckle and Charles Chaplin, who both started with Mack Sennett's Keystone company. They reduced the usual frenetic pace of Sennett's films to give the audience a chance to appreciate the subtlety and finesse of their movement, and the cleverness of their gags. By 1917 Chaplin was also introducing more dramatic plot into his films, and mixing the comedy with sentiment.\nIn Russia, Yevgeni Bauer put a slow intensity of acting combined with Symbolist overtones onto film in a unique way.\nIn Sweden, Victor Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m made a series of films that combined the realities of people's lives with their surroundings in a striking manner, while Mauritz Stiller developed sophisticated comedy to a new level.\nIn Germany, Ernst Lubitsch got his inspiration from the stage work of Max Reinhardt, both in bourgeois comedy and in spectacle, and applied this to his films, culminating in his \"die Puppe\" (\"The Doll\"), \"die Austernprinzessin\" (\"The Oyster Princess\") and \"Madame DuBarry\".\n1920s.\nGolden years of German cinema, Hollywood triumphant.\nAt the start of the First World War, French and Italian cinema had been the most globally popular. The war came as a devastating interruption to European film industries.\nThroughout the early 20th century, screen artists continued to learn how to work with cameras and create illusions using space and time in their shots. This newly introduced form of creativity made way for a whole new group of people to be introduced to stardom, including David W. Griffith, who made a name for himself with his 1915 film, The Birth of a Nation. In 1920, there were two major changes to the film industry: the introduction of sound and the creation of studio systems. In the 1920s, talent who had been working independently began joining studios and working with other actors and directors. In 1927, The Jazz Singer was released, bringing sound to the motion picture industry.\nThe German cinema, marked by those times, saw the era of the German Expressionist film movement. Berlin was its center with the Filmstudio Babelsberg, which is the oldest large-scale film studio in the world. The first Expressionist films made up for a lack of lavish budgets by using set designs with wildly non-realistic, geometrically absurd angles, along with designs painted on walls and floors to represent lights, shadows, and objects. The plots and stories of the Expressionist films often dealt with madness, insanity, betrayal and other \"intellectual\" topics triggered by the experiences of World War I. Films like \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\" (1920), \"Nosferatu\" (1922) and \"M\" (1931), similar to the movement they were part of, had a historic impact on film itself.\nMovies like \"Metropolis\" (1927) and \"Woman in the Moon\" (1929) partly created the genre of science fiction films and Lotte Reiniger became a pioneer in animation, producing animated feature films like The Adventures of Prince Achmed, the oldest surviving and oldest European made animated movie.\nMany German and German-based directors, actors, writers and others emigrated to the US when the Nazis gained power, giving Hollywood and the American film industry the final edge in its competition with other movie producing countries.\nThe American industry, or \"Hollywood\", as it was becoming known after its new geographical center in California, gained the position it has held, more or less, ever since: film factory for the world and exporting its product to most countries on earth.\nBy the 1920s, the United States reached what is still its era of greatest-ever output, producing an average of 800 \"feature\" films annually, or 82% of the global total (Eyman, 1997). The comedies of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton, the swashbuckling adventures of Douglas Fairbanks and the romances of Clara Bow, to cite just a few examples, made these performers' faces well known on every continent. The Western visual norm that would become classical continuity editing was developed and exported \u2013 although its adoption was slower in some non-Western countries without strong realist traditions in art and drama, such as Japan.\nThis development was contemporary with the growth of the studio system and its greatest publicity method, the star system, which characterized American film for decades to come and provided models for other film industries. The studios' efficient, top-down control over all stages of their product enabled a new and ever-growing level of lavish production and technical sophistication. At the same time, the system's commercial regimentation and focus on glamorous escapism discouraged daring and ambition beyond a certain degree, a prime example being the brief but still legendary directing career of the iconoclastic Erich von Stroheim in the late teens and the 1920s.\nIn 1924, Sam Goldwyn, Louis B. Mayer, and the Metro Pictures Corporation create MGM.\n1930s.\nSound era.\nDuring late 1927, Warners released \"The Jazz Singer\", which was mostly silent but contained what is generally regarded as the first synchronized dialogue (and singing) in a feature film; but this process was actually accomplished first by Charles Taze Russell in 1914 with the lengthy film \"The Photo-Drama of Creation\". This drama consisted of picture slides and moving pictures synchronized with phonograph records of talks and music. The early sound-on-disc processes such as Vitaphone were soon superseded by sound-on-film methods like Fox Movietone, DeForest Phonofilm, and RCA Photophone. The trend convinced the largely reluctant industrialists that \"talking pictures\", or \"talkies\", were the future. A lot of attempts were made before the success of \"The Jazz Singer\", that can be seen in the List of film sound systems. And in 1926, Warner Bros. Debuts the film \"Don Juan\" with synchronized sound effects and music.\nThe change was remarkably swift. By the end of 1929, Hollywood was almost all-talkie, with several competing sound systems (soon to be standardized). Total changeover was slightly slower in the rest of the world, principally for economic reasons. Cultural reasons were also a factor in countries like China and Japan, where silents co-existed successfully with sound well into the 1930s, indeed producing what would be some of the most revered classics in those countries, like Wu Yonggang's \"The Goddess\" (China, 1934) and Yasujir\u014d Ozu's \"I Was Born, But...\" (Japan, 1932). But even in Japan, a figure such as the benshi, the live narrator who was a major part of Japanese silent cinema, found his acting career was ending.\nSound further tightened the grip of major studios in numerous countries: the vast expense of the transition overwhelmed smaller competitors, while the novelty of sound lured vastly larger audiences for those producers that remained. In the case of the U.S., some historians credit sound with saving the Hollywood studio system in the face of the Great Depression (Parkinson, 1995). Thus began what is now often called \"The Golden Age of Hollywood\", which refers roughly to the period beginning with the introduction of sound until the late 1940s. The American cinema reached its peak of efficiently manufactured glamour and global appeal during this period. The top actors of the era are now thought of as the classic film stars, such as Clark Gable, Katharine Hepburn, Humphrey Bogart, Greta Garbo, and the greatest box office draw of the 1930s, child performer Shirley Temple.\nCreative impact of sound.\nCreatively, however, the rapid transition was a difficult one, and in some ways, film briefly reverted to the conditions of its earliest days. The late '20s were full of static, stagey talkies as artists in front of and behind the camera struggled with the stringent limitations of the early sound equipment and their own uncertainty as to how to use the new medium. Many stage performers, directors and writers were introduced to cinema as producers sought personnel experienced in dialogue-based storytelling. Many major silent filmmakers and actors were unable to adjust and found their careers severely curtailed or even ended.\nThis awkward period was fairly short-lived. 1929 was a watershed year: William Wellman with \"Chinatown Nights\" and \"The Man I Love\", Rouben Mamoulian with \"Applause\", Alfred Hitchcock with \"Blackmail\" (Britain's first sound feature), were among the directors to bring greater fluidity to talkies and experiment with the expressive use of sound (Eyman, 1997). In this, they both benefited from, and pushed further, technical advances in microphones and cameras, and capabilities for editing and post-synchronizing sound (rather than recording all sound directly at the time of filming).\nSound films emphasized black history, and benefited different genres to a greater extent than silents did. Most obviously, the musical film was born; the first classic-style Hollywood musical was \"The Broadway Melody\" (1929), and the form would find its first major creator in choreographer/director Busby Berkeley (\"42nd Street\", 1933, \"Dames\", 1934). In France, avant-garde director Ren\u00e9 Clair made surreal use of song and dance in comedies like \"Under the Roofs of Paris\" (1930) and \"Le Million\" (1931). Universal Pictures began releasing gothic horror films like \"Dracula\" and \"Frankenstein\" (both 1931). In 1933, RKO Pictures released Merian C. Cooper's classic \"giant monster\" film \"King Kong\". The trend thrived best in India, where the influence of the country's traditional song-and-dance drama made the musical the basic form of most sound films (Cook, 1990); virtually unnoticed by the Western world for decades, this Indian popular cinema would nevertheless become the world's most prolific. (\"See also Bollywood.\")\nAt this time, American gangster films like \"Little Caesar\" and Wellman's \"The Public Enemy\" (both 1931) became popular. Dialogue now took precedence over slapstick in Hollywood comedies: the fast-paced, witty banter of \"The Front Page\" (1931) or \"It Happened One Night\" (1934), the sexual double entendres of Mae West (\"She Done Him Wrong\", 1933), or the often subversively anarchic nonsense talk of the Marx Brothers (\"Duck Soup\", 1933). Walt Disney, who had previously been in the short cartoon business, stepped into feature films with the first English-speaking animated feature \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", released by RKO Pictures in 1937. 1939, a major year for American cinema, brought such films as \"The Wizard of Oz\" and \"Gone with The Wind\".\nColor in cinema.\nCirca 80 percent of the films of the 1890s to the 1920s had colours. Many made use of monochromatic film tinting dye baths, some had the frames painted in multiple transparent colours by hand, and since 1905 there was a mechanized stencil-process (Path\u00e9color).\nKinemacolor, the first commercially successful cinematographic colour process, produced films in two colours (red and cyan) from 1908 to 1914.\nTechnicolor's natural three-strip colour process was very successfully introduced in 1932 with Walt Disney's animated Academy Award-winning short \"Flowers and Trees\", directed by Burt Gillett. Technicolor was initially used mainly for musicals like \"The Wizard of Oz\" (1939), in costume films such as \"The Adventures of Robin Hood\", and in animation. Not long after television became prevalent in the early 1950s, colour became more or less standard for theatrical movies.\n1940s.\nWorld War II and its aftermath.\nThe desire for wartime propaganda against the opposition created a renaissance in the film industry in Britain, with realistic war dramas like \"49th Parallel\" (1941), \"Went the Day Well?\" (1942), \"The Way Ahead\" (1944) and No\u00ebl Coward and David Lean's celebrated naval film \"In Which We Serve\" in 1942, which won a special Academy Award. These existed alongside more flamboyant films like Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger's \"The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp\" (1943), \"A Canterbury Tale\" (1944) and \"A Matter of Life and Death\" (1946), as well as Laurence Olivier's 1944 film \"Henry V\", based on the Shakespearean history \"Henry V\". The success of \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" allowed Disney to make more animated features like \"Pinocchio\" (1940), \"Fantasia\" (1940), \"Dumbo\" (1941) and \"Bambi\" (1942).\nThe onset of US involvement in World War II also brought a proliferation of films as both patriotism and propaganda. American propaganda films included \"Desperate Journey\" (1942), \"Mrs. Miniver\" (1942), \"Forever and a Day\" (1943) and \"Objective, Burma!\" (1945). Notable American films from the war years include the anti-Nazi \"Watch on the Rhine\" (1943), scripted by Dashiell Hammett; \"Shadow of a Doubt\" (1943), Hitchcock's direction of a script by Thornton Wilder; the George M. Cohan biopic, \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\" (1942), starring James Cagney, and the immensely popular \"Casablanca\", with Humphrey Bogart. Bogart would star in 36 films between 1934 and 1942 including John Huston's \"The Maltese Falcon\" (1941), one of the first films now considered a classic film noir. In 1941, RKO Pictures released \"Citizen Kane\" made by Orson Welles. It is often considered the greatest film of all time. It would set the stage for the modern motion picture, as it revolutionized film story telling.\nThe strictures of wartime also brought an interest in more fantastical subjects. These included Britain's Gainsborough melodramas (including \"The Man in Grey\" and \"The Wicked Lady\"), and films like \"Here Comes Mr. Jordan\", \"Heaven Can Wait\", \"I Married a Witch\" and \"Blithe Spirit\". Val Lewton also produced a series of atmospheric and influential small-budget horror films, some of the more famous examples being \"Cat People\", \"Isle of the Dead\" and \"The Body Snatcher\". The decade probably also saw the so-called \"women's pictures\", such as \"Now, Voyager\", \"Random Harvest\" and \"Mildred Pierce\" at the peak of their popularity.\n1946 saw RKO Radio releasing \"It's a Wonderful Life\" directed by Italian-born filmmaker Frank Capra. Soldiers returning from the war would provide the inspiration for films like \"The Best Years of Our Lives\", and many of those in the film industry had served in some capacity during the war. Samuel Fuller's experiences in World War II would influence his largely autobiographical films of later decades such as \"The Big Red One\". The Actors Studio was founded in October 1947 by Elia Kazan, Robert Lewis, and Cheryl Crawford, and the same year Oskar Fischinger filmed \"Motion Painting No. 1\".\nIn 1943, \"Ossessione\" was screened in Italy, marking the beginning of Italian neorealism. Major films of this type during the 1940s included \"Bicycle Thieves\", \"Rome, Open City\", and \"La Terra Trema\". In 1952 \"Umberto D\" was released, usually considered the last film of this type.\nIn the late 1940s, in Britain, Ealing Studios embarked on their series of celebrated comedies, including \"Whisky Galore!\", \"Passport to Pimlico\", \"Kind Hearts and Coronets\" and \"The Man in the White Suit\", and Carol Reed directed his influential thrillers \"Odd Man Out\", \"The Fallen Idol\" and \"The Third Man\". David Lean was also rapidly becoming a force in world cinema with \"Brief Encounter\" and his Dickens adaptations \"Great Expectations\" and \"Oliver Twist\", and Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger would experience the best of their creative partnership with films like \"Black Narcissus\" and \"The Red Shoes\".\n1950s.\nThe House Un-American Activities Committee investigated Hollywood in the early 1950s. Protested by the Hollywood Ten before the committee, the hearings resulted in the blacklisting of many actors, writers and directors, including Chayefsky, Charlie Chaplin, and Dalton Trumbo, and many of these fled to Europe, especially the United Kingdom.\nThe Cold War era zeitgeist translated into a type of near-paranoia manifested in themes such as invading armies of evil aliens (\"Invasion of the Body Snatchers\", \"The War of the Worlds\") and communist fifth columnists (\"The Manchurian Candidate\").\nDuring the immediate post-war years the cinematic industry was also threatened by television, and the increasing popularity of the medium meant that some film theatres would bankrupt and close. The demise of the \"studio system\" spurred the self-commentary of films like \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1950) and \"The Bad and the Beautiful\" (1952).\nIn 1950, the Lettrists avante-gardists caused riots at the Cannes Film Festival, when Isidore Isou's \"Treatise on Slime and Eternity\" was screened. After their criticism of Charlie Chaplin and split with the movement, the Ultra-Lettrists continued to cause disruptions when they showed their new hypergraphical techniques.\nThe most notorious film is Guy Debord's \"Howls for Sade\" of 1952.\nDistressed by the increasing number of closed theatres, studios and companies would find new and innovative ways to bring audiences back. These included attempts to widen their appeal with new screen formats. Cinemascope, which would remain a 20th Century Fox distinction until 1967, was announced with 1953's \"The Robe\". VistaVision, Cinerama, and Todd-AO boasted a \"bigger is better\" approach to marketing films to a dwindling US audience. This resulted in the revival of epic films to take advantage of the new big screen formats. Some of the most successful examples of these Biblical and historical spectaculars include \"The Ten Commandments\" (1956), \"The Vikings\" (1958), \"Ben-Hur\" (1959), \"Spartacus\" (1960) and \"El Cid\" (1961). Also during this period a number of other significant films were produced in Todd-AO, developed by Mike Todd shortly before his death, including \"Oklahoma!\" (1955), \"Around the World in 80 Days\" (1956), \"South Pacific\" (1958) and \"Cleopatra\" (1963) plus many more.\nGimmicks also proliferated to lure in audiences. The fad for 3-D film would last for only two years, 1952\u20131954, and helped sell \"House of Wax\" and \"Creature from the Black Lagoon\". Producer William Castle would tout films featuring \"Emergo\" \"Percepto\", the first of a series of gimmicks that would remain popular marketing tools for Castle and others throughout the 1960s.\nIn 1954, Dorothy Dandridge was nominated as the best actress at the Oscar for her role in the film Carman Jones. She became the first black woman to be nominated for this award.\nIn the U.S., a post-WW2 tendency toward questioning the establishment and societal norms and the early activism of the civil rights movement was reflected in Hollywood films such as \"Blackboard Jungle\" (1955), \"On the Waterfront\" (1954), Paddy Chayefsky's \"Marty\" and Reginald Rose's \"12 Angry Men\" (1957). Disney continued making animated films, notably; \"Cinderella\" (1950), \"Peter Pan\" (1953), \"Lady and the Tramp\" (1955), and \"Sleeping Beauty\" (1959). He began, however, getting more involved in live action films, producing classics like \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\" (1954), and \"Old Yeller\" (1957). Television began competing seriously with films projected in theatres, but surprisingly it promoted more filmgoing rather than curtailing it.\n\"Limelight\" is probably a unique film in at least one interesting respect. Its two leads, Charlie Chaplin and Claire Bloom, were in the industry in no less than three different centuries. In the 19th century, Chaplin made his theatrical debut at the age of eight, in 1897, in a clog dancing troupe, The Eight Lancaster Lads. In the 21st century, Bloom is still enjoying a full and productive career, having appeared in dozens of films and television series produced up to and including 2022. She received particular acclaim for her role in \"The King's Speech\" (2010).\nGolden age of Asian cinema.\nFollowing the end of World War II in the 1940s, the following decade, the 1950s, marked a 'golden age' for non-English world cinema, especially for Asian cinema. Many of the most critically acclaimed Asian films of all time were produced during this decade, including Yasujir\u014d Ozu's \"Tokyo Story\" (1953), Satyajit Ray's \"The Apu Trilogy\" (1955\u20131959) and \"Jalsaghar\" (1958), Kenji Mizoguchi's \"Ugetsu\" (1954) and \"Sansho the Bailiff\" (1954), Raj Kapoor's \"Awaara\" (1951), Mikio Naruse's \"Floating Clouds\" (1955), Guru Dutt's \"Pyaasa\" (1957) and \"Kaagaz Ke Phool\" (1959), and the Akira Kurosawa films \"Rashomon\" (1950), \"Ikiru\" (1952), \"Seven Samurai\" (1954) and \"Throne of Blood\" (1957).\nDuring Japanese cinema's 'Golden Age' of the 1950s, successful films included \"Rashomon\" (1950), \"Seven Samurai\" (1954) and \"The Hidden Fortress\" (1958) by Akira Kurosawa, as well as Yasujir\u014d Ozu's \"Tokyo Story\" (1953) and Ishir\u014d Honda's \"Godzilla\" (1954). These films have had a profound influence on world cinema. In particular, Kurosawa's \"Seven Samurai\" has been remade several times as Western films, such as \"The Magnificent Seven\" (1960) and \"Battle Beyond the Stars\" (1980), and has also inspired several Bollywood films, such as \"Sholay\" (1975) and \"China Gate\" (1998). \"Rashomon\" was also remade as \"The Outrage\" (1964), and inspired films with \"Rashomon effect\" storytelling methods, such as \"Andha Naal\" (1954), \"The Usual Suspects\" (1995) and \"Hero\" (2002). \"The Hidden Fortress\" was also an inspiration behind George Lucas' \"Star Wars\" (1977). Other famous Japanese filmmakers from this period include Kenji Mizoguchi, Mikio Naruse, Hiroshi Inagaki and Nagisa Oshima. Japanese cinema later became one of the main inspirations behind the New Hollywood movement of the 1960s to 1980s.\nDuring Indian cinema's 'Golden Age' of the 1950s, it was producing 200 films annually, while Indian independent films gained greater recognition through international film festivals. One of the most famous was \"The Apu Trilogy\" (1955\u20131959) from critically acclaimed Bengali film director Satyajit Ray, whose films had a profound influence on world cinema, with directors such as Akira Kurosawa, Martin Scorsese, James Ivory, Abbas Kiarostami, Elia Kazan, Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, Steven Spielberg, Carlos Saura, Jean-Luc Godard, Isao Takahata, Gregory Nava, Ira Sachs, Wes Anderson and Danny Boyle being influenced by his cinematic style. According to Michael Sragow of \"The Atlantic Monthly\", the \"youthful coming-of-age dramas that have flooded art houses since the mid-fifties owe a tremendous debt to the Apu trilogy\". Subrata Mitra's cinematographic technique of bounce lighting also originates from \"The Apu Trilogy\". Other famous Indian filmmakers from this period include Guru Dutt, Ritwik Ghatak, Mrinal Sen, Raj Kapoor, Bimal Roy, K. Asif and Mehboob Khan.\nThe cinema of South Korea also experienced a 'Golden Age' in the 1950s, beginning with director Lee Kyu-hwan's tremendously successful remake of \"Chunhyang-jon\" (1955). That year also saw the release of \"Yangsan Province\" by the renowned director, Kim Ki-young, marking the beginning of his productive career. Both the quality and quantity of filmmaking had increased rapidly by the end of the 1950s. South Korean films, such as Lee Byeong-il's 1956 comedy \"Sijibganeun nal (The Wedding Day)\", had begun winning international awards. In contrast to the beginning of the 1950s, when only 5 films were made per year, 111 films were produced in South Korea in 1959.\nThe 1950s was also a 'Golden Age' for Philippine cinema, with the emergence of more artistic and mature films, and significant improvement in cinematic techniques among filmmakers. The studio system produced frenetic activity in the local film industry as many films were made annually and several local talents started to earn recognition abroad. The premiere Philippine directors of the era included Gerardo de Leon, Gregorio Fern\u00e1ndez, Eddie Romero, Lamberto Avellana, and Cirio Santiago.\n1960s.\nDuring the 1960s, the studio system in Hollywood declined, because many films were now being made on location in other countries, or using studio facilities abroad, such as Pinewood in the UK and Cinecitt\u00e0 in Rome. \"Hollywood\" films were still largely aimed at family audiences, and it was often the more old-fashioned films that produced the studios' biggest successes. Productions like \"Mary Poppins\" (1964), \"My Fair Lady\" (1964) and \"The Sound of Music\" (1965) were among the biggest money-makers of the decade. The growth in independent producers and production companies, and the increase in the power of individual actors also contributed to the decline of traditional Hollywood studio production.\nThere was also an increasing awareness of foreign language cinema in America during this period. During the late 1950s and 1960s, the French New Wave directors such as Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut and Jean-Luc Godard produced films such as \"Les quatre cents coups\", \"Breathless\" and \"Jules et Jim\" which broke the rules of Hollywood cinema's narrative structure. As well, audiences were becoming aware of Italian films like Federico Fellini's \"La Dolce Vita\" (1960), \"8\u00bd\" (1963) and the stark dramas of Sweden's Ingmar Bergman.\nIn Britain, the \"Free Cinema\" of Lindsay Anderson, Tony Richardson and others lead to a group of realistic and innovative dramas including \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\", \"A Kind of Loving\" and \"This Sporting Life\". Other British films such as \"Repulsion\", \"Darling\", \"Alfie\", \"Blowup\" and \"Georgy Girl\" (all in 1965\u20131966) helped to reduce prohibitions of sex and nudity on screen, while the casual sex and violence of the James Bond films, beginning with \"Dr. No\" in 1962 would render the series popular worldwide.\nDuring the 1960s, Ousmane Semb\u00e8ne produced several French- and Wolof-language films and became the \"father\" of African Cinema. In Latin America, the dominance of the \"Hollywood\" model was challenged by many film makers. Fernando Solanas and Octavio Getino called for a politically engaged Third Cinema in contrast to Hollywood and the European auteur cinema.\nIn Egypt, the golden age of Egyptian cinema continued in the 1960s at the hands of many directors, and Egyptian cinema greatly appreciated women at that time, such as Soad Hosny. The Zulfikar brothers; Ezz El-Dine Zulfikar, Salah Zulfikar and Mahmoud Zulfikar were on a date with many productions, including Ezz El Dine Zulfikar's \"The River of Love\" (1960), Mahmoud Zulfikar's \"Soft Hands\" (1964), and \"Dearer Than My Life\" (1965) starring Salah Zulfikar and Salah Zulfikar Films production; \"My Wife, the Director General\" (1966) as well as Youssef Chahine's \"Saladin\" (1963).\nFurther, the nuclear paranoia of the age, and the threat of an apocalyptic nuclear exchange (like the 1962 close-call with the USSR during the Cuban Missile Crisis) prompted a reaction within the film community as well. Films like Stanley Kubrick's \"Dr. Strangelove\" and \"Fail Safe\" with Henry Fonda were produced in a Hollywood that was once known for its overt patriotism and wartime propaganda.\nIn documentary film the sixties saw the blossoming of Direct Cinema, an observational style of film making as well as the advent of more overtly partisan films like \"In the Year of the Pig\" about the Vietnam War by Emile de Antonio. By the late 1960s however, Hollywood filmmakers were beginning to create more innovative and ground-breaking films that reflected the social revolution taken over much of the western world such as \"Bonnie and Clyde\" (1967), \"The Graduate\" (1967), \"\" (1968), \"Rosemary's Baby\" (1968), \"Midnight Cowboy\" (1969), \"Easy Rider\" (1969) and \"The Wild Bunch\" (1969). \"Bonnie and Clyde\" is often considered the beginning of the so-called New Hollywood.\nIn Japanese cinema, Academy Award-winning director Akira Kurosawa produced \"Yojimbo\" (1961), which like his previous films also had a profound influence around the world. The influence of this film is most apparent in Sergio Leone's \"A Fistful of Dollars\" (1964) and Walter Hill's \"Last Man Standing\" (1996). \"Yojimbo\" was also the origin of the \"Man with No Name\" trend.\n1970s.\nThe New Hollywood was the period following the decline of the studio system during the 1950s and 1960s and the end of the production code, (which was replaced in 1968 by the MPAA film rating system). During the 1970s, filmmakers increasingly depicted explicit sexual content and showed gunfight and battle scenes that included graphic images of bloody deaths\u00a0\u2013 a notable example of this is Wes Craven's \"The Last House on the Left\" (1972).\nPost-classical cinema is the changing methods of storytelling of the New Hollywood producers. The new methods of drama and characterization played upon audience expectations acquired during the classical/Golden Age period: story chronology may be scrambled, storylines may feature unsettling \"twist endings\", main characters may behave in a morally ambiguous fashion, and the lines between the antagonist and protagonist may be blurred. The beginnings of post-classical storytelling may be seen in 1940s and 1950s film noir films, in films such as \"Rebel Without a Cause\" (1955), and in Hitchcock's \"Psycho\". 1971 marked the release of controversial films like \"Straw Dogs\", \"A Clockwork Orange\", \"The French Connection\" and \"Dirty Harry\". This sparked heated controversy over the perceived escalation of violence in cinema.\nDuring the 1970s, a new group of American filmmakers emerged, such as Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola, George Lucas, Woody Allen, Terrence Malick, and Robert Altman. This coincided with the increasing popularity of the auteur theory in film literature and the media, which posited that a film director's films express their personal vision and creative insights. The development of the auteur style of filmmaking helped to give these directors far greater control over their projects than would have been possible in earlier eras. This led to some great critical and commercial successes, like Scorsese's \"Taxi Driver\", Coppola's \"The Godfather\" films, William Friedkin's \"The Exorcist\", Altman's \"Nashville\", Allen's \"Annie Hall\" and \"Manhattan\", Malick's \"Badlands\" and \"Days of Heaven\", and Polish immigrant Roman Polanski's \"Chinatown\". It also, however, resulted in some failures, including Peter Bogdanovich's \"At Long Last Love\" and Michael Cimino's hugely expensive Western epic \"Heaven's Gate\", which helped to bring about the demise of its backer, United Artists.\nThe financial disaster of \"Heaven's Gate\" marked the end of the visionary \"auteur\" directors of the \"New Hollywood\", who had unrestrained creative and financial freedom to develop films. The phenomenal success in the 1970s of Spielberg's \"Jaws\" originated the concept of the modern \"blockbuster\". However, the enormous success of George Lucas' 1977 film \"Star Wars\" led to much more than just the popularization of blockbuster filmmaking. The film's revolutionary use of special effects, sound editing and music had led it to become widely regarded as one of the single most important films in the medium's history, as well as the most influential film of the 1970s. Hollywood studios increasingly focused on producing a smaller number of very large budget films with massive marketing and promotional campaigns. This trend had already been foreshadowed by the commercial success of disaster films such as \"The Poseidon Adventure\" and \"The Towering Inferno\".\nDuring the mid-1970s, more pornographic theatres, euphemistically called \"adult cinemas\", were established, and the legal production of hardcore pornographic films began. Porn films such as \"Deep Throat\" and its star Linda Lovelace became something of a popular culture phenomenon and resulted in a spate of similar sex films. The porn cinemas finally died out during the 1980s, when the popularization of the home VCR and pornography videotapes allowed audiences to watch sex films at home. In the early 1970s, English-language audiences became more aware of the new West German cinema, with Werner Herzog, Rainer Werner Fassbinder and Wim Wenders among its leading exponents.\nIn world cinema, the 1970s saw a dramatic increase in the popularity of martial arts films, largely due to its reinvention by Bruce Lee, who departed from the artistic style of traditional Chinese martial arts films and added a much greater sense of realism to them with his Jeet Kune Do style. This began with \"The Big Boss\" (1971), which was a major success across Asia. However, he did not gain fame in the Western world until shortly after his death in 1973, when \"Enter the Dragon\" was released. The film went on to become the most successful martial arts film in cinematic history, popularized the martial arts film genre across the world, and cemented Bruce Lee's status as a cultural icon. Hong Kong action cinema, however, was in decline due to a wave of \"Bruceploitation\" films. This trend eventually came to an end in 1978 with the martial arts comedy films, \"Snake in the Eagle's Shadow\" and \"Drunken Master\", directed by Yuen Woo-ping and starring Jackie Chan, laying the foundations for the rise of Hong Kong action cinema in the 1980s.\nWhile the musical film genre had declined in Hollywood by this time, musical films were quickly gaining popularity in the cinema of India, where the term \"Bollywood\" was coined for the growing Hindi film industry in Bombay (now Mumbai) that ended up dominating South Asian cinema, overtaking the more critically acclaimed Bengali film industry in popularity. Hindi filmmakers combined the Hollywood musical formula with the conventions of ancient Indian theatre to create a new film genre called \"Masala\", which dominated Indian cinema throughout the late 20th century. These \"Masala\" films portrayed action, comedy, drama, romance and melodrama all at once, with \"filmi\" song and dance routines thrown in. This trend began with films directed by Manmohan Desai and starring Amitabh Bachchan, who remains one of the most popular film stars in South Asia. The most popular Indian film of all time was \"Sholay\" (1975), a \"Masala\" film inspired by a real-life dacoit as well as Kurosawa's \"Seven Samurai\" and the Spaghetti Westerns.\nThe end of the decade saw the first major international marketing of Australian cinema, as Peter Weir's films \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\" and \"The Last Wave\" and Fred Schepisi's \"The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith\" gained critical acclaim. In 1979, Australian filmmaker George Miller also garnered international attention for his violent, low-budget action film \"Mad Max\".\n1980s.\nDuring the 1980s, audiences began increasingly watching films on their home VCRs. In the early part of that decade, the film studios tried legal action to ban home ownership of VCRs as a violation of copyright, which proved unsuccessful. Eventually, the sale and rental of films on home video became a significant \"second venue\" for exhibition of films, and an additional source of revenue for the film industries. Direct-to-video (niche) markets usually offered lower quality, cheap productions that were not deemed very suitable for the general audiences of television and theatrical releases.\nThe Lucas\u2013Spielberg combine would dominate \"Hollywood\" cinema for much of the 1980s, and lead to much imitation. Two follow-ups to \"Star Wars\", three to \"Jaws\", and three \"Indiana Jones\" films helped to make sequels of successful films more of an expectation than ever before. Lucas also launched THX Ltd, a division of Lucasfilm in 1982, while Spielberg enjoyed one of the decade's greatest successes in \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" the same year. 1982 also saw the release of Disney's \"Tron\" which was one of the first films from a major studio to use computer graphics extensively. American independent cinema struggled more during the decade, although Martin Scorsese's \"Raging Bull\" (1980), \"After Hours\" (1985), and \"The King of Comedy\" (1983) helped to establish him as one of the most critically acclaimed American film makers of the era. Also during 1983 \"Scarface\" was released, which was very profitable and resulted in even greater fame for its leading actor Al Pacino. Probably the most successful film commercially was Tim Burton's 1989 version of Bob Kane's creation, \"Batman\", which broke box-office records. Jack Nicholson's portrayal of the demented Joker earned him a total of $60,000,000 after figuring in his percentage of the gross.\nBritish cinema was given a boost during the early 1980s by the arrival of David Puttnam's company Goldcrest Films. The films \"Chariots of Fire\", \"Gandhi\", \"The Killing Fields\" and \"A Room with a View\" appealed to a \"middlebrow\" audience which was increasingly being ignored by the major Hollywood studios. While the films of the 1970s had helped to define modern blockbuster motion pictures, the way \"Hollywood\" released its films would now change. Films, for the most part, would premiere in a wider number of theatres, although, to this day, some films still premiere using the route of the limited/roadshow release system. Against some expectations, the rise of the multiplex cinema did not allow less mainstream films to be shown, but simply allowed the major blockbusters to be given an even greater number of screenings. However, films that had been overlooked in cinemas were increasingly being given a second chance on home video.\nDuring the 1980s, Japanese cinema experienced a revival, largely due to the success of anime films. At the beginning of the 1980s, \"Space Battleship Yamato\" (1973) and \"Mobile Suit Gundam\" (1979), both of which were unsuccessful as television series, were remade as films and became hugely successful in Japan. In particular, \"Mobile Suit Gundam\" sparked the Gundam franchise of Real Robot mecha anime. The success of \"\" also sparked a Macross franchise of mecha anime. This was also the decade when Studio Ghibli was founded. The studio produced Hayao Miyazaki's first fantasy films, \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\" (1984) and \"Castle in the Sky\" (1986), as well as Isao Takahata's \"Grave of the Fireflies\" (1988), all of which were very successful in Japan and received worldwide critical acclaim. Original video animation (OVA) films also began during this decade; the most influential of these early OVA films was Noboru Ishiguro's cyberpunk film \"Megazone 23\" (1985). The most famous anime film of this decade was Katsuhiro Otomo's cyberpunk film \"Akira\" (1988), which although initially unsuccessful at Japanese theaters, went on to become an international success.\nHong Kong action cinema, which was in a state of decline due to endless Bruceploitation films after the death of Bruce Lee, also experienced a revival in the 1980s, largely due to the reinvention of the action film genre by Jackie Chan. He had previously combined the comedy film and martial arts film genres successfully in the 1978 films \"Snake in the Eagle's Shadow\" and \"Drunken Master\". The next step he took was in combining this comedy martial arts genre with a new emphasis on elaborate and highly dangerous stunts, reminiscent of the silent film era. The first film in this new style of action cinema was \"Project A\" (1983), which saw the formation of the Jackie Chan Stunt Team as well as the \"Three Brothers\" (Chan, Sammo Hung and Yuen Biao). The film added elaborate, dangerous stunts to the fights and slapstick humor, and became a huge success throughout the Far East. As a result, Chan continued this trend with martial arts action films containing even more elaborate and dangerous stunts, including \"Wheels on Meals\" (1984), \"Police Story\" (1985), \"Armour of God\" (1986), \"Project A Part II\" (1987), \"Police Story 2\" (1988), and \"Dragons Forever\" (1988). Other new trends which began in the 1980s were the \"girls with guns\" subgenre, for which Michelle Yeoh gained fame; and especially the \"heroic bloodshed\" genre, revolving around Triads, largely pioneered by John Woo and for which Chow Yun-fat became famous. These Hong Kong action trends were later adopted by many Hollywood action films in the 1990s and 2000s.\nIn Indian cinema, another star actor, considered by many to be the most natural actor in Indian cinema, Mohanlal acted in his first movie. During the 80's he rose to become a super star in Indian cinema. Indian cinema as a whole was changing in a new wave of movies and directors.\n1990s.\nThe early 1990s saw the development of a commercially successful independent cinema in the United States. Although cinema was increasingly dominated by special-effects films such as \"\" (1991), \"Jurassic Park\" (1993) and \"Titanic\" (1997), the latter of which became the highest-grossing film of all time at the time up until \"Avatar\" (2009), also directed by James Cameron, independent films like Steven Soderbergh's \"Sex, Lies, and Videotape\" (1989) and Quentin Tarantino's \"Reservoir Dogs\" (1992) had significant commercial success both at the cinema and on home video.\nFilmmakers associated with the Danish film movement Dogme 95 introduced a manifesto aimed to purify filmmaking. Its first few films gained worldwide critical acclaim, after which the movement slowly faded out.\nScorsese's Goodfellas was released in 1990. It is considered by many as one of the greatest movies to be made, particularly in the gangster genre. It is said to be the highest point of Scorsese's career.\nMajor American studios began to create their own \"independent\" production companies to finance and produce non-mainstream fare. One of the most successful independents of the 1990s, Miramax Films, was bought by Disney the year before the release of Tarantino's runaway hit \"Pulp Fiction\" in 1994. The same year marked the beginning of film and video distribution online. Animated films aimed at family audiences also regained their popularity, with Disney's \"Beauty and the Beast\" (1991), \"Aladdin\" (1992), and \"The Lion King\" (1994). During 1995, the first feature-length computer-animated feature, \"Toy Story\", was produced by Pixar Animation Studios and released by Disney. After the success of Toy Story, computer animation would grow to become the dominant technique for feature-length animation, which would allow competing film companies such as DreamWorks, 20th Century Fox and Warner Bros. to effectively compete with Disney with successful films of their own. During the late 1990s, another cinematic transition began, from physical film stock to digital cinema technology. Meanwhile, DVDs became the new standard for consumer video, replacing VHS tapes.\n2000s.\nSince the late 2000s streaming media platforms like YouTube provided means for anyone with access to internet and cameras (a standard feature of smartphones) to publish videos to the world. Also competing with the increasing popularity of video games and other forms of home entertainment, the industry once again started to make theatrical releases more attractive, with new 3D technologies and epic (fantasy and superhero) films becoming a mainstay in cinemas.\nThe documentary film also rose as a commercial genre for perhaps the first time, with the success of films such as \"March of the Penguins\" and Michael Moore's \"Bowling for Columbine\" and \"Fahrenheit 9/11\". A new genre was created with Martin Kunert and Eric Manes' \"Voices of Iraq\", when 150 inexpensive DV cameras were distributed across Iraq, transforming ordinary people into collaborative filmmakers. The success of \"Gladiator\" led to a revival of interest in epic cinema, and \"Moulin Rouge!\" renewed interest in musical cinema. Home theatre systems became increasingly sophisticated, as did some of the special edition DVDs designed to be shown on them. \"The Lord of the Rings trilogy\" was released on DVD in both the theatrical version and in a special extended version intended only for home cinema audiences.\nIn 2001, the \"Harry Potter\" film series began, and by its end in 2011, it had become the highest-grossing film franchise of all time until the Marvel Cinematic Universe passed it in 2015.\nMore films were also being released simultaneously to IMAX cinema, the first was in 2002's Disney animation \"Treasure Planet\"; and the first live action was in 2003's \"The Matrix Revolutions\" and a re-release of \"The Matrix Reloaded\". Later in the decade, \"The Dark Knight\" was the first major feature film to have been at least partially shot in IMAX technology.\nThere has been an increasing globalization of cinema during this decade, with foreign-language films gaining popularity in English-speaking markets. Examples of such films include \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" (Mandarin), \"Am\u00e9lie\" (French), \"Lagaan\" (Hindi), \"Spirited Away\" (Japanese), \"City of God\" (Brazilian Portuguese), \"The Passion of the Christ\" (Aramaic), \"Apocalypto\" (Mayan) and \"Inglourious Basterds\" (multiple European languages). Italy is the most awarded country at the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, with 14 awards won, 3 Special Awards and 31 nominations.\nIn 2003, there was a revival in 3D film popularity the first being James Cameron's \"Ghosts of the Abyss\" which was released as the first full-length 3-D IMAX feature filmed with the Reality Camera System. This camera system used the latest HD video cameras, not film, and was built for Cameron by Emmy nominated Director of Photography Vince Pace, to his specifications. The same camera system was used to film \"\" (2003), \"Aliens of the Deep\" IMAX (2005), and \"The Adventures of Sharkboy and Lavagirl in 3-D\" (2005).\nAfter James Cameron's 3D film \"Avatar\" became the highest-grossing film of all time, 3D films gained brief popularity with many other films being released in 3D, with the best critical and financial successes being in the field of feature film animation such as Universal Pictures/Illumination Entertainment's \"Despicable Me\" and DreamWorks Animation's \"How To Train Your Dragon\", \"Shrek Forever After\" and \"Megamind\". \"Avatar\" is also note-worthy for pioneering highly sophisticated use of motion capture technology and influencing several other films such as \"Rise of the Planet of the Apes\".\n2010s.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], the largest film industries by number of feature films produced were those of India, the United States, China, Nigeria, and Japan.\nIn 2010, the first woman to win the Best Director Award in Oscar history appeared. Katherine Bigelow's The Hurt Locker won six awards.\nIn Hollywood, superhero films have greatly increased in popularity and financial success, with films based on Marvel and DC comics regularly being released every year up to the present. As of 2019[ [update]], the superhero genre has been the most dominant as far as American box office receipts are concerned. The 2019 superhero film \"\" was the most successful movie of all-time at the box office.\nIn 2020, \"Parasite\" became the first international film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture.\n2020s.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic resulted in the closure of film theatres around the world in response to regional and national lockdowns. Many films slated to release in the early 2020s faced delays in development, production, and distribution, with others being released on streaming services with little or no theatrical window.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10784", "revid": "39761822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10784", "title": "Cinema of France", "text": "Filmmaking industry in France\nFrench cinema consists of the film industry and its film productions, whether made within the nation of France or by French film production companies abroad. It is the oldest and largest precursor of national cinemas in Europe; with primary influence also on the creation of national cinemas in Asia.\nFrance continues to have a particularly strong film industry, due in part to protections afforded by the French government. In 2013, France was the second largest exporter of films in the world after the United States. A study in April 2014 showed that French cinema maintains a positive influence around the world, being the most appreciated by global audiences after that of America.\nFrance currently has the most successful film industry in Europe, in terms of number of films produced per annum, with a record-breaking 300 feature-length films produced in 2015. France is also one of the few countries where non-American productions have the biggest share: American films only represented 44.9% of total admissions in 2014. This is largely due to the commercial strength of domestic productions, which accounted for 44.5% of admissions in 2014 (35.5% in 2015; 35.3% in 2016). The French film industry is closer to being entirely self-sufficient than any other country in Europe, recovering around 80\u201390% of costs from revenues generated in the domestic market alone.\nApart from its strong and innovative film tradition, France has also been a leading destination for filmmakers and actors from around the world; consequently, French cinema is sometimes intertwined with the cinema of foreign nations. Directors from nations such as Poland (Roman Polanski, Krzysztof Kie\u015blowski, and Andrzej \u017bu\u0142awski), Argentina (Gaspar No\u00e9 and Edgardo Cozarinsky), Russia (Alexandre Alexeieff, Anatole Litvak), Austria (Michael Haneke), and Georgia (G\u00e9la Babluani, Otar Iosseliani) are prominent in the ranks of French cinema. Conversely, French directors have had prolific and influential careers in other countries, such as Luc Besson, Jacques Tourneur, or Francis Veber in the United States.\nParis has the highest density of cinemas in the world, measured by the number of movie theaters per inhabitant, and that in most \"downtown Paris\" movie theaters, foreign movies which would be secluded to \"art houses\" cinemas in other places are shown alongside \"mainstream\" works. Philippe Binant realized, on 2 February 2000, the first digital cinema projection in Europe, with the DLP CINEMA technology developed by Texas Instruments, in Paris. Paris also boasts the Cit\u00e9 du cin\u00e9ma, a major studio north of the city, and Disney Studio, a theme park devoted to the cinema and the third theme park near the city behind Disneyland and Parc Asterix.\nA favorite theme has been the French Revolution, with hundreds of titles.\nHistory.\nLes fr\u00e8res Lumi\u00e8re released the first projection with the Cinematograph, in Paris on 28 December 1895. The French film industry in the late 19th century and early 20th century was the world's most important. Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re invented the cin\u00e9matographe and their \"L'Arriv\u00e9e d'un train en gare de La Ciotat\" in Paris in 1895 is considered by many historians as the official birth of cinematography. French films during this period catered to a growing middle class and were mostly shown in caf\u00e9s and traveling fairs.\nThe early days of the industry, from 1896 to 1902, saw the dominance of four firms: Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res, the Gaumont Film Company, the Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s company, and the Lumi\u00e8res. M\u00e9li\u00e8s invented many of the techniques of cinematic grammar, and among his fantastic, surreal short subjects is the first science fiction film \"A Trip to the Moon\" (\"Le Voyage dans la Lune\") in 1902.\nIn 1902, the Lumi\u00e8res abandoned everything but the production of film stock, leaving M\u00e9li\u00e8s as the weakest player of the remaining three. (He would retire in 1914.) From 1904 to 1911, the Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res company led the world in film production and distribution.\nAt Gaumont, pioneer Alice Guy-Blach\u00e9 (M. Gaumont's former secretary) was made head of production and oversaw about 400 films, from her first, \"La F\u00e9e aux Choux\", in 1896, through 1906. She then continued her career in the United States, as did Maurice Tourneur and L\u00e9once Perret after World War I.\nIn 1907, Gaumont owned and operated the biggest movie studio in the world, and along with the boom in construction of \"luxury cinemas\" like the Gaumont-Palace and the Path\u00e9-Palace (both 1911), cinema became an economic challenger to theater by 1914.\nAfter World War I.\nAfter World War I, the French film industry suffered because of a lack of capital, and film production decreased as it did in most other European countries. This allowed the United States film industry to enter the European cinema market, because American films could be sold more cheaply than European productions, since the studios already had recouped their costs in the home market. When film studios in Europe began to fail, many European countries began to set import barriers. France installed an import quota of 1:7, meaning for every seven foreign films imported to France, one French film was to be produced and shown in French cinemas.\nDuring the period between World War I and World War II, Jacques Feyder and Jean Vigo became two of the founders of poetic realism in French cinema. They also dominated French impressionist cinema, along with Abel Gance, Germaine Dulac and Jean Epstein.\nIn 1931, Marcel Pagnol filmed the first of his great trilogy \"Marius\", \"Fanny\", and \"C\u00e9sar\". He followed this with other films including \"The Baker's Wife\". Other notable films of the 1930s included Ren\u00e9 Clair's \"Under the Roofs of Paris\" (1930), Jean Vigo's \"L'Atalante\" (1934), Jacques Feyder's \"Carnival in Flanders\" (1935), and Julien Duvivier's \"La belle equipe\" (1936). In 1935, renowned playwright and actor Sacha Guitry directed his first film and went on to make more than 30 films that were precursors to the New Wave era. In 1937, Jean Renoir, the son of painter Pierre-Auguste Renoir, directed \"La Grande Illusion\" (\"The Grand Illusion\"). In 1939, Renoir directed \"La R\u00e8gle du Jeu\" (\"The Rules of the Game\"). Several critics have cited this film as one of the greatest of all-time, particularly for its innovative camerawork, cinematography and sound editing.\nMarcel Carn\u00e9's (\"Children of Paradise\") was filmed during World War II and released in 1945. The three-hour film was extremely difficult to make due to the Nazi occupation. Set in Paris in 1828, it was voted Best French Film of the Century in a poll of 600 French critics and professionals in the late 1990s.\nPost\u2013World War II.\n1940s\u20131970s.\nIn the magazine , founded by Andr\u00e9 Bazin and two other writers in 1951, film critics raised the level of discussion of the cinema, providing a platform for the birth of modern film theory. Several of the \"Cahiers\" critics, including Jean-Luc Godard, Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, Claude Chabrol, Jacques Rivette and \u00c9ric Rohmer, went on to make films themselves, creating what was to become known as the French New Wave. Some of the first films of this new movement were Godard's \"Breathless\" (\"\u00c0 bout de souffle\", 1960), starring Jean-Paul Belmondo, Rivette's \"Paris Belongs to Us\" (\"Paris nous appartient\", 1958 \u2013 distributed in 1961), starring Jean-Claude Brialy and Truffaut's \"The 400 Blows\" (\"Les Quatre Cent Coups\", 1959) starring Jean-Pierre L\u00e9aud. Later works are \"Contempt\" (1963) by Godard starring Brigitte Bardot and Michel Piccoli and \"Stolen Kisses\" starring L\u00e9aud and Claude Jade. Because Truffaut followed the hero of his screen debut, Antoine Doinel, for twenty years, the last post-New-Wave-film is \"Love on the Run\" in which his heroes Antoine (L\u00e9aud) and Christine (Jade) get divorced.\nMany contemporaries of Godard and Truffaut followed suit, or achieved international critical acclaim with styles of their own, such as the minimalist films of Robert Bresson and Jean-Pierre Melville, the Hitchcockian-like thrillers of Henri-Georges Clouzot, and other New Wave films by Agn\u00e8s Varda and Alain Resnais. The movement, while an inspiration to other national cinemas and unmistakably a direct influence on the future New Hollywood directors, slowly faded by the end of the 1960s.\nDuring this period, French commercial film also made a name for itself. Immensely popular French comedies with Louis de Fun\u00e8s topped the French box office. The war comedy \"La Grande Vadrouille\" (1966), from G\u00e9rard Oury with Bourvil, de Fun\u00e8s and Terry-Thomas, was the most successful film in French theaters for more than 30 years. Another example was \"La Folie des grandeurs\" with Yves Montand. French cinema also was the birthplace for many subgenres of the crime film, most notably the modern caper film, starting with 1955's \"Rififi\" by American-born director Jules Dassin and followed by a large number of serious, noirish heist dramas as well as playful caper comedies throughout the sixties, and the \"polar,\" a typical French blend of film noir and detective fiction.\nIn addition, French movie stars began to claim fame abroad as well as at home. Popular actors of the period included Brigitte Bardot, Alain Delon, Romy Schneider, Catherine Deneuve, Jeanne Moreau, Simone Signoret, Yves Montand, Jean-Paul Belmondo and still Jean Gabin.\nSince the Sixties and the early Seventies they are completed and followed by Michel Piccoli and Philippe Noiret as character actors, Annie Girardot, Jean-Louis Trintignant, Jean-Pierre L\u00e9aud, Claude Jade, Isabelle Huppert, Anny Duperey, G\u00e9rard Depardieu, Patrick Dewaere, Jean-Pierre Cassel, Miou-Miou, Brigitte Fossey, St\u00e9phane Audran and Isabelle Adjani. During the Eightees they are added by a new generation including Sophie Marceau, Emmanuelle B\u00e9art, Jean-Hugues Anglade, Sabine Azema, Juliette Binoche and Daniel Auteuil.\nIn 1968, the May riots shook France. Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut had already organised demonstrations in February against Henri Langlois's removal as head of the Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que fran\u00e7aise and dedicated his film \"Stolen Kisses\", which was being made, to Langlois. The Cannes Film Festival is cancelled - on the initiative of Truffaut, Godard and Louis Malle. Jean-Luc Godard no longer works in the commercial film business for years. Political films such as Costa-Gavras' \"Z\" celebrate success. Chabrol continues his vivisection of the bourgeoisie (\"The Unfaithful Wife\") and Truffaut explores the possibility of bourgeois marital happiness (\"Bed and Board\").\nWhile Godard disappears from cinema after the Nouvelle Vague except for a few essays, Truffaut and Chabrol remain the leading directors whose artistic aspects remain commercially successful. Other directors of the 1970s in this effect are Bertrand Tavernier, Claude Sautet, Eric Rohmer, Claude Lelouch, Georges Lautner, Jean-Paul Rappeneau, Michel Deville Yves Boisset, Maurice Pialat, Bertrand Blier, Coline Serreau and Andr\u00e9 T\u00e9chin\u00e9 in purely entertainment films, it is G\u00e9rard Oury and \u00c9douard Molinaro.\nThe 1979 film \"La Cage aux Folles\" ran for well over a year at the Paris Theatre, an arthouse cinema in New York City, and was a commercial success at theaters throughout the country, in both urban and rural areas. It won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and for years it remained the most successful foreign film to be released in the United States.\n1980s.\nJean-Jacques Beineix's \"Diva\" (1981) sparked the beginning of the 1980s wave of French cinema. Movies which followed in its wake included \"Betty Blue\" (\"37\u00b02 le matin\", 1986) by Beineix, \"The Big Blue\" (\"Le Grand bleu\", 1988) by Luc Besson, and \"The Lovers on the Bridge\" (\"Les Amants du Pont-Neuf\", 1991) by L\u00e9os Carax. Made with a slick commercial style and emphasizing the alienation of their main characters, these films are representative of the style known as \"Cinema du look\".\n\"Camille Claudel\", directed by newcomer Bruno Nuytten and starring Isabelle Adjani and G\u00e9rard Depardieu, was a major commercial success in 1988, earning Adjani, who was also the film's co-producer, a C\u00e9sar Award for best actress. The historical drama film \"Jean de Florette\" (1986) and its sequel \"Manon des Sources\" (1986) were among the highest grossing French films in history and brought Daniel Auteuil international recognition.\nAccording to Rapha\u00ebl Bassan, in his article \u00ab\"The Angel\": Un m\u00e9t\u00e9ore dans le ciel de l'animation,\u00bb \"La Revue du cin\u00e9ma\", n\u00b0 393, avril 1984. , Patrick Bokanowski's \"The Angel\", shown in 1982 at the Cannes Film Festival, can be considered the beginnings of contemporary animation. The masks erase all human personality in the characters. Patrick Bokanowski would thus have total control over the \"matter\" of the image and its optical composition. This is especially noticeable throughout the film, with images taken through distorted objectives or a plastic work on the sets and costumes, for example in the scene of the designer. Patrick Bokanowski creates his own universe and obeys his own aesthetic logic. It takes us through a series of distorted areas, obscure visions, metamorphoses and synthetic objects. Indeed, in the film, the human may be viewed as a fetish object (for example, the doll hanging by a thread), with reference to Kafkaesque and Freudian theories on automata and the fear of man faced with something as complex as him. The ascent of the stairs would be the liberation of the ideas of death, culture, and sex that makes us reach the emblematic figure of the angel.\n1990s.\nJean-Paul Rappeneau's \"Cyrano de Bergerac\" was a major box-office success in 1990, earning several C\u00e9sar Awards, including best actor for G\u00e9rard Depardieu, as well as an Academy Award nomination for best foreign picture.\nLuc Besson made \"La Femme Nikita\" in 1990, a movie that inspired remakes in both United States and in Hong Kong. In 1994, he also made \"\" (starring Jean Reno and a young Natalie Portman), and in 1997 \"The Fifth Element\", which became a cult favorite and launched the career of Milla Jovovich.\nJean-Pierre Jeunet made \"Delicatessen\" and \"The City of Lost Children\" (\"La Cit\u00e9 des enfants perdus\"), both of which featured a distinctly fantastical style.\nIn 1992, Claude Sautet co-wrote (with Jacques Fieschi) and directed \"Un Coeur en Hiver\", considered by many to be a masterpiece. Mathieu Kassovitz's 1995 film \"Hate\" (\"La Haine\") received critical praise and made Vincent Cassel a star, and in 1997, Juliette Binoche won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role in \"The English Patient\".\nThe success of Michel Ocelot's \"Kirikou and the Sorceress\" in 1998 rejuvenated the production of original feature-length animated films by such filmmakers as Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Laguionie and Sylvain Chomet.\n2000s.\nIn 2000, Philippe Binant realized the first digital cinema projection in Europe, with the DLP CINEMA technology developed by Texas Instruments, in Paris.\nIn 2001, after a brief stint in Hollywood, Jean-Pierre Jeunet returned to France with \"Am\u00e9lie\" (\"Le Fabuleux Destin d'Am\u00e9lie Poulain\") starring Audrey Tautou. It became the highest-grossing French-language film ever released in the United States. The following year, \"Brotherhood of the Wolf\" became the second-highest-grossing French-language film in the United States since 1980 and went on to gross more than $70 million worldwide.\nIn 2008, Marion Cotillard won the Academy Award for Best Actress and the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role for her portrayal of legendary French singer \u00c9dith Piaf in \"La Vie en Rose\", the first French-language performance to be so honored. The film won two Oscars and four BAFTAs and became the third-highest-grossing French-language film in the United States since 1980. Cotillard was the first female and second person to win both an Academy Award and C\u00e9sar Award for the same performance.\nAt the 2008 Cannes Film Festival, \"Entre les murs\" (\"The Class\") won the Palme d'Or, the 6th French victory at the festival. The 2000s also saw an increase in the number of individual competitive awards won by French artists at the Cannes Festival, for direction (Tony Gatlif, \"Exils\", 2004), screenplay (Agn\u00e8s Jaoui and Jean-Pierre Bacri, \"Look at Me\", 2004), female acting (Isabelle Huppert, \"The Piano Teacher\", 2001; Charlotte Gainsbourg, \"Antichrist\", 2009) and male acting (Jamel Debbouze, Samy Naceri, Roschdy Zem, Sami Bouajila and Bernard Blancan, \"Days of Glory\", 2006).\nThe 2008 rural comedy \"Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis\" drew an audience of more than 20 million, the first French film to do so. Its $193 million gross in France puts it just behind \"Titanic\" as the most successful film of all time in French theaters.\nIn the 2000s, several French directors made international productions, often in the action genre. These include G\u00e9rard Pir\u00e8s (\"Riders\", 2002), Pitof (\"Catwoman\", 2004), Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Richet (\"Assault on Precinct 13\", 2005), Florent Emilio Siri (\"Hostage\", 2005), Christophe Gans (\"Silent Hill\", 2006), Mathieu Kassovitz (\"Babylon A.D.\", 2008), Louis Leterrier (\"The Transporter\", 2002; \"Transporter 2\", 2005; Olivier Megaton directed \"Transporter 3\", 2008), Alexandre Aja (\"Mirrors\", 2008), and Pierre Morel (\"Taken\", 2009).\nSurveying the entire range of French filmmaking today, Tim Palmer calls contemporary cinema in France a kind of eco-system, in which commercial cinema co-exists with artistic radicalism, first-time directors (who make up about 40% of all France's directors each year) mingle with veterans, and there even occasionally emerges a fascinating pop-art hybridity, in which the features of intellectual and mass cinemas are interrelated (as in filmmakers like Valeria Bruni-Tedeschi, Olivier Assayas, Ma\u00efwenn, Sophie Filli\u00e8res, Serge Bozon, and others).\n2010s.\nOne of the most noticed and best reviewed films of 2010 was the drama \"Of Gods and Men\" (\"Des hommes et des dieux\"), about the assassination of seven monks in Tibhirine, Algeria. 2011 saw the release of \"The Artist\", a silent film shot in black and white by Michel Hazanavicius that reflected on the end of Hollywood's silent era.\nFrench cinema continued its upward trend of earning awards at the Cannes Festival, including the prestigious Grand Prix for \"Of Gods and Men\" (2010) and the Jury Prize for Poliss (2011); the Best Director Award for Mathieu Amalric (\"On Tour\", 2010); the Best Actress Award for Juliette Binoche (\"Certified Copy\", 2010); and the Best Actor Award for Jean Dujardin (\"The Artist\", 2011).\nIn 2011, the film \"Intouchables\" became the most watched film in France (including the foreign films). After ten weeks nearly 17.5 million people had seen the film in France, Intouchables was the second most-seen French movie of all time in France, and the third including foreign movies.\nIn 2012, with 226 million admissions (US$1,900 million) in the world for French films (582 films released in 84 countries), including 82 million admissions in France (US$700 million), 2012 was the fourth best year since 1985. With 144 million admissions outside France (US$1,200 million), 2012 was the best year since at least 1994 (since Unifrance collects data), and the French cinema reached a market share of 2.95% of worldwide admissions and of 4.86% of worldwide sales. Three films particularly contributed to this record year: \"Taken 2\", \"The Intouchables\" and \"The Artist\". In 2012, films shot in French ranked 4th in admissions (145 million) behind films shot in English (more than a billion admissions in the US alone), Hindi (?: no accurate data but estimated at 3 billion for the whole India/Indian languages) and Chinese (275 million in China plus a few million abroad), but above films shot in Korean (115 million admissions in South Korea plus a few millions abroad) and Japanese (102 million admissions in Japan plus a few million abroad, a record since 1973 et its 104 million admissions). French-language movies ranked 2nd in export (outside of French-speaking countries) after films in English. 2012 was also the year French animation studio Mac Guff was acquired by an American studio, Universal Pictures, through its Illumination Entertainment subsidiary. Illumination Mac Guff became the animation studio for some of the top English-language animated movies of the 2010s, including \"The Lorax\" and the \"Despicable Me\" franchise.\nIn 2015 French cinema sold 106 million tickets and grossed \u20ac600 million outside of the country. The highest-grossing film was \"Taken 3\" (\u20ac261.7 million) and the largest territory in admissions was China (14.7 million).\nGovernment support.\nAs the advent of television threatened the success of cinema, countries were faced with the problem of reviving movie-going. The French cinema market, and more generally the French-speaking market, is smaller than the English-speaking market; one reason being that some major markets, including prominently the United States, are reluctant to generally accept foreign films, especially foreign-language and subtitled productions. As a consequence, French movies have to be amortized on a relatively small market and thus generally have budgets far lower than their American counterparts, ruling out expensive settings and special effects.\nThe French government has implemented various measures aimed at supporting local film production and movie theaters. The Canal+ TV channel has a broadcast license requiring it to support the production of movies. Some taxes are levied on movies and TV channels for use as subsidies for movie production. Some tax breaks are given for investment in movie productions, as is common elsewhere including in the United States. The sale of DVDs is prohibited for four months after the showing in theaters, so as to ensure some revenue for movie theaters.\nCo-production.\nThe French national and regional governments involve themselves in film production. For example, the award-winning documentary \"In the Land of the Deaf\" (\"Le Pays des sourds\") was created by Nicolas Philibert in 1992. The film was co-produced by multinational partners, which reduced the financial risks inherent in the project; and co-production also ensured enhanced distribution opportunities.\nIn Anglophone distribution, \"In the Land of the Deaf\" was presented in French Sign Language (FSL) and French, with English subtitles and closed captions.\nFilm distribution and production companies.\nNotable French film distribution and/or production companies include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10785", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10785", "title": "Film history/Germany", "text": ""}
{"id": "10786", "revid": "39619725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10786", "title": "Cinema of the Soviet Union", "text": "Film history of the Soviet Union\nThe cinema of the Soviet Union includes films produced by the constituent republics of the Soviet Union reflecting elements of their pre-Soviet culture, language and history, albeit they were all regulated by the central government in Moscow. Most prolific in their republican films, after the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, were Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Ukraine, and, to a lesser degree, Lithuania, Belarus and Moldavia. At the same time, the nation's film industry, which was fully nationalized throughout most of the country's history, was guided by philosophies and laws propounded by the monopoly Soviet Communist Party which introduced a new view on the cinema, socialist realism, which was different from the one before or after the existence of the Soviet Union.\nHistorical outline.\nUpon the establishment of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) on November 7, 1917 (although the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics did not officially come into existence until December 30, 1922), what had formerly been the Russian Empire began quickly to come under the domination of a Soviet reorganization of all its institutions. From the outset, the leaders of this new state held that film would be the most ideal propaganda tool for the Soviet Union because of its widespread popularity among the established citizenry of the new land. Vladimir Lenin viewed film as the most important medium for educating the masses in the ways, means and successes of communism. As a consequence Lenin issued the \"Directives on the Film Business\" on January 17, 1922, which instructed the People's Commissariat for Education to systemise the film business, registering and numbering all films shown in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, extracting rent from all privately owned cinemas and subject them to censorship. Joseph Stalin later also regarded cinema as of the prime importance.\nHowever, between World War I and the Russian Revolution, the Russian film industry and the infrastructure needed to support it (e.g., electrical power) had deteriorated to the point of unworkability. The majority of cinemas had been in the corridor between Moscow and Saint Petersburg, and most were out of commission. Additionally, many of the performers, producers, directors and other artists of pre-Soviet Russia had fled the country or were moving ahead of Red Army forces as they pushed further and further south into what remained of the Russian Empire. Furthermore, the new government did not have the funds to spare for an extensive reworking of the system of filmmaking. Thus, they initially opted for project approval and censorship guidelines while leaving what remained of the industry in private hands. As this amounted mostly to cinema houses, the first Soviet films consisted of recycled films of the Russian Empire and its imports, to the extent that these were not determined to be offensive to the new Soviet ideology. Ironically, the first new film released in Soviet Russia did not exactly fit this mold: this was \"Father Sergius\", a religious film completed during the last weeks of the Russian Empire but not yet exhibited. It appeared on Soviet screens in 1918.\nBeyond this, the government was principally able to fund only short, educational films, the most famous of which were the agitki \u2013 educational films intended to agitate, or energize and enthuse, the masses to participate fully in approved Soviet activities, and deal effectively with those who remained in opposition to the new order. These short (often one small reel) films were often simple visual aids and accompaniments to live lectures and speeches, and were carried from city to city, town to town, village to village (along with the lecturers) to educate the entire countryside, even reaching areas where film had not been previously seen.\nNewsreels, as documentaries, were the other major form of earliest Soviet cinema. Dziga Vertov's newsreel series \"Kino-Pravda\", the best known of these, lasted from 1922 to 1925 and had a propagandistic bent; Vertov used the series to promote socialist realism but also to experiment with cinema.\nStill, in 1921, there was not one functioning cinema in Moscow until late in the year. Its rapid success, using old Russian and imported feature films, jumpstarted the industry significantly, especially insofar as the government did not heavily or directly regulate what was shown, and by 1923 an additional 89 cinemas had opened. Despite extremely high taxation of ticket sales and film rentals, there was an incentive for individuals to begin making feature film product again \u2013 there were places to show the films \u2013 albeit they now had to conform their subject matter to a Soviet world view. In this context, the directors and writers who were in support of the objectives of communism assumed quick dominance in the industry, as they were the ones who could most reliably and convincingly turn out films that would satisfy government censors.\nNew talent joined the experienced remainder, and an artistic community assembled with the goal of defining \"Soviet film\" as something distinct and better from the output of \"decadent capitalism\". The leaders of this community viewed it essential to this goal to be free to experiment with the entire nature of film, a position which would result in several well-known creative efforts but would also result in an unforeseen counter-reaction by the increasingly solidifying administrators of the government-controlled society.\nIn 1924 Nikolai Lebedev wrote a book on the history of film he says is \"the first Soviet attempt at systematization of the meager available sources [on cinema] for the general reader\". Along with other articles written by Lebedev and published by \"Pravda\", \"Izvestia\" and \"Kino\". In the book he draws attention to the funding challenges that follow nationalization of Soviet cinema. In 1925 all film organizations merged to form \"Sovkino\". Under \"Sovkino\" the film industry was given a tax-free benefit and held a monopoly on all film-related exports and imports.\nSergei Eisenstein's \"Battleship Potemkin\" was released to wide acclaim in 1925; the film was heavily fictionalized and also propagandistic, giving the party line about the virtues of the proletariat. The \"kinokomitet\" or \"Film Committee\" established that same year published translations of important books about film theory by B\u00e9la Bal\u00e1zs, Rudolf Harms and L\u00e9on Moussinac.\nOne of the most popular films released in the 1930s was \"Circus\". Immediately after the end of World War II, color movies such as \"The Stone Flower\" (1946), \"Ballad of Siberia\" (1947), and \"Cossacks of the Kuban\" (1949) were released. Other notable films from the 1940s include \"Alexander Nevsky\" and \"Ivan the Terrible\".\nIn the late 1950s and early 1960s Soviet cinema produced \"Ballad of a Soldier\", which won the 1961 BAFTA Award for Best Film, and \"The Cranes Are Flying\".\n\"The Height\" is considered to be one of the best films of the 1950s (it also became the foundation of the bard movement).\nIn the 1980s there was a diversification of subject matter. Touchy issues could now be discussed openly. The results were films like \"Repentance\", which dealt with repression in Georgia, and the allegorical science fiction movie \"Kin-dza-dza!\".\nCensorship.\nAfter the death of Stalin, Soviet filmmakers were given a freer hand to film what they believed audiences wanted to see in their film's characters and stories. The industry remained a part of the government and any material that was found politically offensive or undesirable, was either removed, edited, reshot, or shelved. The definition of \"socialist realism\" was liberalized to allow development of more human characters, but communism still had to remain uncriticized in its fundamentals. Additionally, the degree of relative artistic liberality was changed from administration to administration.\nExamples created by censorship include:\nRevolution and Civil War.\nOn August 27, 1919, Vladimir Lenin nationalized the film industry and created post-imperial Soviet films \"when all control over film production and exhibition was ceded to the People\u2019s Commissariat of Education.\" The work of the nationalized motion-picture studios was administered by the All-Russian Photography and Motion Picture Department, which was reorganized in 1923 into Goskino, which in 1926 became Sovkino. The world's first state-filmmaking school, the First State School of Cinematography, was established in Moscow in 1919.\nDuring the Russian Civil War, agitation trains and ships visited soldiers, workers, and peasants. Lectures, reports, and political meetings were accompanied by newsreels about events at the various fronts.\n1920s.\nIn the 1920s, the documentary film group headed by Dziga Vertov blazed the trail from the conventional newsreel to the \"image centered publicistic film\", which became the basis of the Soviet film documentary. Typical of the 1920s were the topical news serial \"Kino-Pravda\" and the film \"Forward, Soviet!\" by Vertov, whose experiments and achievements in documentary films influenced the development of Russian and world cinematography. Other important films of the 1920s were Esfir Shub's historical-revolutionary films such as \"The Fall of the Romanov Dynasty\" which used montage editing techniques to repurpose old Imperial documentaries into a revolutionary theme. In 1924, filmmakers Sergei Eisenstein and Lev Kuleshov created the first association of Soviet filmmakers, the Association of Revolutionary Cinematography (ARK), to \"meet the ideological and artistic needs of the proletariat\". Although state controlled, \"the organization was characterized by a pluralism of political and artistic views until the late 1920s\". One of the most iconic developments in film during this period that is still used in films today was editing and montage to create meaning. This style of film making came to be known as the Kuleshov effect and was employed to conserve film stock due to shortages during that period. The film \"Hydropeat\" by Yuri Zhelyabuzhsky marked the beginning of popular science films. Feature-length agitation films in 1918\u201321 were important in the development of the film industry. Innovation in Russian filmmaking was expressed particularly in the work of Eisenstein. \"Battleship Potemkin\" was noteworthy for its innovative montage and metaphorical quality of its film language. It won world acclaim. Eisenstein developed concepts of the revolutionary epic in the film \"\". Also noteworthy was Vsevolod Pudovkin's adaptation of Maxim Gorky's \"Mother\" to the screen in 1926. Pudovkin developed themes of revolutionary history in the film \"The End of St. Petersburg\" (1927). Other noteworthy silent films were films dealing with contemporary life such as Boris Barnet's \"The House on Trubnaya\". The films of Yakov Protazanov were devoted to the revolutionary struggle and the shaping of a new way of life, such as \"Don Diego and Pelagia\" (1928). Ukrainian director Alexander Dovzhenko was noteworthy for the historical-revolutionary epic \"Zvenigora\", \"Arsenal\" and the poetic film \"Earth\".\n1930s.\nIn the early 1930s, Russian filmmakers applied socialist realism to their work. Among the most outstanding films was \"Chapaev\", a film about Russian revolutionaries and society during the Revolution and Civil War. Revolutionary history was developed in films such as \"Golden Mountains\" by Sergei Yutkevich, \"Outskirts\" by Boris Barnet, and the Maxim trilogy by Grigori Kozintsev and Leonid Trauberg: \"The Youth of Maxim\", \"The Return of Maxim\", and \"The Vyborg Side\". Also notable were biographical films about Vladimir Lenin such as Mikhail Romm's \"Lenin in October\" and \"Lenin in 1918\". The life of Russian society and everyday people were depicted in films such as \"Seven Brave Men\" and \"Komsomolsk\" by Sergei Gerasimov. The comedies of Grigori Aleksandrov such as \"Circus\", \"Volga-Volga\", and \"Tanya\" as well as \"The Rich Bride\" by Ivan Pyryev and \"By the Bluest of Seas\" by Boris Barnet focus on the psychology of the common person, enthusiasm for work and intolerance for remnants of the past. Many films focused on national heroes, including \"Alexander Nevsky\" by Sergei Eisenstein, \"Minin and Pozharsky\" by Vsevolod Pudovkin, and \"Bogdan Khmelnitsky\" by Igor Savchenko. There were adaptations of literary classics, particularly Mark Donskoy's trilogy of films about Maxim Gorky: \"The Childhood of Maxim Gorky\", ', and '.\nDuring the late 1920s and early 1930s the Stalin wing of the Communist Party consolidated its authority and set about transforming the Soviet Union on both the economic and cultural fronts. The economy moved from the market-based New Economic Policy (NEP) to a system of central planning. The new leadership declared a \"cultural revolution\" in which the party would exercise control over cultural affairs, including artistic expression. Cinema existed at the intersection of art and economics; so it was destined to be thoroughly reorganized in this episode of economic and cultural transformation.\nTo implement central planning in cinema, the new entity Soyuzkino was created in 1930. All the hitherto autonomous studios and distribution networks that had grown up under NEP's market would now be coordinated in their activities by this planning agency. Soyuzkino's authority also extended to the studios of the national republics such as VUFKU, which had enjoyed more independence during the 1920s. Soyuzkino consisted of an extended bureaucracy of economic planners and policy specialists who were charged to formulate annual production plans for the studios and then to monitor the distribution and exhibition of finished films.\nWith central planning came more centralized authority over creative decision making. Script development became a long, torturous process under this bureaucratic system, with various committees reviewing drafts and calling for cuts or revisions. In the 1930s censorship became more exacting with each passing year. Feature film projects would drag out for months or years and might be terminated at any point.\nAlexander Dovzhenko drew from Ukrainian folk culture in such films as \"Earth\" (1930)\nalong the way because of the capricious decision of one or another censoring committee.\nThis redundant oversight slowed down production and inhibited creativity. Although central planning was supposed to increase the film industry's productivity, production levels declined steadily through the 1930s. The industry was releasing over one-hundred features annually at the end of the NEP period, but that figure fell to seventy by 1932 and to forty-five by 1934. It never again reached triple digits during the remainder of the Stalin era. Veteran directors experienced precipitous career declines under this system of control; whereas Eisenstein was able to make four features between 1924 and 1929, he completed only one film, \"Alexander Nevsky\" (1938) during the entire decade of the 1930s. His planned adaptation of the Ivan Turgenev story \"Bezhin Meadow\" (1935\u201337) was halted during production in 1937 and officially banned, one of many promising film projects that fell victim to an exacting censorship system.\nMeanwhile, the USSR cut off its film contacts with the West. It stopped importing films after 1931 out of concern that foreign films exposed audiences to capitalist ideology. The industry also freed itself from dependency on foreign technologies. During its industrialization effort of the early 1930s, the USSR finally built an array of factories to supply the film industry with the nation's own technical resources.\nTo secure independence from the West, industry leaders mandated that the USSR develop its own sound technologies, rather than taking licenses on Western sound systems. Two Soviet scientists, Alexander Shorin in Leningrad (present-day St. Petersburg) and Pavel Tager in Moscow, conducted research through the late 1920s on complementary sound systems, which were ready for use by 1930. The implementation process, including the cost of refitting movie theaters, proved daunting, and the USSR did not complete the transition to sound until 1935. Nevertheless, several directors made innovative use of sound once the technology became available. In \"Enthusiasm: The Symphony of Donbass\" (1930), his documentary on coal mining and heavy industry, Dziga Vertov based his soundtrack on an elegantly orchestrated array of industrial noises. In \"The Deserter\" (1933) Pudovkin experimented with a form of \"sound counterpoint\" by exploiting tensions and ironic dissonances between sound elements and the image track. And in \"Alexander Nevsky\", Eisenstein collaborated with the composer Sergei Prokofiev on an \"operatic\" film style that elegantly coordinated the musical score and the image track.\nAs Soviet cinema made the transition to sound and central planning in the early 1930s, it was also put under a mandate to adopt a uniform film style, commonly identified as \"socialist realism\". In 1932 the party leadership ordered the literary community to abandon the avant-garde practices of the 1920s and to embrace socialist realism, a literary style that, in practice, was actually close to 19th-century realism. The other arts, including cinema, were subsequently instructed to develop the aesthetic equivalent. For cinema, this meant adopting a film style that would be legible to a broad audience, thus avoiding a possible split between the avant-garde and mainstream cinema that was evident in the late 1920s. The director of Soyuzkino and, later, GUKF, Boris Shumyatsky (1886\u20131938), served as chief executive of the Soviet film industry from 1931 to 1938, and was a harsh critic of the montage aesthetic. He championed a \"cinema for the millions\", which would use clear, linear narration. Although American movies were no longer being imported in the 1930s, the Hollywood model of continuity editing was readily available, and it had a successful track record with Soviet movie audiences. Soviet socialist realism was built on this style, which assured tidy storytelling. Various other strictures were then added to the doctrine: positive heroes to act as role models for viewers; lessons in good citizenship for spectators to embrace; and support for reigning policy decisions of the Communist Party.\nSuch aesthetic policies, enforced by the rigorous censorship apparatus of the USSR, resulted in a number of formulaic films. Apparently, they did succeed in sustaining a true \"cinema of the masses\". The 1930s witnessed some stellar examples of popular cinema. The single most successful film of the decade, in terms of both official praise and genuine affection from the mass audience, was \"Chapaev\" (1934), directed by the Vasilyev brothers. Based on the life of a martyred Red Army commander, the film was touted as a model of socialist realism, in that Chapayev and his followers battled heroically for the revolutionary cause. The film also humanized the title character, giving him personal foibles, an ironic sense of humour, and a rough peasant charm. These qualities endeared him to the viewing public: spectators reported seeing the film multiple times during its first run in 1934, and \"Chapaev\" was periodically re-released for subsequent generations of audiences.\nA genre that emerged in the 1930s to consistent popular acclaim was the musical comedy, and a master of that form was Grigori Aleksandrov (1903\u20131984). He effected a creative partnership with his wife, the brilliant comic actress and chanteuse Lyubov Orlova (1902\u20131975), in a series of crowd-pleasing musicals. Their pastoral comedy \"Volga-Volga\" (1938) was surpassed only by \"Chapaev\" in terms of box-office success. The fantasy element of their films, with lively musical numbers reviving the montage aesthetic, sometimes stretched the boundaries of socialist realism, but the genre could also allude to contemporary affairs. In Aleksandrov's 1940 musical \"Tanya\", Orlova plays a humble servant girl who rises through the ranks of the Soviet industrial leadership after developing clever labour-saving work methods. Audiences could enjoy the film's comic turn on the \"Cinderella\" story while also learning about the value of efficiency in the workplace.\n1940s.\nImmediately after the end of the Second World War, color movies such as \"The Stone Flower\" (1946), \"Ballad of Siberia\" (1947), and \"Cossacks of the Kuban\" (1949) were released.\nOther notable films from the 1940s include the black and white films, \"Alexander Nevsky\", \"Ivan the Terrible\" and \"Encounter at the Elbe\".\nThe Soviet film industry suffered during the period after World War II. On top of dealing with the severe physical and monetary losses of the war, Stalin's regime tightened social control and censorship to manage the effects recent exposure to the West had on the people. The postwar period was marked by an end of almost all autonomy in the Soviet Union. The \"Catalogue of Soviet Films\" recorded remarkably low numbers of films being produced from 1945 to 1953, with as few as nine films produced in 1951 and a maximum of twenty-three produced in 1952. These numbers do not, however, include many of the works which are not generally considered to be \"film\" in an elitist sense, such as filmed versions of theatrical works and operas, feature-length event documentaries and travelogues, short films for children, and experimental stereoscopic films. But compared to the four hundred to five hundred films produced every year by Hollywood, the Soviet film industry was practically dead.\nEven as the economy of the Soviet Union strengthened, film production continued to decrease. A resolution passed by the Council of Ministers in 1948 further crippled the film industry. The resolution criticized the work of the industry, saying that an emphasis placed on quantity over quality had ideologically weakened the films. Instead, the council insisted that every film produced must be a masterpiece for promoting communist ideas and the Soviet system. Often, Stalin had the ultimate decision on whether a newly produced film was appropriate for public viewing. In private screenings after meetings of the Politburo, the Minister of the Film Industry Ivan Bolshakov privately screened films for Stalin and top members of Soviet government. The strict limitations on content and complex, centralized process for approval drove many screenwriters away, and studios had much difficulty producing any of the quality films mandated by the 1948 resolution.\nTrophy films.\nMovie theaters in the postwar period faced the problem of satisfying the growing appetites of Soviet audiences for films while dealing with the shortage of newly produced works from studios. In response, cinemas played the same films for months at a time, many of them the works of the late 1930s. Anything new drew millions of people to the box office, and many theaters screened foreign films to attract larger audiences. Most of these foreign films were \"trophy films\", two thousand films brought into the country by the Red Army after the occupation of Germany and Eastern Europe in World War II. In the top secret minutes for the CPSU Committee Meeting on August 31, 1948, the committee permitted the Minister of the Film Industry to release fifty of these films in the Soviet Union. Of these fifty, Bolshakov was only allowed to release twenty-four for screening to the general public, mainly films made in Germany, Austria, Italy, and France. The other twenty-six films, consisting almost entirely of American films, were only allowed to be shown in private screenings. The minutes also include a separate list of permitted German musical films, which were mainly German and Italian film adaptations of famous operas. Most of the trophy films were released in 1948\u201349, but somewhat strangely, compiled lists of the released films include ones not previously mentioned in the official minutes of the Central Committee.\nThe public release of these trophy films seems contradictory in the context of the 1940s Soviet Union. The Soviet government allowed the exhibition of foreign films which contained far more subversive ideas than any a Soviet director would have ever attempted putting in a film at a time when Soviet artists found themselves unemployed because of censorship laws. Historians hypothesize many possible reasons why the Soviet government showed such seemingly inexplicable leniency toward the foreign films. The government may have granted cinemas the right to show the films so they could stay in business after the domestic film industry had declined. A second hypothesis speculates that the government saw the films as an easy source of money to help rebuild the nation after the war. The minutes of the CPSU Central Committee meeting seem to support the latter idea with instructions that the films are to bring in a net income of at least 750 million roubles to the State coffers over the course of a year from public and private screenings, and 250 million roubles of this were supposed to come from rentals to the trade union camera network.\nIn addition to releasing the films, the committee also charged Bolshakov and the Agitation and Propaganda Department of the CPSU Central Committee \"with making the necessary editorial corrections to the films and with providing an introductory text and carefully edited subtitles for each film.\" In general, the captured Nazi films were considered apolitical enough to be shown to the general populace. Still the Propaganda and Agitation Section of the Central Committee ran into trouble with the censoring of two films slated for release. The censors found it impossible to remove the \"Zionist\" ideas from \"Jud Suss\", an anti-Semitic, Nazi propaganda film. The censors also had trouble with a film adaptation of \"Of Mice and Men\" because of the representation of the poor as a detriment to society.\nThere is very little direct evidence of how Soviet audiences received the trophy films. Soviet magazines or newspapers never reviewed the films, there were no audience surveys, and no records exist of how many people viewed the films. To judge the reception and popularity of these foreign films, historians have mainly relied on anecdotal evidence. The German musical comedy \"The Woman of My Dreams\" received mixed reviews according to this evidence. \"Kultura i zhizn\" published a supposed survey compiled of readers' letters to the editor in March 1947 which criticize the film for being idealess, low brow, and even harmful. Bulat Okudzhava wrote a contradicting viewpoint in \"Druzhba Narodov\" in 1986, saying that everyone in the city of Tbilisi was crazy about the film. According to him, everywhere he went people were talking about the film and whistling the songs. Of the two accounts, film historians generally consider Okudzhava's more reliable than the one presented by \"Kultura i zhizn\". Films such as \"His Butler's Sister\", \"The Thief of Bagdad\", \"Waterloo Bridge\" and \"Sun Valley Serenade\", although not technically trophies as they had been purchased legally during the wartime alliance with America, were highly popular with Soviet audiences. In \"Vechernyaya Moskva\" (October 4, 1946), M. Chistiakov reprimanded theaters and the Soviet film industry for the fact that over a six-month timespan, sixty of the films shown had been tasteless Western films rather than Soviet ones. Even in criticism of the films and the crusading efforts of the anti-cosmopolitan campaign against the trophy films, it is clear to see they had quite an impact on Soviet society.\n1950s.\nWith the start of the Cold War, writers, still considered the primary auteurs, were all the more reluctant to take up script writing, and the early 1950s saw only a handful of feature films completed during any year. The death of Stalin was a relief to some people, and all the more so was the official trashing of his public image as a benign and competent leader by Nikita Khrushchev two years later. This latter event gave filmmakers the margin of comfort they needed to move away from the narrow stories of socialist realism, expand its boundaries, and begin work on a wider range of entertaining and artistic Soviet films.\nNotable films include:\n1960s\u201370s.\nThe 1960s and 1970s saw the creation of many films, many of which molded Soviet and post-Soviet culture. They include:\nSoviet films tend to be rather culture-specific and are difficult for many foreigners to understand without having been exposed to the culture first. Various Soviet directors were more concerned with artistic success than with financial success (they were paid by the academy, and so money was not a critical issue). This contributed to the creation of a large number of more philosophical and poetic films. Most well-known examples of such films are those by directors Andrei Tarkovsky, Sergei Parajanov and Nikita Mikhalkov. In keeping with Russian culture, tragi-comedies were very popular. These decades were also prominent in the production of the Eastern or Red Western.\nAnimation was a respected genre, with many directors experimenting with animation techniques. \"Tale of Tales\" (1979) by Yuri Norstein was twice given the title of \"Best Animated Film of All Eras and Nations\" by animation professionals from around the world, in 1984 and 2002.\nIn the year of the 60th anniversary of the Soviet cinema (1979), on April 25, a decision of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR established a commemorative \"Soviet Cinema Day\". It was then celebrated in the USSR each year on August 27, the day on which Vladimir Lenin signed a decree to nationalise the country's cinematic and photographic industries.\n1980s.\nThe policies of perestroika and glasnost saw a loosening of the censorship of earlier eras. A genre known as \"chernukha\" (from the Russian word for \"noir\"), including films such as \"Little Vera\", portrayed the harsher side of Soviet life. Notable films of this period include:\nSoviet production units.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10787", "revid": "5098269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10787", "title": "Cinema of Italy", "text": "Filmmaking industry in Italy\nThe cinema of Italy (, ]) comprises the films made within Italy or by Italian directors. Since its beginning, Italian cinema has influenced film movements worldwide. Italy is one of the birthplaces of art cinema and the stylistic aspect of film has been the most important factor in the history of Italian film. As of 2018, Italian films have won 14 Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film (the most of any country) as well as 12 Palmes d'Or (the second-most of any country), one Academy Award for Best Picture and many Golden Lions and Golden Bears.\nThe history of Italian cinema began a few months after the Lumi\u00e8re brothers began motion picture exhibitions. The first Italian director is considered to be Vittorio Calcina, a collaborator of the Lumi\u00e8re Brothers, who filmed Pope Leo XIII in 1896. The first films date back to 1896 and were made in the main cities of the Italian peninsula. These brief experiments immediately met the curiosity of the popular class, encouraging operators to produce new films until they laid the foundations for the birth of a true film industry. In the early years of the 20th century, silent cinema developed, bringing numerous Italian stars to the forefront until the end of World War I. In the early 1900s, artistic and epic films such as \"Otello\" (1906), \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" (1908), \"L'Inferno\" (1911), \"Quo Vadis\" (1913), and \"Cabiria\" (1914), were made as adaptations of books or stage plays. Italian filmmakers were using complex set designs, lavish costumes, and record budgets, to produce pioneering films.\nThe oldest European avant-garde cinema movement, Italian futurism, took place in the late 1910s. After a period of decline in the 1920s, the Italian film industry was revitalized in the 1930s with the arrival of sound film. A popular Italian genre during this period, the Telefoni Bianchi, consisted of comedies with glamorous backgrounds. Calligrafismo was instead in a sharp contrast to Telefoni Bianchi-American style comedies and is rather artistic, highly formalistic, expressive in complexity and deals mainly with contemporary literary material. While Italy's Fascist government provided financial support for the nation's film industry, notably the construction of the Cinecitt\u00e0 studios (the largest film studio in Europe), it also engaged in censorship, and thus many Italian films produced in the late 1930s were propaganda films. A new era took place at the end of World War II with the birth of the influential Italian neorealist movement, reaching a vast consensus of audiences and critics throughout the post-war period, and which launched the directorial careers of Luchino Visconti, Roberto Rossellini, and Vittorio De Sica. Neorealism declined in the late 1950s in favor of lighter films, such as those of the Commedia all'italiana genre and important directors like Federico Fellini and Michelangelo Antonioni. Actresses such as Sophia Loren, Giulietta Masina and Gina Lollobrigida achieved international stardom during this period.\nFrom the mid-1950s to the end of the 1970s, Commedia all'italiana and many other genres arose due to auteur cinema, and Italian cinema reached a position of great prestige both nationally and abroad. The Spaghetti Western achieved popularity in the mid-1960s, peaking with Sergio Leone's Dollars Trilogy, which featured enigmatic scores by composer Ennio Morricone, which have become popular culture icons of the Western genre. Erotic Italian thrillers, or giallos, produced by directors such as Mario Bava and Dario Argento in the 1970s, influenced the horror genre worldwide. Since the 1980s, due to multiple factors, Italian production has gone through a crisis that has not prevented the production of quality films in the 1990s and into the new millennium, thanks to a revival of Italian cinema, awarded and appreciated all over the world. During the 1980s and 1990s, directors such as Ermanno Olmi, Bernardo Bertolucci, Giuseppe Tornatore, Gabriele Salvatores and Roberto Benigni brought critical acclaim back to Italian cinema, while the most popular directors of the 2000s and 2010s were Matteo Garrone, Paolo Sorrentino, Marco Bellocchio, Nanni Moretti and Marco Tullio Giordana.\nThe country is also famed for its prestigious Venice Film Festival, the oldest film festival in the world, held annually since 1932 and awarding the Golden Lion; and for the David di Donatello. In 2008 the Venice Days (\"Giornate degli Autori\"), a section held in parallel to the Venice Film Festival, has produced in collaboration with Cinecitt\u00e0 studios and the Ministry of Cultural Heritage a list of 100 films that have changed the collective memory of the country between 1942 and 1978: the \"100 Italian films to be saved\".\nHistory.\n1890s.\nThe history of Italian cinema began a few months after the French Lumi\u00e8re brothers, who made the first public screening of a film on 28 December 1895, an event considered the birth of cinema, began motion picture exhibitions. The first Italian director is considered to be Vittorio Calcina, a collaborator of the Lumi\u00e8re Brothers, who filmed Pope Leo XIII on 26 February 1896 in the short film \"Sua Santit\u00e0 papa Leone XIII\" (\"His Holiness Pope Leo XIII\"). He then became the official photographer of the House of Savoy, the Italian ruling dynasty from 1861 to 1946. In this role he filmed the first Italian film, \"Sua Maest\u00e0 il Re Umberto e Sua Maest\u00e0 la Regina Margherita a passeggio per il parco a Monza\" (\"His Majesty the King Umberto and Her Majesty the Queen Margherita strolling through the Monza Park\"), believed to have been lost until it was rediscovered by the Cineteca Nazionale in 1979.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers commenced public screenings in Italy in 1896 starting in March, in Rome and Milan; in April in Naples, Salerno and Bari; in June in Livorno; in August in Bergamo, Bologna and Ravenna; in October in Ancona; and in December in Turin, Pescara and Reggio Calabria. Not long before, in 1895, Filoteo Alberini patented his \"kinetograph\", a shooting and projecting device not unlike that of the Lumi\u00e8res brothers.\nItalian Lumi\u00e8re trainees produced short films documenting everyday life and comic strips in the late 1890s and early 1900s. Before long, other pioneers made their way. Italo Pacchioni, Arturo Ambrosio, Giovanni Vitrotti and Roberto Omegna were also active. The success of the short films were immediate. The cinema fascinated with its ability to show distant geographic realities with unprecedented precision and, vice versa, to immortalize everyday moments. Sporting events, local events, intense road traffic, the arrival of a train, visits by famous people, but also natural disasters and calamities are filmed.\nTitles of the time include, \"Arrivo del treno alla Stazione di Milano\" (\"Arrival of the train at Milan station\") (1896), \"La battaglia di neve\" (\"The snow battle\") (1896), \"La gabbia dei matti\" (\"The madmen's cage\") (1896), \"Ballo in famiglia\" (\"Family dance\") (1896), \"Il finto storpio al Castello Sforzesco\" (\"The fake cripple at the Castello Sforzesco\") (1896) and \"La Fiera di Porta Genova\" (\"The fair of Porta Genova\") (1898), all shot by Italo Pacchioni, who was also the inventor of a camera and projector, inspired by the cinematograph of Lumi\u00e8re brothers, kept at the Cineteca Italiana in Milan.\nIf the interest of the masses were enthusiastic, the technological novelty would likely be snubbed, at least at the beginning, by intellectuals and the press. Despite initial doubt, in just two years, cinema climbs the hierarchy of society, intriguing the wealthier classes. On 28 January 1897, prince Victor Emmanuel and princess Elena of Montenegro attended a screening organized by Vittorio Calcina, in a room of the Pitti Palace in Florence. Interested in experimenting with the new medium, they were filmed in \"S.A.R. il Principe di Napoli e la Principessa Elena visitano il battistero di S. Giovanni a Firenze \" (\"Their real heights the Prince of Naples and Princess Elena visit the baptistery of Saint John in Florence\") and on the day of their wedding in \"Dimostrazione popolare alle LL. AA. i Principi sposi (al Pantheon \u2013 Roma)\" (\"Popular demonstration at the their heights the princes spouses (at the Pantheon \u2013 Rome)\").\n1900s.\nIn the early years of the 20th century, the phenomenon of itinerant cinemas developed throughout Italy, providing literacy of the visual medium. This innovative form of spectacle ran out, in a short time, a number of optical attractions such as magic lanterns, cineographers, stereoscopes, panoramas and dioramas that had fueled the European imagination and favored the circulation of a common market for images. The nascent Italian cinema, therefore, is still linked to the traditional shows of the \"commedia dell'arte\" or to those typical of circus folklore. Public screenings take place in the streets, in cafes or in variety theaters in the presence of a swindler who has the task of promoting and enriching the story.\nBetween 1903 and 1909 the itinerant cinema Italian film was quieting, until then considered as a freak phenomenon, took on consistency assuming the characteristics of an authentic industry, led by four major organizations: Titanus (originally \"Monopolio Lombardo\"), the first italian film production company and the largest and probably the most famous film house in Italy founded by Gustavo Lombardo at Naples in 1904, Cines, based in Rome; and the Turin-based companies Ambrosio Film and Itala Film. Other companies soon followed in Milan, and these early companies quickly attained a respectable production quality and were able to market their products both within Italy and abroad. Early Italian films typically consisted of adaptations of books or stage plays, such as Mario Caserini's \"Otello\" (1906) and Arturo Ambrosio's 1908 \"The Last Days of Pompeii\", an adaptation of the homonymous novel by Edward Bulwer-Lytton. Also popular during this period were films about historical figures, such as Caserini's \"Beatrice Cenci\" (1909) and Ugo Falena's \"Lucrezia Borgia\" (1910).\nIn 1905, Cines inaugurated the genre of the historical film, which in this decade gave great fortune to many Italian filmmakers. One of the first of these films was \"La presa di Roma\" (1905), lasting 10 minutes, and made by Filoteo Alberini. The operator employs for the first time actors of theatrical origin, exploiting the historical argument in a popular and pedagogical key. The film, assimilating Manzoni's lesson of making historical fiction plausible, reconstructs the Capture of Rome on 20 September 1870.\nThe discovery of the spectacular potential of the cinematographic medium favored the development of a cinema with great ambitions, capable of incorporating all the cultural and historical suggestions of the country. Education is an inexhaustible source of ideas, ideas that are easily assimilated not only by a cultured public but also by the masses. Dozens of characters from texts make their appearance on the big screen such as the Count of Monte Cristo, Giordano Bruno, Judith beheading Holofernes, Francesca da Rimini, Lorenzino de' Medici, Rigoletto, Count Ugolino and others. From an iconographic point of view, the main references are the great Renaissance and neoclassical artists, as well as symbolists and popular illustrations.\n1910s.\nIn the 1910s, the Italian film industry developed rapidly. In 1912, the year of the greatest expansion, 569 films were produced in Turin, 420 in Rome and 120 in Milan. Popular early Italian actors included Emilio Ghione, Alberto Collo, Bartolomeo Pagano, Amleto Novelli, Lyda Borelli, Ida Carloni Talli, Lidia Quaranta and Maria Jacobini.\n\"Lost in the Dark\", silent drama film directed by Nino Martoglio and produced in 1914, documented life in the slums of Naples, and is considered a precursor to the Italian neorealism movement of the 1940s and 1950s. The only surviving copy of this film was destroyed by Nazi German forces during the World War II. This film is based on a 1901 play of the same title by Roberto Bracco.\nIn the three years leading up to World War I, as production consolidates, mythological, comedy and drama films are exported all over the world. In the meantime, in the actor's field, the phenomenon of stardom was born which for a few years will experience unstoppable success. With the end of the decade, Rome definitively established itself as the main production center; this will remain, despite the crises that will periodically shake the industry, right up to the present day.\nHistorical blockbusters (1910s).\nThe archetypes of this film genre was \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" (1908), by Arturo Ambrosio and Luigi Maggi and \"Nero\" (1909), by Maggi himself and Arrigo Frusta. This last film was inspired by the work of Pietro Cossa who is iconographically based on the etchings of Bartolomeo Pinelli, neoclassicism and the show \"Nero, or the Destruction of Rome\" represented by the Barnum circus. Followed by \"Marin Faliero, Doge of Venice\" (1909), by Giuseppe De Liguoro, \"Otello\" (1909) by Yambo and \"L'Odissea\" (1911), by Bertolini, Padovan and De Liguoro.\n\"L'Inferno\", produced by Milano Films in 1911, even before being an adaptation of Dante's canticle, was a cinematic translation of Gustave Dor\u00e9's engravings that experiments with the integration of optical effects and stage action, and it was the first Italian feature film ever made. \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" (1913), by Eleuterio Rodolfi, used innovative special effects.\nEnrico Guazzoni's 1913 film \"Quo Vadis\" was one of the first blockbusters in the history of cinema, using thousands of extras and a lavish set design. The international success of the film marked the maturation of the genre and allows Guazzoni to make increasingly spectacular films such as \"Antony and Cleopatra\" (1913) and \"Julius Caesar\" (1914). Giovanni Pastrone's 1914 film \"Cabiria\" was an even larger production, requiring two years and a record budget to produce, it was the first epic film ever made and it is considered the most famous Italian silent film. It was also the first film in history to be shown in the White House. After Guazzoni came Emilio Ghione, Febo Mari, Carmine Gallone, Giulio Antamoro and many others who contributed to the expansion of the genre.\nAfter the great success of \"Cabiria\", with the changing tastes of the public and the first signs of the industrial crisis, the genre began to show signs of crisis. Pastrone's plan to adapt the \"Bible\" with thousands of extras remained unfulfilled. Antamoro's \"Christus\" (1916) and Guazzoni's \"The Crusaders\" (1918) remained notable for their iconographic complexity but offered no substantial novelties. Despite sporadic attempts to reconnect with the \"grandeur\" of the past, the trend of historical blockbusters was interrupted at the beginning of the 1920s.\nProto-giallo (1910s).\nIn the first and second decade of the 20th century came a prolific film production aimed at investigative and mystery contents, supported by well-assorted Italian and foreign literature that favors its transposition into film. What would later take on the synthesis of the \"giallo\", in fact, was produced and distributed at the dawn of Italian cinema. The most prolific production houses in the 1910s were Cines, Ambrosio Film, Itala Film, Aquila Films, Milano Films and many others, while titles such as \"Il delitto del magistrato\" (1907), \"Il cadavere misterioso\" (1908), \"Il piccolo Sherlock Holmes\" (1909), \"L'abisso\" (1910) and \"Alibi atroce\" (1910), breached the imagination of the first cinema users who demanded a greater offer. The popular consensus is remarkable to the point of encouraging the film industry to invest further production resources, since these films are also distributed on the French and Anglo-Saxon markets. Thus directors among the most prolific in this field such as Oreste Mentasti, Luigi Maggi, Arrigo Frusta and Ubaldo Maria Del Colle, together with many others less known, direct several dozen films where classic narrative elements of the silent proto-giallo (mystery, crime, investigation investigative and final twist) constitute the structural aspects of cinematic representation.\nElvira Notari, the first female director ever in Italy and one of the premieres in the history of world cinema, directed \"Carmela, la sartina di Montesanto\" (1916). While in Palermo, Lucarelli Film produced \"La cassaforte n. 8\" (1914) and \"Ipnotismo\" (1914), the Azzurri Film \"La regina della notte\" (1915), the Lumen Film \"Il romanzo fantastico del Dr. Mercanton o il giustiziere invisibile\" (1915) and \"Profumo mortale\" (1915), all films ascribable to the proto-giallo that multiplied in the following decades, becoming preparatory to the subsequent birth of the \"giallo\".\nStardom (1910s).\nBetween 1913 and 1920 there was the rise, development and decline of the phenomenon of cinematographic stardom, born with the release of \"Ma l'amor mio non muore\" (1913), by Mario Caserini. The film had great success with the public and encoded the setting and aesthetics of female stardom. Within just a few years, Eleonora Duse, Pina Menichelli, Rina De Liguoro, Leda Gys, Hesperia, Vittoria Lepanto, Mary Cleo Tarlarini and Italia Almirante Manzini established themselves.\nFilms such as \"Fior di male\" (1914), by Carmine Gallone, \"Il fuoco\" (1915), by Giovanni Pastrone, \"Rapsodia satanica\" (1917), by Nino Oxilia and \"Cenere\" (1917), by Febo Mari, changed the national costume, imposing canons of beauty, role models and objects of desire. These models, strongly stylized according to the cultural and artistic trends of the time, moved away from naturalism in favor of melodramatic acting, pictorial gesture and theatrical pose; all favored by the incessant use of close-up which focuses the attention on the expressiveness of the actress.\nComic short films (1910s).\nThe most successful comedian in Italy was Andr\u00e9 Deed, better known in Italy as \"Cretinetti\", star of comic short film for Itala Film. Its success paved the way for Marcel Fabre (\"Robinet\"), Ernesto Vaser (\"Fricot\") and many others. The only actor of a certain substance, however, was Ferdinand Guillaume, who became famous with the stage name of \"Polidor\".\nThe historical interest of these films lay in their ability to reveal the aspirations and fears of a petty-bourgeois society torn between the desire for affirmation and the uncertainties of the present. It was significant that the protagonists of Italian comedians never place themselves in open contrast with society or embody the desire for social revenge (as happens for example with Charlie Chaplin), but rather tried to integrate into a strongly desired world.\nFuturist cinema (1910s).\nItalian futurist cinema was the oldest movement of European avant-garde cinema. Italian futurism, an artistic and social movement, impacted the Italian film industry from 1916 to 1919. It influenced Russian Futurist cinema and German Expressionist cinema. Its cultural importance was considerable and influenced all subsequent avant-gardes, as well as some authors of narrative cinema; its echo expands to the dreamlike visions of some films by Alfred Hitchcock.\nFuturism emphasized dynamism, speed, technology, youth, violence, and objects such as the car, the airplane, and the industrial city. Its key figures were the Italians Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carr\u00e0, Fortunato Depero, Gino Severini, Giacomo Balla, and Luigi Russolo. It glorified modernity and aimed to liberate Italy from the weight of its past.\nThe 1916 Manifesto of Futuristic Cinematography was signed by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, Armando Ginna, Bruno Corra, Giacomo Balla and others. To the Futurists, cinema was an ideal art form, being a fresh medium, and able to be manipulated by speed, special effects and editing. Most of the futuristic-themed films of this period have been lost, but critics cite \"Tha\u00efs\" (1917) by Anton Giulio Bragaglia as one of the most influential, serving as the main inspiration for German Expressionist cinema in the following decade.\nThe Italian film industry struggled against rising foreign competition in the years following World War I. Several major studios, among them Cines and Ambrosio, formed the Unione Cinematografica Italiana to coordinate a national strategy for film production. This effort was largely unsuccessful, however, due to a wide disconnect between production and exhibition (some movies weren't released until several years after they were produced).\n1920s.\nWith the end of World War I, Italian cinema went through a period of crisis due to many factors such as production disorganization, increased costs, technological backwardness, loss of foreign markets and inability to cope with international competition, in particular with that of Hollywood. The main causes included the lack of a generational change with a production still dominated by filmmakers and producers of literary training, unable to face the challenges of modernity. The first half of the 1920s marked a sharp decrease in production; from 350 films produced in 1921 to 60 in 1924.\nLiterature and theater are still the preferred narrative sources. The feuilletons resist, mostly taken from classical or popular texts and directed by specialists such as Roberto Roberti and the religious blockbusters of Giulio Antamoro. On the basis of the latest generation of divas, a sentimental cinema for women spread, centered on figures on the margins of society who, instead of struggling to emancipate themselves (as happens in contemporary Hollywood cinema), go through an authentic ordeal in order to preserve their own virtue. Protest and rebellion by the female protagonists are out of the question. It is a strongly conservative cinema, tied to social rules upset by the war and in the process of dissolution throughout Europe. An exemplary case is that of \"A Woman's Story\" (1920) by Eugenio Perego, which uses an original narrative construction to propose a 19th-century morality with melodramatic tones.\nA particular genre is that of a realist setting, due to the work of the first female director of Italian cinema, Elvira Notari, who directs numerous films influenced by popular theater and taken from famous dramas, Neapolitan songs, appendix novels or inspired by facts of chronicle. Another film with a realist setting is \"Lost in the Dark\" (1914) by director Nino Martoglio, considered by critics as a prime example of neorealist cinema.\nThe revival of Italian cinema took place at the end of the decade with the production of larger-scale films. During this period, a group of intellectuals close to the fortnightly \"cinematografo\" led by Alessandro Blasetti launched a program that was as simple as it was ambitious. Aware of the Italian cultural backwardness, they decided to break all ties with the previous tradition through a rediscovery of the peasant world, hitherto practically absent in Italian cinema. \"Sun\" (1929) by Alessandro Blasetti shows the evident influence of the Soviet and German avant-gardes in an attempt to renew Italian cinema in accordance with the interests of the fascist regime. \"Rails\" (1929) by Mario Camerini blends the traditional genre of comedy with kammerspiel and realist film, revealing the director's ability to outline the characters of the middle class. While not comparable to the best results of international cinema of the period, the works of Camerini and Blasetti testify to a generational transition between Italian directors and intellectuals, and above all an emancipation from literary models and an approach to the tastes of the public.\n1930s.\nThe sound cinema arrived in Italy in 1930, three years after the release of \"The Jazz Singer\" (1927), and immediately led to a debate on the validity of spoken cinema and its relationship with the theater. Some directors enthusiastically face the new challenge. The advent of talkies led to stricter censorship by the Fascist government.\nThe first Italian talking picture was \"The Song of Love\" (1930) by Gennaro Righelli, which was a great success with the public. Alessandro Blasetti also experimented with the use of an optical track for sound in the film \"Resurrection\" (1931), shot before \"The Song of Love\" but released a few months later. Similar to Righelli's film is \"What Scoundrels Men Are!\" (1932) by Mario Camerini, which has the merit of making Vittorio De Sica debut on the screens. Historical films such as Blasetti's \"1860\" (1934) and Carmine Gallone's \"\" (1937) were also popular during this period.\nWith the transition to sound cinema, most of the Italian silent film actors, still linked to theatrical stylization, find themselves disqualified. The era of divas, dandies and strongmen, who barely survived the 1920s, is definitely over. Even if some performers will move on to directing or producing, the arrival of sound favors the generational change and the consequent modernization of the structures.\nItalian-born director Frank Capra received three Academy Awards for Best Director for the films \"It Happened One Night\" (1934, the first Big Five winner at the Academy Awards), \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" (1936) and \"You Can't Take It with You\" (1938).\nCinecitt\u00e0 (1930s\u2013present).\nIn 1934, the Italian government created the General Directorate for Cinema (\"Direzione Generale per le Cinematografia\"), and appointed Luigi Freddi its director. With the approval of Benito Mussolini, this directorate called for the establishment of a town southeast of Rome devoted exclusively to cinema, dubbed the Cinecitt\u00e0 (\"Cinema City\"), under the slogan \"Il cinema \u00e8 l'arma pi\u00f9 forte\" (\"Cinema is the most powerful weapon\"). The studios were constructed during the Fascist era as part of a plan to revive the Italian film industry, which had reached its low point in 1931.\nMussolini himself inaugurated the studios on 21 April 1937. Post-production units and sets were constructed and heavily used initially. Early films such as \"\" (1937) and \"The Iron Crown\" (1941) showcased the technological advancement of the studios. Seven thousand people were involved in the filming of the battle scene from \"Scipio Africanus\", and live elephants were brought in as a part of the re-enactment of the Battle of Zama.\nThe Cinecitt\u00e0 provided everything necessary for filmmaking: theaters, technical services, and even a cinematography school, the Centro Sperimentale di Cinematografia, for younger apprentices. The Cinecitt\u00e0 studios were Europe's most advanced production facilities, and greatly boosted the technical quality of Italian films. Many films are still shot entirely in Cinecitt\u00e0. Benito Mussolini founded Cinecitt\u00e0 studio also for the production of Fascist propaganda until World War II.\nDuring this period, Mussolini's son, Vittorio, created a national production company and organized the work of noted authors, directors and actors (including even some political opponents), thereby creating an interesting communication network among them, which produced several noted friendships and stimulated cultural interaction.\nWith an area of 400,000 square metres (99 acres), it is still the largest film studio in Europe, and is considered the hub of Italian cinema. Filmmakers such as Federico Fellini, Roberto Rossellini, Luchino Visconti, Sergio Leone, Bernardo Bertolucci, Francis Ford Coppola, Martin Scorsese, and Mel Gibson have worked at Cinecitt\u00e0. More than 3,000 movies have been filmed there, of which 90 received an Academy Award nomination and 47 of these won it.\nTelefoni Bianchi (1930s\u20131940s).\nDuring the 1930s, light comedies known as Telefoni Bianchi (\"white telephones\") were predominant in Italian cinema. These films, which featured lavish set designs, promoted conservative values and respect for authority, and thus typically avoided the scrutiny of government censors. Telefoni Bianchi proved to be the testing ground of numerous screenwriters destined to impose themselves in the following decades (including Cesare Zavattini and Sergio Amidei), and above all of numerous set designers such as Guido Fiorini, Gino Carlo Sensani and Antonio Valente, who, by virtue successful graphic inventions led these productions to become a kind of \"summa\" of the petty-bourgeois aesthetics of the time.\nThe first film of the genre Telefoni Bianchi was \"The Private Secretary\" (1931), by Goffredo Alessandrini. Among the authors, Mario Camerini is the most representative director of the genre. After having practiced the most diverse trends in the 1930s, he happily moved into the territory of sentimental comedy with \"What Scoundrels Men Are!\" (1932), \"Il signor Max\" (1937) and \"Department Store\" (1939). In other films he compares himself with the Hollywood-style comedy on the model of Frank Capra (\"Heartbeat\", 1939) and the surreal one of Ren\u00e9 Clair (\"I'll Give a Million\", 1936). Camerini is interested in the figure of the typical and popular Italian, so much so that he anticipates some elements of the future Italian comedy. His major interpreter, Vittorio De Sica, will continue his lesson in \"Maddalena, Zero for Conduct\" (1940) and \"Teresa Venerd\u00ec\" (1941), emphasizing above all the direction of the actors and the care for the settings.\nOther directors include Mario Mattoli (\"Schoolgirl Diary\", 1941), Jean de Limur (\"Apparition\", 1944) and Max Neufeld (\"The House of Shame\", 1938; \"A Thousand Lire a Month\", 1939). The realist comedies of Mario Bonnard (\"Before the Postman\", 1942; \"The Peddler and the Lady\", 1943) are partially different in character, which partially deviate from the imprint of Telefoni Bianchi.\nFascist propaganda (1930s\u20131940s).\nIn the fascist propaganda cinema, at the beginning, the representations of the squads and the first fascist actions were rare. \"The Old Guard\" (1934), by Alessandro Blasetti evokes the supposed vitalistic spontaneity of squadism with populist tones, but is not appreciated by official critics. \"Black Shirt\" (1933), by Giovacchino Forzano, made for the 10th anniversary of the March on Rome, celebrated the regime's policies (the reclamation of the Pontine marshes and the construction of Littoria) alternating narrative sequences with documentary passages.\nWith political consolidation, the government authority required the film industry to strengthen the regime's identification with the country's history and culture. Hence the intention to reread Italian history in an authoritarian perspective, teleologically reducing every past event to a harbinger of the \"fascist revolution\", in continuity with the historiographical work of Gioacchino Volpe. After the first attempts in this direction, aimed above all at underlining the alleged link between the Risorgimento and Fascism (\"Villafranca\" by Forzano, 1933; \"1860\" by Blasetti, 1933), the trend reached its peak just before the war. \"Cavalry\" (1936), by Goffredo Alessandrini, evokes the nobility of the Savoy fighters by presenting their deeds as anticipations of squadism. \"Condottieri\" (1937) by Luis Trenker, tells the story of Giovanni delle Bande Nere, explicitly establishing a parallel with Benito Mussolini, while \"\" (1937) by Carmine Gallone (one of the greatest financial efforts of the time), it celebrates the Roman Empire and indirectly the Fascist Empire.\nThe invasion of Ethiopia gives Italian directors the opportunity to extend the horizons of the settings. \"The Great Appeal\" (1936) by Mario Camerini, exalts imperialism by describing the \"new land\" as an opportunity for work and redemption, contrasting the heroism of young soldiers with bourgeois fearlessness. The anti-pacifist controversy that accompanies colonial enterprises is also evident in \"Lo squadrone bianco\" (1936) by Augusto Genina, which combines propaganda rhetoric with notable battle sequences shot in the Italian Tripolitania desert. Most of the films celebrating the empire are predominantly documentaries, aimed at disguising the war as a struggle of civilization against barbarism. The Spanish Civil War is described in the documentaries \"Los novios de la muerte\" (1936) by Romolo Marcellini and \"Arriba Espa\u00f1a, Espa\u00f1a una, grande, libre!\" (1939) by Giorgio Ferroni, and is the backdrop for another dozen films, among which the most spectacular is \"The Siege of the Alcazar\" (1940) by Augusto Genina.\nFilms such as \"Pietro Micca\" (1938) by Aldo Vergano, \"Ettore Fieramosca\" (1938), made in the same year by Alessandro Blasetti, and \"Fanfulla da Lodi\" (1940) by Giulio Antamoro can also be counted as propaganda films (albeit indirect), in which, a pretext for the epic narration of historical events, a clear apology for dedication to the homeland (in some cases even to the point of personal sacrifice) is made in the same vein as colonial films with a contemporary setting.\nWith Italy's participation in the World War II, the fascist regime further strengthens its control over production and requires a more decisive commitment to propaganda. In addition to the now canonical documentaries, short films and newsreels, there is also an increase in feature films in praise of Italian war enterprises. Among the most representative we find \"Bengasi\" (1942) by Genina, \"Gente dell'aria\" (1943) by Esodo Pratelli, \"The Three Pilots\" (1942) by Mario Mattoli (based on a screenplay by Vittorio Mussolini), \"Il treno crociato\" (1943) by Carlo Campogalliani, \"Harlem\" (1943) by Carmine Gallone and \"Men of the Mountain\" (1943) by Aldo Vergano under the supervision of Blasetti. \"Uomini sul fondo\" (1941) by Francesco De Robertis is also notable due to its almost documentary approach.\nThe most successful film of the period is \"We the Living\" (1942) by Goffredo Alessandrini, made as a single film, but then distributed in two parts due to its excessive length. Referable to the genre of anti-communist drama, this sombre melodrama (set in the Soviet Union) is inspired by the novel of the same name by the writer Ayn Rand which exalts the most radical philosophical individualism. Precisely because of this generic criticism of authoritarianism, the diptych could be interpreted as a mild accusation against the fascist regime.\nAmong the directors who give their contribution to the war propaganda there is also Roberto Rossellini, author of a trilogy composed of \"The White Ship\" (1941), \"A Pilot Returns\" (1942) and \"The Man with a Cross\" (1943). Anticipating in some ways his works of maturity, the director adopted a modest and immediate style, which does not contrast the effectiveness of the propaganda but neither does it exalt the dominant war rhetoric; it was the same anti-spectacular approach to which he remained faithful throughout his life.\n1940s.\nNeorealism (1940s\u20131950s).\nBy the end of World War II, the Italian \"neorealist\" movement had begun to take shape. Neorealist films typically dealt with the working class (in contrast to the \"Telefoni Bianchi\"), and were shot on location. Many neorealist films, but not all, used non-professional actors. Though the term \"neorealism\" was used for the first time to describe Luchino Visconti\u2019s 1943 film, \"Ossessione\", there were several important precursors to the movement, most notably Camerini's \"What Scoundrels Men Are!\" (1932), which was the first Italian film shot entirely on location, and Blasetti's 1942 film, \"Four Steps in the Clouds\".\n\"Ossessione\" angered Fascist officials. Upon viewing the film, Vittorio Mussolini is reported to have shouted, \"This is not Italy!\" before walking out of the theater. The film was subsequently banned in the Fascist-controlled parts of Italy. While neorealism exploded after the war, and was incredibly influential at the international level, neorealist films made up only a small percentage of Italian films produced during this period, as postwar Italian moviegoers preferred escapist comedies starring actors such as Tot\u00f2 and Alberto Sordi.\nNeorealist works such as Roberto Rossellini's trilogy \"Rome, Open City\" (1945), \"Pais\u00e0\" (1946), and \"Germany, Year Zero\" (1948), with professional actors such as Anna Magnani and a number of non-professional actors, attempted to describe the difficult economic and moral conditions of postwar Italy and the changes in public mentality in everyday life. Visconti's \"The Earth Trembles\" (1948) was shot on location in a Sicilian fishing village, and used local non-professional actors. Giuseppe De Santis, on other hand, used actors such as Silvana Mangano and Vittorio Gassman in his 1949 film, \"Bitter Rice\", which is set in the Po Valley during rice-harvesting season.\nPoetry and cruelty of life were harmonically combined in the works that Vittorio De Sica wrote and directed together with screenwriter Cesare Zavattini: among them, \"Shoeshine\" (1946), \"The Bicycle Thief\" (1948) and \"Miracle in Milan\" (1951). The 1952 film \"Umberto D.\" showed a poor old man with his little dog, who must beg for alms against his dignity in the loneliness of the new society. This work is perhaps De Sica's masterpiece and one of the most important works in Italian cinema. It was not a commercial success and since then it has been shown on Italian television only a few times. Yet it is perhaps the most violent attack, in the apparent quietness of the action, against the rules of the new economy, the new mentality, the new values, and it embodies both a conservative and a progressive view.\nAlthough \"Umberto D.\" is considered the end of the neorealist period, later films such as Federico Fellini's \"La Strada\" (1954) and De Sica's 1960 film \"Two Women\" (for which Sophia Loren won the Oscar for Best Actress) are grouped with the genre. Director Pier Paolo Pasolini's first film, \"Accattone\" (1961), shows a strong neorealist influence. Italian neorealist cinema influenced filmmakers around the world, and helped inspire other film movements, such as the French New Wave and the Polish Film School. The Neorealist period is often simply referred to as \"The Golden Age\" of Italian cinema by critics, filmmakers, and scholars.\nCalligrafismo (1940s).\nCalligrafismo is in a sharp contrast to Telefoni Bianchi-American style comedies and is rather artistic, highly formalistic, expressive in complexity and deals mainly with contemporary literary material, above all the pieces of Italian realism from authors like Corrado Alvaro, Ennio Flaiano, Emilio Cecchi, Francesco Pasinetti, Vitaliano Brancati, Mario Bonfantini and Umberto Barbaro.\nThe best-known exponent of this genre is Mario Soldati, a long-time writer and director destined to establish himself with films of literary ancestry and solid formal structure. His films put at the center of the story characters endowed with a dramatic and psychological strength foreign to both white-phone cinema and propaganda films, and found in works such as \"Dora Nelson\" (1939), \"Piccolo mondo antico\" (1941), \"Tragic Night\" (1942), \"Malombra\" (1942) and \"In High Places\" (1943). Luigi Chiarini, already active as a critic, deepens the trend in his \"Sleeping Beauty\" (1942), \"Street of the Five Moons\" (1942) and \"The Innkeeper\" (1944). The internal conflicts of the characters and the scenographic richness are also recurrent in the first films by Alberto Lattuada (\"Giacomo the Idealist\", 1943) and Renato Castellani (\"A Pistol Shot\", 1942), dominated by a sense of moral and cultural decay that seems to anticipate the end of the war.\nAnother important example of a calligraphic film is the film version of \"The Betrothed\" (1941), by Mario Camerini (very faithful in the staging of Manzoni's masterpiece), which due to the perceived income, became the most popular feature film between 1941 and 1942.\nAnimation (1940s\u2013present).\nThe pioneer of the Italian cartoon was Francesco Guido, better known as Gibba. Immediately after the end of World War II, he produced the first animated medium-length film of Italian cinema entitled \"L'ultimo sciusci\u00e0\" (1946), which took up themes typical of neorealism and in the following decade the feature films \"Rompicollo and I picchiatelli\", in collaboration with Antonio Attanasi. In the 1970s, after many animated documentaries, Gibba himself will return to the feature film with the erotic \"Il nano e la strega\" (1973) and \"Il racconto della giungla\" (1974). Also interesting are the contributions of the painter and set designer Emanuele Luzzati who, after some valuable short films, made in 1976 one of the masterpieces of Italian animation: \"Il flauto magico\" (\"The Magic Flute\"), based on the homonymous opera by Mozart.\nIn 1949, the designer Nino Pagot presented \"The Dynamite Brothers\" at the Venice Film Festival, one of the first animated feature films of the time, released in theaters in conjunction with \"La Rosa di Bagdad\" (1949), made by the animator Anton Gino Domeneghini. In the early 1950s, the cartoonist Romano Scarpa created the short film \"La piccola fiammiferaia\" (1953), which remains, like the two previous films, little more than an isolated case. Apart from these examples, Italian animation in the 1950s and 1960s failed to become a major reality and remains confined to the television sector, due to the various commissions provided by the Carosello container.\nBut it is with Bruno Bozzetto that the Italian cartoon reaches an international dimension: his debut feature film \"West and Soda\" (1965), an irresistible caricature of the Western genre, received acclaim from both audiences and critics. A few years later his second work entitled \"VIP my Brother Superman\" was released, distributed in 1968. After many satirical short films (centered on the popular figure of \"Signor Rossi\") he returned to the feature film with what is considered his most ambitious work, \"Allegro Non Troppo\" (1977). Inspired by the well-known Disney \"Fantasia\", it is a mixed media film, in which animated episodes are molded to the notes of many classical music pieces. Another illustrator to underline is the artist Pino Zac who in 1971 shot (again with mixed technique) \"The Nonexistent Knight\", based on the novel of the same name by Italo Calvino.\nIn the 1990s, Italian animation entered a new phase of production due to the Turin Lanterna Magica studio which in 1996, under the direction of Enzo D'Al\u00f2, created the intriguing Christmas fairy tale \"La freccia azzurra\", based on a short story by Gianni Rodari. The film was a success and paved the way for other feature films. In fact, in 1998, \"Lucky and Zorba\" based on a novel by Luis Sep\u00falveda was distributed, which attracted the favor of the public, reaching a new apex in the Italian animated cinema.\nThe director Enzo d'Al\u00f2, who separated from the Lanterna Magica studio, produced other films in the following years such as \"Momo\" (2001) and \"Opopomoz\" (2003). The Turin studio distributed on its behalf the films \"Aida of the Trees\" (2001) and \"Tot\u00f2 Sapore e la magica storia della pizza\" (2003), accompanied by a good response at the box office. In 2003, the first entirely Italian animated film in computer graphics was released entitled \"L'apetta Giulia and Signora Vita\", directed by Paolo Modugno. To underline the work \"La Storia di Leo\" (2007) by director Mario Cambi, winner, the following year, at the Giffoni Film Festival.\nIn 2010, the first Italian animated film in 3D technology was made, directed by Iginio Straffi, entitled ', based on the homonymous series; in the meantime Enzo D'Al\u00f2 returns to theaters, presenting his \"Pinocchio\" (2012). In 2012, the film \"Gladiators of Rome\", also shot in 3D technology, received credit from the public, followed by the feature film ' (2014), both again by Iginio Straffi. Finally, \"The Art of Happiness\" (2013) by Alessandro Rak, a film made in Naples by 40 authors, including only 10 designers and animators from the Mad Entertainment studio, a true absolute record for an animated film was made. \"Cinderella the Cat\" (2017), taken from the text \"Pentamerone\" by Giambattista Basile, came out of the same studio. The work won two David di Donatello's, one of which was for special effects, becoming the first animated film to be nominated, and win, in this category.\n1950s.\nStarting from the mid-1950s, Italian cinema freed itself from neorealism by tackling purely existential topics, films with different styles and points of view, often more introspective than descriptive. Thus we are witnessing a new flowering of filmmakers who contribute in a fundamental way to the development of the art.\nMichelangelo Antonioni is the first to establish himself, becoming a reference author for all contemporary cinema. This charge of novelty is recognizable from the beginning as the director's first work, \"Story of a Love Affair\" (1950), marks an indelible break with the world of neorealism and the consequent birth of a modern cinema. Antonioni investigated the world of the Italian bourgeoisie with a critical eye, left out of the post-war cinematic lens. In doing so, works of psychological research such as \"I Vinti\" (1952), \"The Lady Without Camelias\" (1953) and \"Le Amiche\" (1955), free adaptation of the short story \"Tra donne sole\" by Cesare Pavese, came to light. In 1957, he staged the unusual proletarian drama \"Il Grido\", with which he obtained critical acclaim.\nIn 1955, the David di Donatello was established, with its Best Picture category being awarded for the first time only in 1970.\nFederico Fellini (1950s\u20131990s).\nFederico Fellini is recognized as one of the greatest and most influential filmmakers of all time. Fellini won the Palme d'Or for \"La Dolce Vita\", was nominated for twelve Academy Awards, and won four in the category of Best Foreign Language Film, the most for any director in the history of the academy. He received an honorary award for Lifetime Achievement at the 65th Academy Awards in Los Angeles. His other well-known films include \"La Strada\" (1954), \"Nights of Cabiria\" (1957), \"Juliet of the Spirits\" (1967), \"Satyricon\" (1969), \"Roma\" (1972), \"Amarcord\" (1973), and \"Fellini's Casanova\" (1976).\nPersonal and highly idiosyncratic visions of society, Fellini's films are a unique combination of memory, dreams, fantasy and desire. The adjectives \"Fellinian\" and \"Felliniesque\" are \"synonymous with any kind of extravagant, fanciful, even baroque image in the cinema and in art in general\". \"La Dolce Vita\" contributed the term \"paparazzi\" to the English language, derived from Paparazzo, the photographer friend of journalist Marcello Rubini (Marcello Mastroianni).\nContemporary filmmakers such as Tim Burton, Terry Gilliam, Emir Kusturica, and David Lynch have cited Fellini's influence on their work.\nPink neorealism (1950s\u20131960s).\nAlthough \"Umberto D.\" is considered the end of the neorealist period, subsequent works turned toward lighter, sweetened and mildly optimistic atmospheres, more coherent with the improving conditions of Italy just before the economic boom; this genre became known as \"pink neorealism\".\nThe precursor of pink neorealism was Renato Castellani, who helped bring realist comedy into vogue with \"Under the Sun of Rome\" (1948) and \"It's Forever Springtime\" (1949), both shot on location and with non-professional actors, and above all with public success and criticism of \"Two Cents Worth of Hope\" (1952), which laid the foundations for pink neorealism.\nNotable films of pink neorealism, which combine popular comedy and realist motifs, are \"Pane, amore e fantasia\" (1953) by Luigi Comencini and \"Poveri ma belli\" (1957) by Dino Risi, both works in perfect harmony with the evolution of the Italian costume. The large influx at the box office from the two films remained almost unchanged in the sequels \"Bread, Love and Jealousy\" (1954), \"Scandal in Sorrento\" (1955) and \"Pretty But Poor\" (1957), also directed by Luigi Comencini and Dino Risi.\nSimilarly, stories of daily life told with gentle irony (without losing sight of the social fabric) can be found in the work of the Milanese Luciano Emmer, whose films \"Sunday in August\" (1950), \"Three Girls from Rome\" (1952) and \"High School\" (1954), are the best known examples. Another film of the pink neorealism genre was \"Susanna Whipped Cream\" (1957) by Steno.\nThis trend allowed some actresses to become real celebrities, such as Sophia Loren, Gina Lollobrigida, Silvana Pampanini, Lucia Bos\u00e9, Barbara Bouchet, Eleonora Rossi Drago, Silvana Mangano, Virna Lisi, Claudia Cardinale and Stefania Sandrelli. Soon pink neorealism was replaced by the Commedia all'italiana, a unique genre that, born on an ideally humouristic line, talked instead very seriously about important social themes.\nCommedia all'Italiana (1950s\u20131970s).\nCommedia all'italiana (\"Comedy in the Italian way\") is an Italian film genre born in Italy in the 1950s and developed in the following 1960s and 1970s. It is widely considered to have started with Mario Monicelli's \"Big Deal on Madonna Street\" in 1958 and derives its name from the title of Pietro Germi's \"Divorce Italian Style\", 1961. According to most of the critics, \"La Terrazza\" by Ettore Scola (1980) is the last work considered part of the Commedia all'italiana.\nRather than a specific genre, the term indicates a period (approximately from the late 1950s to the early 1970s) in which the Italian film industry was producing many successful comedies, with some common traits like satire of manners, farcical and grotesque overtones, a strong focus on \"spicy\" social issues of the period (like sexual matters, divorce, contraception, marriage of the clergy, the economic rise of the country and its various consequences, the traditional religious influence of the Catholic Church) and a prevailing middle-class setting, often characterized by a substantial background of sadness and social criticism that diluted the comic contents.\nThe genre of Commedia all'italiana differs markedly from the light and disengaged comedy from the so-called \"pink neorealism\" trend, in vogue until all of the 1950s, since, starting from the lesson of neorealism, is based on a more frank adherence in writing to reality; therefore, alongside the comic situations and plots typical of traditional comedy, always combines, with irony, a biting and sometimes bitter satire of manners, which reflects the evolution of Italian society in those years.\nThe success of films belonging to the \"Commedia all'italiana\" genre is due both to the presence of an entire generation of great actors, who knew how to masterfully embody the vices and virtues, and the attempts at emancipation but also the vulgarities of the Italians of the time, both to the careful work of directors, storytellers and screenwriters, who invented a real genre, with essentially new connotations, managing to find precious material for their cinematographic creations in the folds of a rapid evolution with many contradictions.\nAmong the actors the main representatives are Alberto Sordi, Ugo Tognazzi, Vittorio Gassman, Marcello Mastroianni and Nino Manfredi, while among the actresses is Monica Vitti. Among directors and films, in 1961 Dino Risi directed \"Una vita difficile\" (\"A Difficult Life\"), then \"Il Sorpasso\" (\"The Easy Life\"), now a cult-movie, followed by: \"I Mostri\" (\"The Monsters\", also known as \"15 From Rome\"), \"In nome del popolo italiano\" (\"In the Name of the Italian People\") and \"Profumo di donna\" (\"Scent of a Woman\"). Monicelli's works include \"La grande guerra\" (\"The Great War\"), \"I compagni\" (\"The Organizer\"), \"L'armata Brancaleone\", \"Vogliamo i colonnelli\" (\"We Want the Colonels\"), \"Romanzo popolare\" (\"Come Home and Meet My Wife\") and the \"Amici miei\" (\"My Friends\") series.\nFor the majority of critics the true and proper \"Commedia all'italiana\" is to be considered definitively waned since the beginning of the 1980s, giving way, at most, to an \"Commedia italiana\" (\"Italian comedy\").\nTot\u00f2 (1950s\u20131960s).\nAt this time, on the more commercial side of production, the phenomenon of Tot\u00f2, a Neapolitan actor who is acclaimed as the major Italian comic, exploded. His films (often with Aldo Fabrizi, Peppino De Filippo and almost always with Mario Castellani) expressed a sort of neorealistic satire, in the means of a \"guitto\" (a \"hammy\" actor) as well as with the art of the great dramatic actor he also was. Tot\u00f2 is one of the symbols of the cinema of Naples.\nA \"film-machine\" who produced dozens of titles per year, his repertoire was frequently repeated. His personal story (a prince born in the poorest \"rione\" (section of the city) of Naples), his unique twisted face, his special mimic expressions and his gestures created an inimitable personage and made him one of the most beloved Italians of the 1960s.\nSome of his best-known films are \"Fear and Sand\" by Mario Mattoli, \"Toto Tours Italy\" by Mario Mattoli, \"Toto the Sheik\" by Mario Mattoli, \"Cops and Robbers\" by Mario Monicelli, \"Toto and the Women\" by Mario Monicelli, \"Tot\u00f2 Tarzan\" by Mario Mattoli, \"Toto the Third Man\" by Mario Mattoli, \"Toto and the King of Rome\" by Mario Monicelli and Steno, \"Toto in Color\" by Steno (one of the first Italian color movies, 1952, in Ferraniacolor), \"Big Deal on Madonna Street\" by Mario Monicelli, \"Toto, Peppino, and the Hussy\" by Camillo Mastrocinque and \"The Law Is the Law\" by Christian-Jaque. Pier Paolo Pasolini's \"The Hawks and the Sparrows\" and the episode \"Che cosa sono le nuvole\" from \"Caprice Italian Style\" (the latter released after his death), showed his dramatic skills.\nDon Camillo and Peppone (1950s\u20131980s).\nA series of black-and-white films based on Don Camillo and Peppone characters created by the Italian writer and journalist Giovannino Guareschi were made between 1952 and 1965. These were French-Italian coproductions, and starred Fernandel as the Italian priest Don Camillo and Gino Cervi as Giuseppe 'Peppone' Bottazzi, the Communist Mayor of their rural town. The titles are: \"The Little World of Don Camillo\" (1952), \"The Return of Don Camillo\" (1953), \"Don Camillo's Last Round\" (1955), \"\" (1961), and \"Don Camillo in Moscow\" (1965).\nThe movies were a huge commercial success in their native countries. In 1952, \"Little World of Don Camillo\" became the highest-grossing film in both Italy and France, while \"The Return of Don Camillo\" was the second most popular film of 1953 at the Italian and French box office.\nMario Camerini began filming the film \"Don Camillo e i giovani d'oggi\", but had to stop filming due to Fernandel's falling ill, which resulted in his untimely death. The film was then realized in 1972 with Gastone Moschin playing the role of Don Camillo and Lionel Stander as Peppone.\nA new Don Camillo film, titled \"The World of Don Camillo\", was also remade in 1983, an Italian production with Terence Hill directing and also starring as Don Camillo. Colin Blakely performed Peppone in one of his last film roles.\nHollywood on the Tiber (1950s\u20131960s).\nHollywood on the Tiber is a phrase used to describe the period in the 1950s and 1960s when the Italian capital of Rome emerged as a major location for international filmmaking attracting many foreign productions to the Cinecitt\u00e0 studios, the largest film studio in Europe. By contrast to the native Italian film industry, these movies were made in English for global release. Although the primary markets for such films were American and British audiences, they enjoyed widespread popularity in other countries, including Italy.\nIn the late 1940s, Hollywood studios began to shift production abroad to Europe. Italy was, along with Britain, one of the major destinations for American film companies. Large-budget films shot at Cinecitt\u00e0 during the \"Hollywood on the Tiber\" era such as \"Quo Vadis\" (1951), \"Roman Holiday\" (1953), \"Ben-Hur\" (1959), and \"Cleopatra\" (1963) were made in English with international casts and sometimes, but not always, Italian settings or themes.\nThe heyday of what was dubbed '\"Hollywood on the Tiber\" was between 1950 and 1970, during which time many of the most famous names in world cinema made films in Italy. The phrase \"Hollywood on Tiber\", a reference to the river that runs through Rome, was coined in 1950 by \"Time\" magazine during the making of \"Quo Vadis\".\nSword-and-sandal (a.k.a. Peplum) (1950s\u20131960s).\nSword-and-sandal, also known as \"peplum\" (\"pepla\" plural), is a subgenre of largely Italian-made historical, mythological, or Biblical epics mostly set in the Greco-Roman antiquity or the Middle Ages. These films attempted to emulate the big-budget Hollywood historical epics of the time.\nWith the release of 1958's \"Hercules\", starring American bodybuilder Steve Reeves, the Italian film industry gained entree to the American film market. These films were low-budget costume/adventure dramas, and had immediate appeal with both European and American audiences. Besides the many films starring a variety of muscle men as Hercules, heroes such as Samson and Italian fictional hero Maciste were common.\nSometimes dismissed as low-quality escapist fare, the sword-and-sandal allowed newer directors such as Sergio Leone and Mario Bava a means of breaking into the film industry. Some, such as Mario Bava's \"Hercules in the Haunted World\" (Italian: Ercole Al Centro Della Terra) are considered seminal works in their own right.\nAs the genre matured, budgets sometimes increased, as evidenced in 1962's \"I sette gladiatori\" (\"The Seven Gladiators\" in 1964 US release), a wide-screen epic with impressive sets and matte-painting work. Most sword-and-sandal films were in color, whereas previous Italian efforts had often been black and white.\nMusicarelli (1950s\u20131970s).\nMusicarello (pl. musicarelli) is a film subgenre which emerged in Italy and which is characterised by the presence in main roles of young singers, already famous among their peers, and their new record album. The genre began in the late 1950s, and had its peak of production in the 1960s.\nThe film which started the genre is considered to be \"I ragazzi del Juke-Box\" by Lucio Fulci (1959). The musicarelli were inspired by two American musicals, in particular \"Jailhouse Rock\" by Richard Thorpe (1957) and earlier \"Love Me Tender\" by Robert D. Webb (1956), both starring Elvis Presley.\nAt the heart of the musicarello is a hit song, or a song that the producers hoped would become a hit, that usually shares its title with the film itself and sometimes has lyrics depicting a part of the plot. In the films there are almost always tender and chaste love stories accompanied by the desire to have fun and dance without thoughts. Musicarelli reflect the desire and need for emancipation of young Italians, highlighting some generational frictions.\nWith the arrival of the 1968 student protests the genre started to decline, because the generational revolt became explicitly political and at the same time there was no longer a music equally directed to the whole youth-audience. For some time the duo Al Bano and Romina Power continued to enjoy success in musicarello films, but their films (like their songs) were a return to the traditional melody and to the musical films of the previous decades.\n1960s.\nSpaghetti Western (1960s\u20131970s).\nOn the heels of the sword-and-sandal craze, a related genre, the Spaghetti Western arose and was popular both in Italy and elsewhere. These films differed from traditional westerns by being filmed in Europe on limited budgets, but featured vivid cinematography. The term was used by foreign critics because most of these westerns were produced and directed by Italians.\nThe most popular Spaghetti Westerns were those of Sergio Leone, credited as the inventor of the genre, whose Dollars Trilogy (1964's \"A Fistful of Dollars\", an unauthorized remake of the Japanese film \"Yojimbo\" by Akira Kurosawa; 1965's \"For a Few Dollars More\", an original sequel; and 1966's \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\", a World-famous prequel), featuring Clint Eastwood as a character marketed as \"the Man with No Name\" and notorious scores by Ennio Morricone, came to define the genre along with \"Once Upon a Time in the West\" (1968).\nAnother popular Spaghetti Western film is Sergio Corbucci \"Django\" (1966), starring Franco Nero as the titular character, another \"Yojimbo\" plagiarism, produced to capitalize on the success of \"A Fistful of Dollars\". The original \"Django\" was followed by both an authorized sequel (1987's \"Django Strikes Again\") and an overwhelming number of unauthorized uses of the same character in other films.\nBud Spencer and Terence Hill (1960s\u20131990s).\nAlso considered Spaghetti Westerns is a film genre which combined traditional western ambiance with a Commedia all'italiana-type comedy; films including \"They Call Me Trinity\" (1970) and \"Trinity Is Still My Name\" (1971), both by Enzo Barboni, which featured Bud Spencer and Terence Hill, the stage names of Carlo Pedersoli and Mario Girotti.\nTerence Hill and Bud Spencer made numerous films together. Most of their early films were Spaghetti Westerns, beginning with \"God Forgives... I Don't!\" (1967), the first part of a trilogy, followed by \"Ace High\" (1968) and \"Boot Hill\" (1969), but they also starred in comedies such as \"... All the Way, Boys!\" (1972) and \"Watch Out, We're Mad!\" (1974).\nThe next films shot by the couple of actors, almost all comedies, were \"Two Missionaries\" (1974), \"Crime Busters\" (1977), \"Odds and Evens\" (1978), \"I'm for the Hippopotamus\" (1979), \"Who Finds a Friend Finds a Treasure\" (1981), \"Go for It\" (1983), \"Double Trouble\" (1984), \"Miami Supercops\" (1985) and \"Troublemakers\" (1994).\nGiallo (1960s\u2013present).\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, Italian filmmakers Mario Bava, Riccardo Freda, Antonio Margheriti and Dario Argento developed \"giallo\" (plural \"gialli\", from \"giallo\", Italian for \"yellow\") horror films that become classics and influenced the genre in other countries. Representative films include: \"The Girl Who Knew Too Much\" (1963), \"Castle of Blood\" (1964), \"The Bird with the Crystal Plumage\" (1970), \"Twitch of the Death Nerve\" (1971), \"Deep Red\" (1975) and \"Suspiria\" (1977).\n\"Giallo\" is a genre of mystery fiction and thrillers and often contains slasher, crime fiction, psychological thriller, psychological horror, sexploitation, and, less frequently, supernatural horror elements. \"Giallo\" developed in the mid-to-late 1960s, peaked in popularity during the 1970s, and subsequently declined in commercial mainstream filmmaking over the next few decades, though examples continue to be produced. It was a predecessor to, and had significant influence on, the later American slasher film genre.\n\"Giallo\" usually blends the atmosphere and suspense of thriller fiction with elements of horror fiction (such as slasher violence) and eroticism (similar to the French \"fantastique\" genre), and often involves a mysterious killer whose identity is not revealed until the final act of the film. Most critics agree that the \"giallo\" represents a distinct category with unique features, but there is some disagreement on what exactly defines a \"giallo\" film.\n\"Giallo\" films are generally characterized as gruesome murder-mystery thrillers that combine the suspense elements of detective fiction with scenes of shocking horror, featuring excessive bloodletting, stylish camerawork and often jarring musical arrangements. The archetypal \"giallo\" plot involves a mysterious, black-gloved psychopathic killer who stalks and butchers a series of beautiful women. While most \"gialli\" involve a human killer, some also feature a supernatural element.\nThe typical \"giallo\" protagonist is an outsider of some type, often a traveller, tourist, outcast, or even an alienated or disgraced private investigator, and frequently a young woman, often a young woman who is lonely or alone in a strange or foreign situation or environment (\"gialli\" rarely or less frequently feature law enforcement officers as chief protagonists).\nThe protagonists are generally or often unconnected to the murders before they begin and are drawn to help find the killer through their role as a witness to one of the murders. The mystery is the identity of the killer, who is often revealed in the climax to be another key character, who conceals his or her identity with a disguise (usually some combination of hat, mask, sunglasses, gloves, and trench coat). Thus, the literary whodunit element of the \"giallo\" novels is retained, while being filtered through horror genre elements and Italy's long-standing tradition of opera and staged grand guignol drama. The structure of \"giallo\" films is also sometimes reminiscent of the so-called \"weird menace\" pulp magazine horror mystery genre alongside Edgar Allan Poe and Agatha Christie.\nPoliziotteschi (1960s\u20131970s).\nPoliziotteschi (plural of poliziottesco) films constitute a subgenre of crime and action film that emerged in Italy in the late 1960s and reached the height of their popularity in the 1970s. They are also known as \"polizieschi all'italiana\", Euro-crime, Italo-crime, spaghetti crime films', or simply Italian crime films.\nInfluenced by both 1970s French crime films and gritty 1960s and 1970s American cop films and vigilante films, poliziotteschi films were made amidst an atmosphere of socio-political turmoil in Italy and increasing Italian crime rates.\nThe films generally featured graphic and brutal violence, organized crime, car chases, vigilantism, heists, gunfights, and corruption up to the highest levels. The protagonists were generally tough working class loners, willing to act outside a corrupt or overly bureaucratic system. Notable international actors who acted in this genre of films include Alain Delon, Henry Silva, Fred Williamson, Charles Bronson, Tomas Milian and others.\nFranco and Ciccio (1960s\u20131980s).\nFranco and Ciccio were a comedy duo formed by Italian actors Franco Franchi (1928\u20131992) and Ciccio Ingrassia (1922\u20132003), particularly popular in the 1960s and 1970s. Together, they appeared in 116 films, usually as the main characters, and occasionally as supporting characters in films featuring well-known actors such as Tot\u00f2, Domenico Modugno, Vittorio Gassman, Buster Keaton and Vincent Price.\nTheir collaboration began in 1954 in the theater field, and ended with Franchi's death in 1992. The two made their cinema debuts in 1960 with the film \"Appuntamento a Ischia\". After, seeing them in this film Modugno who, wanted them with him in his film, and remained active until 1984 when they shot their last film together, \"Kaos\", although there were some interruptions in 1973, and from 1975 to 1980.\nThey acted in films certainly made in a short time and with few means, such as those shot with director Marcello Ciorciolini, sometimes even making a dozen films in a year, often without a real script and where they often improvised on the set. Also are the 13 films directed by Lucio Fulci, who was the architect of the reversal of their typical roles by making Ciccio the serious one, the sidekick, and Franco the comic one.\nThey also worked with important directors such as Pier Paolo Pasolini and the Taviani brothers. Considered at the time as protagonists of B movie, they were subsequently reevaluated by critics for their comedy and creative abilities, becoming the subject of study. The huge success with the public is evidenced by the box office earnings, which in the 1960s, represented 10% of the annual earnings in Italy.\nSocial and political cinema (1960s\u20131970s).\nThe auteur cinema of the 1960s continues its path by analyzing distinct themes and problems. A new authorial vision is emancipated from the surreal and existential veins of Fellini and Antonioni which sees cinema as an ideal means of denouncing corruption and malfeasance, both in the political system and in the industrial world. Thus was born the structure of the investigative film which, starting from the neorealist analysis of the facts, adding to them a concise critical judgment, with the manifest intent of shaking the consciences of public opinion. This typology deliberately touches upon burning issues, often targeting the established power, with the intent of reconstructing a historical truth that is often hidden or denied.\nThe precursor of this way of understanding the director's profession was Francesco Rosi. In 1962 he inaugurated the investigation film project retracing, through a series of long flashbacks, the life of the homonym Sicilian criminal in the film \"Salvatore Giuliano\". The following year he directed Rod Steiger in \"Hands over the City\" (1963), in which he courageously denounced the collusion existing between the various organs of the State and the building exploitation in Naples. The film was awarded the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival.\nOne of Francesco Rosi's most famous films of denunciation is \"The Mattei Affair\" (1972), a rigorous documentary into the mysterious disappearance of Enrico Mattei, manager of Eni, a large Italian state group. The film won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival and became (together with the tight \"Illustrious Corpses\" (1976)) a true model for similar denunciation films produced both in Italy and abroad. Famous films of denunciation by Elio Petri are \"The Working Class Goes to Heaven\" (1971), a corrosive denunciation of life in the factory (winner of the Palme d'Or at Cannes) and \"Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion\" (1970). The latter (accompanied by the incisive soundtrack by Ennio Morricone) is a dry psychoanalytic thriller centered on the aberrations of power, analyzed in a pathological key. The film obtained a wide consensus, winning the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film the following year.\nArguments related to civilian cinema can be found in the work of Damiano Damiani, who with \"The Day of the Owl\" (1968) enjoyed considerable success. Other feature films include, \"Confessions of a Police Captain\" (1971), \"The Case Is Closed, Forget It\" (1971), \"How to Kill a Judge\" (1974) and \"I Am Afraid\" (1977). Also Pasquale Squitieri for the film \"Il prefetto di ferro\" (1977) and Giuliano Montaldo, who after some experiences as an actor, staged some historical and political films such as \"The Fifth Day of Peace\" (1970), \"Sacco &amp; Vanzetti\" (1971) and \"Giordano Bruno\" (1973). Also Nanni Loy for the film \"In Prison Awaiting Trial\" (1971) starring Alberto Sordi.\n1970s.\nIn the 1970s the work done by the director Lina Wertm\u00fcller was influential, who together with the well-established actors Giancarlo Giannini and Mariangela Melato, gave life to successful films such as \"The Seduction of Mimi\" (1972), \"Love and Anarchy\" (1973) and \"Swept Away\" (1974). Two years later, with \"Seven Beauties\" (1976), she obtained four nominations for the Academy Awards, making her the first woman ever to receive a nomination for best director.\nThe last protagonist of the great season of the comedy is the director Ettore Scola. Throughout the 1950s, he played the role of screenwriter, and then makes his directorial debut in 1964 with the film \"Let's Talk About Women\". In 1974, he directed his best known film, \"We All Loved Each Other So Much\", which traces 30 years of Italian history through the stories of three friends: the lawyer Gianni Perego (Vittorio Gassman), the porter Antonio (Nino Manfredi) and the intellectual Nicola (Stefano Satta Flores). Other films include, \"Down and Dirty\" (1976) starring Nino Manfredi, and \"A Special Day\" (1977) starring Sophia Loren and Marcello Mastroianni.\nCommedia sexy all'italiana (1970s\u20131980s).\nCommedia sexy all'italiana is characterized typically by both abundant female nudity and comedy, and by the minimal weight given to social criticism that was the basic ingredient of the main commedia all'italiana genre. Stories are often set in affluent environments such as wealthy households. It is closely connected to the sexual revolution, and it was something extremely new and innovative for that period. For the first time, films with female nudity could be watched at the cinema. Pornography and scenes of explicit sex were still forbidden in Italian cinemas, but partial nudity was somewhat tolerated. The genre has been described as a cross between bawdy comedy and humorous erotic film with ample slapstick elements which follows more or less clich\u00e9d storylines.\nDuring this time, commedia sexy all'italiana films, described by the film critics of the time as not artistic or \"trash films\", were very popular in Italy. Today they are widely re-evaluated and have become real cult movies. They also allowed the producers of Italian cinema to have enough revenue to produce successful artistic films. These comedy films were of little artistic value and reached their popularity by confronting Italian social taboos, most notably in the sexual sphere. Actors such as Lando Buzzanca, Lino Banfi, Renzo Montagnani, Alvaro Vitali, Gloria Guida, Barbara Bouchet and Edwige Fenech owe much of their popularity to these films.\nFantozzi (1970s\u20131990s).\nThe films starring Ugo Fantozzi, a character invented by Paolo Villaggio for his television sketches and newspaper short stories, also fell within the comic satirical comedy genre. Although Villaggio's movies tend to bridge comedy with a more elevated social satire, this character had a great impact on Italian society, to such a degree that the adjective \"fantozziano\" entered the lexicon. Ugo Fantozzi represents the archetype of the average Italian of the 1970s, middle-class with a simple lifestyle with the anxieties common to an entire class of workers, being re-evaluated by critics.\nOf the many films telling of Fantozzi's misadventures, the most notable and famous were \"Fantozzi\" (1975) and \"Il secondo tragico Fantozzi\" (1976), both directed by Luciano Salce, but many others were produced. The other films were \"Fantozzi contro tutti\" (1980) directed by Neri Parenti, \"Fantozzi subisce ancora\" (1983) by Neri Parenti, \"Superfantozzi\" (1986) by Neri Parenti, \"Fantozzi va in pensione\" (1988) by Neri Parenti, \"Fantozzi alla riscossa\" (1990) by Neri Parenti, \"Fantozzi in paradiso\" (1993) by Neri Parenti, \"Fantozzi - Il ritorno\" (1996) by Neri Parenti and \"Fantozzi 2000 - La clonazione\" (1999) by Domenico Saverni.\nSceneggiata (1970s\u20131990s).\nThe sceneggiata (pl. sceneggiate) or sceneggiata napoletana is a form of musical drama typical of Naples. Beginning as a form of musical theatre after World War I, it was also adapted for cinema; sceneggiata films became especially popular in the 1970s, and contributed to the genre becoming more widely known outside Naples. The most famous actors who played dramas were Mario Merola, Mario Trevi, and Nino D'Angelo.\nThe sceneggiata can be roughly described as a \"musical soap opera\", where action and dialogue are interspersed with Neapolitan songs. Plots revolve around melodramatic themes drawing from the Neapolitan culture and tradition, including passion, jealousy, betrayal, personal deceit and treachery, honor, vengeance, and life in the world of petty crime. Songs and dialogue were originally in Neapolitan dialect, although, especially in filmic production, Italian has sometimes been preferred, to reach a larger audience.\n\"Sgarro alla camorra\" (i.e. \"Offence to the Camorra\", 1973), written and directed by Ettore Maria Fizzarotti and starring Mario Merola at his film debut, is regarded as the first sceneggiata film and as a prototype for the genre. It was shot in Cetara, Province of Salerno. Outside Italy, sceneggiata is mostly known in areas populated by Italian immigrants. Besides Naples, the second homeland of sceneggiata is probably Little Italy in New York City.\n1980s.\nThe 1980s was a period of decline for Italian filmmaking. In 1985, only 80 films were produced (the least since the postwar period) and the total number of audience decreased from 525 million in 1970, to 123\u00a0million. It is a physiological process that invests, in the same period as other countries, with a great cinematographic tradition such as Japan, United Kingdom and France. The era of producers ended; Carlo Ponti and Dino De Laurentiis work abroad, Goffredo Lombardo and Franco Cristaldi were no longer key figures. The crisis affects the Italian genre cinema above all, which, by virtue of the success of commercial television, is deprived of the vast majority of its audience. As a result, movie theaters began showing mainly Hollywood films, which steadily took over, while many other movie theaters closed.\nAmong the major artistic films of this era were \"La citt\u00e0 delle donne\", \"E la nave va\", \"Ginger and Fred\" by Fellini, \"L'albero degli zoccoli\" by Ermanno Olmi (winner of the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival), \"La notte di San Lorenzo\" by Paolo and Vittorio Taviani, Antonioni's \"Identificazione di una donna\", and \"Bianca\" and \"La messa \u00e8 finita\" by Nanni Moretti. Although not entirely Italian, Bernardo Bertolucci's \"The Last Emperor\", winner of 9 Oscars including Best Picture and Best Director, and \"Once Upon a Time in America\" of Sergio Leone came out of this period also.\n\"Non ci resta che piangere\", directed by and starring both Roberto Benigni and Massimo Troisi, is a cult movie in Italy.\nCarlo Verdone, actor, screenwriter and film director, is best known for his comedic roles in Italian classics, which he also wrote and directed. His career was jumpstarted by his first three successes, \"Un sacco bello\" (1980), \"Bianco, rosso e Verdone\" (1981) and \"Borotalco\" (1982). Since the 1990s, he has been introducing more serious subjects in his work, linked to the excesses of society and the individual's hardships in confronting it; some examples are \"Maledetto il giorno che t'ho incontrata\" (1992), \"Il mio miglior nemico\" (2006) and \"Io, loro e Lara\" (2010).\nFrancesco Nuti began his professional career as an actor in the late 1970s, when he formed the cabaret group \"Giancattivi\" together with Alessandro Benvenuti and Athina Cenci. The group took part in the TV shows \"Black Out\" and \"Non Stop\" for RAI TV, and shot their first feature film, \"West of Paperino\" (1981), written and directed by Benvenuti. The following year Nuti abandoned the trio and began a solo career with three movies directed by Maurizio Ponzi: \"What a Ghostly Silence There Is Tonight\" (1982), \"The Pool Hustlers\" (1982) and \"Son contento\" (1983). Starting in 1985, he began to direct his movies, scoring an immediate success with the films \"Casablanca, Casablanca \" and \" All the Fault of Paradise\" (1985), \"Stregati\" (1987), \"Caruso Pascoski, Son of a Pole\" (1988), \"Willy Signori e vengo da lontano\" (1990) and \"Women in Skirts\" (1991). The 1990s were however a period of decline for the Tuscan director, with poorly successful movies such as \"OcchioPinocchio\" (1994), \"Mr. Fifteen Balls\" (1998), \"Io amo Andrea\" (2000) and \"Caruso, Zero for Conduct\" (2001).\nThe cinepanettoni (singular: \"cinepanettone\") are a series of farcical comedy films, one or two of which are scheduled for release annually in Italy during the Christmas period. The films were originally produced by Aurelio De Laurentiis' Filmauro studio. These films are usually focused on the holidays of stereotypical Italians: bungling, wealthy and presumptuous members of the middle class who visit famous, glamorous or exotic places.\nCinepanettoni (1980s\u2013present).\nThe \"cinepanettoni\" (singular: \"cinepanettone\") are a series of farcical comedy films, one or two of which are scheduled for release annually in Italy during the Christmas period. The films were originally produced by Aurelio De Laurentiis' Filmauro studio. Despite their critical reception, by 2002, the films had grossed 700 billion lire ($350 million). Starting in 1983 with \"Vacanze di Natale\" (\"Christmas Holidays\") by Carlo Vanzina, some farcical or comic movie were released every year around Christmas time in Italy, and were known as \"cinepanettoni\", a Portmanteau of Italian: \"cine\" for \"Cinema\", and \"panettone\" is a type of sweet bread traditionally eaten at Christmas.\nThese films are usually focused on the holidays of stereotypical Italians: bungling, wealthy and presumptuous members of the middle class who visit famous, glamorous or exotic places. Films were set for example in the Netherlands (\"Merry Christmas\", 2001), Egypt (\"Christmas in Egypt\" \u2013 \"Natale sul Nilo\", 2002), India (\"Christmas in India\" \u2013 \"Natale in India\", 2003), America (\"Christmas in Miami\", 2005, or \"Christmas in New York\", 2006), Cortina d'Ampezzo (\"Christmas holidays in Cortina\" \u2013 \"Vacanze di Natale a Cortina\", 2011). Directors included Carlo Vanzina, Enrico Oldoini, and Neri Parenti. Many of the screenplays are not related to Christmas, other than those set in Italy.\n1990s.\nThe economic crisis that emerged in the 1980s began to ease over the next decade. Nonetheless, the 1992\u201393 and 1993\u201394 seasons marked an all-time low in the number of films made, in the national market share (15 percent), in the total number of viewers (under 90 million per year) and in the number of cinemas. The effect of this industrial contraction sanctions the total disappearance of Italian genre cinema in the middle of the decade, as it was no longer suitable to compete with the contemporary big Hollywood blockbusters (mainly due to the enormous budget differences available), with its directors and actors who therefore almost entirely switch to television film.\nA new generation of directors has helped return Italian cinema to a healthy level since the end of the 1980s. Probably the most noted film of the period is \"Nuovo Cinema Paradiso\", for which Giuseppe Tornatore won a 1989 Oscar (awarded in 1990) for Best Foreign Language Film. This award was followed when Gabriele Salvatores's \"Mediterraneo\" won the same prize for 1991.\n\"\" (1994), directed by the British Michael Radford and starring Massimo Troisi, received five nominations at the Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Actor for Troisi, and won for Best Original Score. Another exploit was in 1998 when Roberto Benigni won three Oscars for his movie \"Life Is Beautiful\" (\"La vita \u00e8 bella)\" (Best Actor for Benigni himself, Best Foreign Film, Best Music). The film was also nominated for Best Picture.\nLeonardo Pieraccioni made his directorial debut with \"The Graduates\" (1995). In 1996 he directed his breakthrough film \"The Cyclone\", which grossed Lire\u00a075\u00a0billion at the box office.\nAldo, Giovanni &amp; Giacomo (1990s\u2013present).\nAldo, Giovanni &amp; Giacomo are an Italian trio of comedians, actors, directors and screenwriters. Performing in cinema, theatre and television, they are among the most successful and widely known Italian comedians. Their humour is typically Milanese, involving scenes that develop from a simple idea, and that are often centred on stereotypical differences between Northern and Southern Italy. Their big-screen debut was in 1997 with the film \"Three Men and a Leg\", both of which are key players that directors, alongside Marina Massironi and Massimo Venier as a writer and director, in which they have repeated several typical sketches of their repertoire with a simple plot, thanks to which they have obtained the consent of the public and critical acclaim.\nThe success of the first film was repeated in 1998 with \"That's Life\", always on the side of Marina Massironi as in \"Ask Me If I'm Happy\", released in 2000 and able to collect the more than 75 billion lire, entering the top eight films Italian most profitable ever. In 2002 it was the turn of \"The Legend of Al, John and Jack\", followed in 2004 by \"Do You Know Claudia?\", with only Massimo Venier director and Paola Cortellesi female lead.\nThe comic trio then returned to the big screen on 19 December 2008 with an episodic film, \"Il cosmo sul com\u00f2\", this time under the direction of comedian Marcello Cesena. On 12 February 2010, they participated as narrative voices in the documentary Oceans 3D, while on 17 December of the same year the film was released \"The Santa Claus Gang\", the blockbuster of the season with over 21 million euros. After four years of absence from the halls, on 11 December 2014, the trio returned to the movies with \"The Rich, the Pauper and the Butler\". In late 2016, it was followed by \"Fuga da Reuma Park\". After a three year hiatus, they returned in January 2020 with \"I Hate Summer\".\n2000s.\nWith the new millennium, the Italian film industry regained stability and critical recognition. In 1995, 93 films were produced, while in 2005, 274 films were made. In 2006, the national market share reached 31 percent. In 2001, Nanni Moretti's film \"The Son's Room\" (\"La stanza del figlio\") received the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival. Other noteworthy recent Italian films include: \"Jona che visse nella balena\" directed by Roberto Faenza, \"Il grande cocomero\" by Francesca Archibugi, \"The Profession of Arms\" (\"Il mestiere delle armi\") by Olmi, \"L'ora di religione\" by Marco Bellocchio, \"Il ladro di bambini\", \"Lamerica\", \"The Keys to the House\" (\"Le chiavi di casa\") by Gianni Amelio, \"I'm Not Scared\" (\"Io non-ho paura\") by Gabriele Salvatores, \"Le Fate Ignoranti\", \"Facing Windows\" (\"La finestra di fronte\") by Ferzan \u00d6zpetek, \"Good Morning, Night\" (\"Buongiorno, notte\") by Marco Bellocchio, \"The Best of Youth\" (\"La meglio giovent\u00f9\") by Marco Tullio Giordana, \"The Beast in the Heart\" (\"La bestia nel cuore\") by Cristina Comencini.\nIn 2008 Paolo Sorrentino's \"Il Divo\", a biographical film based on the life of Giulio Andreotti, won the Jury prize and \"Gomorra\", a crime drama film, directed by Matteo Garrone won the Gran Prix at the Cannes Film Festival.\nFicarra e Picone (2000s\u2013present).\nFicarra e Picone are an Italian comedy duo who work on stage, films, television and books. In 2000, Ficarra e Picone made their film debut with \"Ask Me If I'm Happy\" by Aldo, Giovanni &amp; Giacomo, and two years later they made the first film as main actors, \"Nati stanchi\". In 2007 they debuted as directors alongside Gianbattista Avellino with the film \"Il 7 e l'8\", for which they were nominated to David di Donatello for Best New Director and to Silver Ribbon in the same category. Other movies in which they acted as actors are \"La matassa\" (2009), \"Baar\u00eca\" (2009), \"Women vs. Men\" (2011), \"It May Be Love But It Doesn't Show\" (2011), \"\" (2014), \"Andiamo a quel paese\" (2014), \"It's the Law\" (2017) and \"Once Upon a Time... in Bethlehem\" (2019).\n2010s.\nPaolo Sorrentino's \"The Great Beauty\" (\"La Grande Bellezza\") won the 2014 Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.\nThe two highest-grossing Italian films in Italy have both been directed by Gennaro Nunziante and starred Checco Zalone: \"Sole a catinelle\" (2013) with \u20ac51.8\u00a0million, and \"Quo Vado?\" (2016) with \u20ac65.3\u00a0million.\n\"They Call Me Jeeg\", a 2016 critically acclaimed superhero film directed by Gabriele Mainetti and starring Claudio Santamaria, won many awards, such as eight David di Donatello, two Nastro d'Argento, and a Globo d'oro.\nGianfranco Rosi's documentary film \"Fire at Sea\" (2016) won the Golden Bear at the 66th Berlin International Film Festival. \"They Call Me Jeeg\" and \"Fire at Sea\" were also selected as the Italian entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 89th Academy Awards, but they were not nominated.\nOther successful 2010s Italian films include: \"Vincere\" and \"The Traitor\" by Marco Bellocchio, \"The First Beautiful Thing\" (\"La prima cosa bella\"), \"Human Capital\" (\"Il capitale umano\") and \"Like Crazy\" (\"La pazza gioia\") by Paolo Virz\u00ec, \"We Have a Pope\" (\"Habemus Papam\") and \"Mia Madre\" by Nanni Moretti, \"Caesar Must Die\" (\"Cesare deve morire\") by Paolo and Vittorio Taviani, \"Don't Be Bad\" (\"Non essere cattivo\") by Claudio Caligari, \"Romanzo Criminale\" by Michele Placido (that spawned a TV series, \"Romanzo criminale - La serie\"), \"Youth\" (\"La giovinezza\") by Paolo Sorrentino, \"Suburra\" by Stefano Sollima, \"Perfect Strangers\" (\"Perfetti sconosciuti\") by Paolo Genovese, \"Mediterranea\" and \"A Ciambra\" by Jonas Carpignano, \"Italian Race\" (\"Veloce come il vento\") and \"\" (\"Il primo re\") by Matteo Rovere, and \"Tale of Tales\" (\"Il racconto dei racconti\"), \"Dogman\" and \"Pinocchio\" by Matteo Garrone.\n\"Call Me by Your Name\" (2017), the final installment in Luca Guadagnino's thematic \"Desire\" trilogy, following \"I Am Love\" (2009) and \"A Bigger Splash\" (2015), received widespread acclaim and numerous accolades, including the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and the nomination for Best Picture in 2018.\n\"Perfect Strangers\" by Paolo Genovese was included in the \"Guinness World Records\" as it became the most remade film in cinema history, with a total of 18 versions of the film.\n2020s.\nSuccessful 2020s Italian films include: \"The Life Ahead\" by Edoardo Ponti, \"Hidden Away\" by Giorgio Diritti, \"Bad Tales\" by Damiano and Fabio D'Innocenzo, \"The Predators\" by Pietro Castellitto, \"Padrenostro\" by Claudio Noce, \"Notturno\" by Gianfranco Rosi, \"The King of Laughter\" by Mario Martone, \"A Chiara\" by Jonas Carpignano, \"Freaks Out\" by Gabriele Mainetti, \"The Hand of God\" by Paolo Sorrentino, \"Nostalgia\" by Mario Martone, \"Dry\" by Paolo Giordano, \"The Hanging Sun\" by Francesco Carrozzini, \"Bones and All\" by Luca Guadagnino, \"L'immensit\u00e0\" by Emanuele Crialese and \"Robbing Mussolini\" by Renato De Maria.\n100 Italian films to be saved.\nThe list of the 100 Italian films to be saved () was created with the aim to report \"100 films that have changed the collective memory of the country between 1942 and 1978\". The project was established in 2008 by the Venice Days festival section of the 65th Venice International Film Festival, in collaboration with Cinecitt\u00e0 Holding and with the support of the Ministry of Cultural Heritage.\nThe list was edited by Fabio Ferzetti, film critic of the newspaper \"Il Messaggero\", in collaboration with film director Gianni Amelio and the writers and film critics Gian Piero Brunetta, , Gianluca Farinelli, Giovanna Grignaffini, Paolo Mereghetti, Morando Morandini, Domenico Starnone and Sergio Toffetti.\nCinematheques.\nCineteca Nazionale is a film archive located in Rome. Founded in 1949, here are 80,000 films on file, 600,000 photographs, 50,000 posters and the collection of the Italian Association for the History of Cinema Research (AIRSC). It arose from the archival heritage of the Centro Sperimentale di Cinematografia, which in 1943, had been removed by the Nazi occupiers, losing unique materials. Cineteca Italiana is a private film archive located in Milan. Established in 1947, and as a foundation in 1996, the Cineteca Italiana houses over 20,000 films and more than 100,000 photographs from the history of Italian and international cinema. Cineteca di Bologna is a film archive in Bologna. It was founded in 1962.\nMuseums.\nThe National Museum of Cinema (Italian: \"Museo Nazionale del Cinema\") located in Turin is a motion picture museum inside the Mole Antonelliana tower. It is operated by the \"Maria Adriana Prolo Foundation\", and the core of its collection is the result of the work of the historian and collector Maria Adriana Prolo. It was housed in the \"Palazzo Chiablese\". In 2008, with 532,196 visitors, it ranked 13th among the most visited Italian museums. The museum houses pre-cinematographic optical devices such as magic lanterns, earlier and current film technologies, stage items from early Italian movies and other memorabilia. Along the exhibition path of about 35,000 square feet (3,200 m2) on five levels, it is possible to visit some areas devoted to the different kinds of film crew, and in the main hall, fitted in the temple hall of the Mole (which was a building originally intended as a synagogue), a series of chapels representing several film genres.\nThe Museum of Precinema (Italian: \"Museo del Precinema\") is a museum in the Palazzo Angeli, Prato della Valle, Padua, related to the history of precinema, or precursors of film. It was created in 1998 to display the Minici Zotti Collection, in collaboration with the Comune of Padova. It also produces interactive touring exhibitions and makes valuable loans to other prestigious exhibitions such as \"Lanterne magique et film peint\" at the Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise in Paris and the National Museum of Cinema in Turin.\nThe Cinema Museum of Rome is located in Cinecitt\u00e0. The collections consist of movie posters and playbills, cine cameras, projectors, magic lanterns, stage costumes and the patent of Filoteo Alberini's \"kinetograph\". The Milan Cinema Museum, managed by the Cineteca Italiana, is divided into three sections, the precinema, animation cinema and \"Milan as a film set\", as well as multimedia and interactive stations.\nThe Catania Cinema Museum exhibits documents concerning cinema, its techniques and its history, with particular attention to the link between cinema and Sicily. The Cinema Museum of Syracuse collects more than 10,000 exhibits on display in 12 rooms.\nItalian Academy Award winners.\nAfter the United States and the United Kingdom, Italy has the most Academy Awards wins.\nItaly is the most awarded country at the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, with 14 awards won, 3 Special Awards and 31 nominations. Winners with the year of the ceremony:\nIn 1961, Sophia Loren won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role as a woman who is raped in World War II, along with her adolescent daughter, in Vittorio De Sica's \"Two Women\". She was the first actress to win an Academy Award for a performance in any foreign language, and the second Italian leading lady Oscar-winner, after Anna Magnani for \"The Rose Tattoo\". In 1998, Roberto Benigni was the first Italian actor to win for the Best Actor for \"Life Is Beautiful\".\nItalian-born filmmaker Frank Capra won three times at the Academy Award for Best Director, for \"It Happened One Night\", \"Mr. Deeds Goes to Town\" and \"You Can't Take It with You\". Bernardo Bertolucci won the award for \"The Last Emperor\", and also Best Adapted Screenplay for the same movie.\nEnnio De Concini, Alfredo Giannetti and Pietro Germi won the award for Best Original Screenplay for \"Divorce Italian Style\". The Academy Award for Best Film Editing was won by Gabriella Cristiani for \"The Last Emperor\" and by Pietro Scalia for \"JFK\" and \"Black Hawk Down\".\nThe award for Best Original Score was won by Nino Rota for \"The Godfather Part II\"; Giorgio Moroder for \"Midnight Express\"; Nicola Piovani for \"Life is Beautiful\"; Dario Marianelli for \"Atonement\"; and Ennio Morricone for \"The Hateful Eight\". Giorgio Moroder also won the award for Best Original Song for \"Flashdance\" and \"Top Gun\".\nThe Italian winners at the Academy Award for Best Production Design are Dario Simoni for \"Lawrence of Arabia\" and \"Doctor Zhivago\"; Elio Altramura and Gianni Quaranta for \"A Room with a View\"; Bruno Cesari, Osvaldo Desideri and Ferdinando Scarfiotti for \"The Last Emperor\"; Luciana Arrighi for \"Howards End\"; and Dante Ferretti and Francesca Lo Schiavo for \"The Aviator\", \"\" and \"Hugo\".\nThe winners at the Academy Award for Best Cinematography are: Tony Gaudio for \"Anthony Adverse\"; Pasqualino De Santis for \"Romeo and Juliet\"; Vittorio Storaro for \"Apocalypse Now\", \"Reds\" and \"The Last Emperor\"; and Mauro Fiore for \"Avatar\".\nThe winners at the Academy Award for Best Costume Design are Piero Gherardi for \"La dolce vita\" and \"8\u00bd\"; Vittorio Nino Novarese for \"Cleopatra\" and \"Cromwell\"; Danilo Donati for \"The Taming of the Shrew\", \"Romeo and Juliet\", and \"Fellini's Casanova\"; Franca Squarciapino for \"Cyrano de Bergerac\"; Gabriella Pescucci for \"The Age of Innocence\"; and Milena Canonero for \"Barry Lyndon\", \"Chariots of Fire\", \"Marie Antoinette\" and \"The Grand Budapest Hotel\".\nSpecial effects artist Carlo Rambaldi won three Oscars: one Special Achievement Academy Award for Best Visual Effects for \"King Kong\" and two Academy Awards for Best Visual Effects for \"Alien\" (1979) and \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\". The Academy Award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling was won by Manlio Rocchetti for \"Driving Miss Daisy\", and Alessandro Bertolazzi and Giorgio Gregorini for \"Suicide Squad\".\nSophia Loren, Federico Fellini, Michelangelo Antonioni, Dino De Laurentiis, Ennio Morricone, and Piero Tosi also received the Academy Honorary Award.\nAuteurs.\nItaly has produced many important cinematography \"auteurs\", including:\nThese directors' works often span many decades and genres. Present \"auteurs\" include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10789", "revid": "1151957148", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10789", "title": "Cinema of Poland", "text": "Filmmaking in Poland\nThe history of cinema in Poland is almost as long as the history of cinematography, and it has universally recognized achievements, even though Polish films tend to be less commercially available than films from several other European nations.\nAfter World War II, the communist government built an auteur-based national cinema, trained hundreds of new directors and empowered them to make films. Filmmakers like Roman Pola\u0144ski, Krzysztof Kie\u015blowski, Agnieszka Holland, Andrzej Wajda, Andrzej \u017bu\u0142awski, Andrzej Munk, and Jerzy Skolimowski impacted the development of Polish film-making. In more recent years, the industry has been producer-led with finance being the key to a film being made, and with many independent filmmakers of all genres, Polish productions tend to be more inspired by American film.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe first cinema was founded in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a in 1899, several years after the invention of the Cinematograph. Initially dubbed \"Living Pictures Theatre\", it gained much popularity and by the end of the next decade there were cinemas in almost every major town of Poland. Arguably the first Polish filmmaker was Kazimierz Pr\u00f3szy\u0144ski, who filmed various short documentaries in Warsaw. His pleograph film camera had been patented before the Lumi\u00e8re brothers' invention and he is credited as the author of the earliest surviving Polish documentary titled \"\u015alizgawka w \u0141azienkach\" (\"Skating-rink in the Royal Baths\"), as well as the first short narrative films \"Powr\u00f3t birbanta\" (\"Rake's return home\") and \"Przygoda doro\u017ckarza\" (\"Cabman's Adventure\"), both created in 1902. Another pioneer of cinema was Boles\u0142aw Matuszewski, who became one of the first filmmakers working for the Lumi\u00e8re company - and the official \"cinematographer\" of the Russian tsars in 1897.\nThe earliest surviving feature film, the \"Anto\u015b pierwszy raz w Warszawie\" (\"Anto\u015b for the First Time in Warsaw\") was made in 1908 by Antoni Fertner. The date of its premi\u00e8re, October 22, 1908, is considered the founding date of Polish film industry. Soon Polish artists started experimenting with other genres of cinema: in 1910 W\u0142adys\u0142aw Starewicz made one of the first animated cartoons in the world - and the first to use the stop motion technique, the \"Pi\u0119kna Lukanida\" (\"Beautiful Lukanida\"). By the start of World War I the cinema in Poland was already in full swing, with numerous adaptations of major works of Polish literature screened (notably the \"Dzieje grzechu\", \"Meir Ezofowicz\" and \"Nad Niemnem\").\nDuring the World War I the Polish cinema crossed borders. Films made in Warsaw or Vilnius were often rebranded with German language intertitles and shown in Berlin. That was how a young actress Pola Negri (born Barbara Apolonia Cha\u0142upiec) gained fame in Germany and eventually became one of the European super-stars of silent film.\nThe first woman to direct a film in Poland and the only female film director of the Polish silent film era was Nina Niovilla. She debuted in 1918 in Berlin, then directed her first Polish film titled \"Tamara\" (also known under the title \"Obro\u0144cy Lwowa\") in 1919.\nDuring World War II, Polish filmmakers in Great Britain created the anti-Nazi color film \"Calling Mr. Smith\" (1943) about Nazi crimes in occupied Europe and about Nazi propaganda. It was one of the first anti-Nazi films in history being both an avant-garde and a documentary film.\nAfter WWII.\nIn November 1945 the communist government founded the film production and distribution organization Film Polski, and put the well-known Polish People's Army filmmaker Aleksander Ford in charge. Starting with a few railway carriages full of film equipment taken from the Germans they proceed to train and build a Polish film industry. The FP output was limited; only thirteen features were released between 1947 and its dissolution in 1952, concentrating on Polish suffering at the hands of the Nazis. In 1947 Ford moved to help establish the new National Film School in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, where he taught for 20 years.\nThe industry used imported cameras and film stocks. At first ORWO black and white film stock from East Germany and then Eastman colour negative stock and ORWO print stocks for rushes and release prints. Poland made its own lighting equipment. Because of the high costs of film stock Polish films were shot with very low shooting ratios, the amount of film stock used in shooting the film to length of the finished film. The equipment and film stock were not the best and budgets were modest but the film makers received probably the best training in the world from the Polish Film School. Another advantage was Film Polski's status as a state organisation, so its film-makers had access to all Polish institutions and their cooperation in making their films. Film cameras were able to enter almost every aspect of Polish life.\nThe first film produced in Poland following the World War II was \"Zakazane piosenki\" (1946), directed by Leonard Buczkowski, which was seen by 10.8 million people (out of 23,8 total population) in its initial theatrical run. Buczkowski continued to make films regularly until his death in 1967. Other important films of early post-World War II period were \"The Last Stage\" (1948), directed by Wanda Jakubowska, who continued to make films until the transition from communism to capitalism in 1989, and \"Border Street\" (1949), directed by Aleksander Ford.\nBy the mid 1950s, following the end of Stalinism in Poland, Film production was organised into film groups. A film group was a collection of film makers, led by an experienced film director and consisting of writers, film directors and production managers. They would write scripts, create budgets, apply for funding off the Ministry of Culture and produce the picture. They would hire actors and crew, and use studios and laboratories controlled by Film Polski.\nThe change in political climate gave rise to the Polish Film School movement, a training ground for some of the icons of the world cinematography, e.g., Roman Polanski (\"Knife in the Water\", \"Rosemary's Baby\", \"Frantic\", \"The Pianist\") and Krzysztof Zanussi (a leading director of the so-called \"cinema of moral anxiety\" of the 1970s). Andrzej Wajda's films offer insightful analyses of the universal element of the Polish experience - the struggle to maintain dignity under the most trying circumstances. His films defined several Polish generations. In 2000, Wajda was awarded an honorary Oscar for his overall contribution to cinema. Four of his films were nominated for Best Foreign Language Film award at Academy Awards with seven other Polish directors receiving one nomination each: Roman Pola\u0144ski, Jerzy Kawalerowicz, Jerzy Hoffman, Jerzy Antczak, Agnieszka Holland, Jan Komasa and Jerzy Skolimowski. In 2015, Polish filmmaker Pawe\u0142 Pawlikowski received this award for his film \"Ida\". In 2019, he was also nominated to the award for his next film \"Cold War\" in two categories - Best Foreign Language Film and Best Director.\nIt is also important to note that during the 1980s, the People's Republic of Poland instituted the martial law to vanquish and censor all forms of opposition against the communist rule of the nation, including outlets such as cinema and radio. A notable film to have emerged during this period was Ryszard Bugajski's 1982 film \"Interrogation\" (\"Przesluchanie\"), which depicts the story of an unfortunate woman (played by Krystyna Janda) who is arrested and tortured by the secret police into confessing a crime she knows nothing about. The anti-communist nature of the film brought about the film's over seven-year ban. In 1989, the ban was repealed after the overthrow of the Communist government in Poland, and the film was shown in theaters for the first time later that year. The film is still lauded today for its audacity in depicting the cruelty of the Stalinist regime, as many artists feared persecution during that time.\nIn the 1990s, Krzysztof Kie\u015blowski won a universal acclaim with productions such as \"Dekalog\" (made for television), \"The Double Life of V\u00e9ronique\" and the \"Three Colors\" trilogy. Another of the most famous movies in Poland is Krzysztof Krauze\u2019s \"The Debt\", which became a blockbuster. It showed the brutal reality of Polish capitalism and the growth of poverty. A considerable number of Polish film directors (e.g., Agnieszka Holland and Janusz Kami\u0144ski) have worked in American studios. Polish animated films - like those by Jan Lenica and Zbigniew Rybczy\u0144ski (Oscar, 1983) - drew on a long tradition and continued to derive their inspiration from Poland's graphic arts. Other notable Polish film directors include: Tomasz Bagi\u0144ski, Ma\u0142gorzata Szumowska, Jan Jakub Kolski, Jerzy Kawalerowicz, Stanis\u0142aw Bareja and Janusz Zaorski.\nAmong prominent annual film festivals taking place in Poland are: Warsaw International Film Festival, Camerimage, International Festival of Independent Cinema Off Camera, New Horizons Film Festival as well as Gdynia Film Festival and Polish Film Awards.\nCinema audience.\nThe Communist government invested resources into building a sophisticated cinema audience. All the cinema were state owned and consisted of first run premiere cinema, local cinema and art house cinemas. Tickets were cheap and students and old people received discounts. In the city of Lodz there were 36 cinemas in the 1970s showing films from all over the world. There were the Italian films of Fellini, French comedies, American crime movies such as Don Siegel's \"Charley Varrick\" . Films were shown in their original versions with Polish subtitles. Anti-Communist and Cold War films were not shown, but a bigger restriction was the cost of some films. There were popular film magazines like \"Film\" and \"Screen\", critical magazines such as \"Kino\". This all helped to build a well informed film audience.\nPolish Film Academy.\nThe Polish Film Academy was founded in 2003 in Warsaw and aims to provide native filmmakers a forum for discussion and a way to promote the reputation of Polish cinema through publications, presentations, discussions and regular promotion of the subject in the schools.\nAwards.\nSince 2003, the winners of the Polish Film Awards are elected by the members of the Academy.\nFilm schools.\nSeveral institutions, both government run and private, provide formal education in various aspects of filmmaking.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10790", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10790", "title": "Cinema of Japan", "text": "Filmmaking industry in Japan\nThe has a history that spans more than 100 years. Japan has one of the oldest and largest film industries in the world; as of 2021, it was the fourth largest by number of feature films produced. In 2011, Japan produced 411 feature films that earned 54.9% of a box office total of US$2.338 billion. Films have been produced in Japan since 1897, when the first foreign cameramen arrived.\nDuring the 1950s, a period dubbed the \"Golden Age of Japanese cinema\", the \"jidaigeki\" films of Akira Kurosawa as well as the science fiction films of Ishir\u014d Honda and Eiji Tsuburaya gained Japanese cinema international praise and made these directors universally renown and highly influential. Some of the Japanese films of this period are now rated some of the greatest of all time: \"Tokyo Story\" (1953) ranked number three in \"Sight &amp; Sound\" critics' list of the 100 greatest films of all time and also topped the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" directors' poll of The Top 50 Greatest Films of All Time, dethroning \"Citizen Kane\", while Akira Kurosawa's \"Seven Samurai\" (1954) was voted the greatest foreign-language film of all time in BBC's 2018 poll of 209 critics in 43 countries. Japan has also won the Academy Award for the Best International Feature Film five times, more than any other Asian country.\nJapan's Big Four film studios are Toho, Toei, Shochiku and Kadokawa, which are the only members of the Motion Picture Producers Association of Japan (MPPAJ). The annual Japan Academy Film Prize hosted by the Nippon Academy-sh\u014d Association is considered to be the Japanese equivalent of the Academy Awards.\nHistory.\nEarly silent era.\nThe kinetoscope, first shown commercially by Thomas Edison in the United States in 1894, was first shown in Japan in November 1896. The Vitascope and the Lumi\u00e8re Brothers' Cinematograph were first presented in Japan in early 1897, by businessmen such as Inabata Katsutaro. Lumi\u00e8re cameramen were the first to shoot films in Japan. Moving pictures, however, were not an entirely new experience for the Japanese because of their rich tradition of pre-cinematic devices such as \"gent\u014d\" (\"utsushi-e\") or the magic lantern. The first successful Japanese film in late 1897 showed sights in Tokyo.\nIn 1898, some ghost films were made, such as the Shir\u014d Asano shorts \"Bake Jizo\" (Jizo the Spook / \u5316\u3051\u5730\u8535) and \"Shinin no sosei\" (Resurrection of a Corpse). The first documentary, the short \"Geisha no teodori\" (\u82b8\u8005\u306e\u624b\u8e0a\u308a), was made in June 1899. Tsunekichi Shibata made a number of early films, including \"Momijigari\", an 1899 record of two famous actors performing a scene from a well-known kabuki play. Early films were influenced by traditional theater\u00a0\u2013 for example, kabuki and bunraku.\n20th century.\nAt the dawn of the 20th century, theaters in Japan hired benshi, storytellers who sat next to the screen and narrated silent movies. They were descendants of kabuki j\u014druri, k\u014ddan storytellers, theater barkers and other forms of oral storytelling. Benshi could be accompanied by music like silent films from cinema of the West. With the advent of sound in the early 1930s, the benshi gradually declined.\nIn 1908, Sh\u014dz\u014d Makino, considered the pioneering director of Japanese film, began his influential career with \"Honn\u014dji gassen\" (\u672c\u80fd\u5bfa\u5408\u6226), produced for Yokota Sh\u014dkai. Sh\u014dz\u014d recruited Matsunosuke Onoe, a former kabuki actor, to star in his productions. Onoe became Japan's first film star, appearing in over 1,000 films, mostly shorts, between 1909 and 1926. The pair pioneered the \"jidaigeki\" genre. Tokihiko Okada was a popular romantic lead of the same era.\nThe first Japanese film production studio was built in 1909 by the Yoshizawa Sh\u014dten company in Tokyo.\nThe first female Japanese performer to appear in a film professionally was the dancer/actress Tokuko Nagai Takagi, who appeared in four shorts for the American-based Thanhouser Company between 1911 and 1914.\nAmong intellectuals, critiques of Japanese cinema grew in the 1910s and eventually developed into a movement that transformed Japanese film. Film criticism began with early film magazines such as \"Katsud\u014d shashinkai\" (begun in 1909) and a full-length book written by Yasunosuke Gonda in 1914, but many early film critics often focused on chastising the work of studios like Nikkatsu and Tenkatsu for being too theatrical (using, for instance, elements from kabuki and shinpa such as onnagata) and for not utilizing what were considered more cinematic techniques to tell stories, instead relying on benshi. In what was later named the Pure Film Movement, writers in magazines such as \"Kinema Record\" called for a broader use of such cinematic techniques. Some of these critics, such as Norimasa Kaeriyama, went on to put their ideas into practice by directing such films as \"The Glow of Life\" (1918), which was one of the first films to use actresses (in this case, Harumi Hanayagi). There were parallel efforts elsewhere in the film industry. In his 1917 film \"The Captain's Daughter\", Masao Inoue started using techniques new to the silent film era, such as the close-up and cut back. The Pure Film Movement was central in the development of the gendaigeki and scriptwriting.\nNew studios established around 1920, such as Shochiku and Taikatsu, aided the cause for reform. At Taikatsu, Thomas Kurihara directed films scripted by the novelist Junichiro Tanizaki, who was a strong advocate of film reform. Even Nikkatsu produced reformist films under the direction of Eiz\u014d Tanaka. By the mid-1920s, actresses had replaced onnagata and films used more of the devices pioneered by Inoue. Some of the most discussed silent films from Japan are those of Kenji Mizoguchi, whose later works (including \"Ugetsu\"/\"Ugetsu Monogatari\") retain a very high reputation.\nJapanese films gained popularity in the mid-1920s against foreign films, in part fueled by the popularity of movie stars and a new style of jidaigeki. Directors such as Daisuke It\u014d and Masahiro Makino made samurai films like \"A Diary of Chuji's Travels\" and \"Roningai\" featuring rebellious antiheroes in fast-cut fight scenes that were both critically acclaimed and commercial successes. Some stars, such as Tsumasaburo Bando, Kanj\u016br\u014d Arashi, Chiez\u014d Kataoka, Takako Irie and Utaemon Ichikawa, were inspired by Makino Film Productions and formed their own independent production companies where directors such as Hiroshi Inagaki, Mansaku Itami and Sadao Yamanaka honed their skills. Director Teinosuke Kinugasa created a production company to produce the experimental masterpiece \"A Page of Madness\", starring Masao Inoue, in 1926. Many of these companies, while surviving during the silent era against major studios like Nikkatsu, Shochiku, Teikine, and Toa Studios, could not survive the cost involved in converting to sound.\nWith the rise of left-wing political movements and labor unions at the end of the 1920s, there arose so-called tendency films with left-leaning tendencies. Directors Kenji Mizoguchi, Daisuke It\u014d, Shigeyoshi Suzuki, and Tomu Uchida were prominent examples. In contrast to these commercially produced 35 mm films, the Marxist Proletarian Film League of Japan (Prokino) made works independently in smaller gauges (such as 9.5mm and 16mm), with more radical intentions. Tendency films suffered from severe censorship heading into the 1930s, and Prokino members were arrested and the movement effectively crushed. Such moves by the government had profound effects on the expression of political dissent in 1930s cinema. Films from this period include: \"Sakanaya Honda, Jitsuroku Chushingura, Horaijima, Orochi, Maboroshi, Kurutta Ippeji, Jujiro, \", and \"Kurama Tengu\".\nA later version of \"The Captain's Daughter\" was one of the first talkie films. It used the Mina Talkie System. The Japanese film industry later split into two groups; one retained the Mina Talkie System, while the other used the Eastphone Talkie System used to make Tojo Masaki's films.\nThe 1923 earthquake, the bombing of Tokyo during World War II, and the natural effects of time and Japan's humidity on flammable and unstable nitrate film have resulted in a great dearth of surviving films from this period.\nUnlike in the West, silent films were still being produced in Japan well into the 1930s; as late as 1938, a third of Japanese films were silent. For instance, Yasujir\u014d Ozu's \"An Inn in Tokyo\" (1935), considered a precursor to the neorealism genre, was a silent film. A few Japanese sound shorts were made in the 1920s and 1930s, but Japan's first feature-length talkie was \"Fujiwara Yoshie no furusato\" (1930), which used the \"Mina Talkie System\". Notable talkies of this period include Mikio Naruse's \"Wife, Be Like A Rose!\" (\"Tsuma Yo Bara No Yoni\", 1935), which was one of the first Japanese films to gain a theatrical release in the U.S.; Kenji Mizoguchi's \"Sisters of the Gion\" (\"Gion no shimai\", 1936); \"Osaka Elegy\" (1936); \"The Story of the Last Chrysanthemums\" (1939); and Sadao Yamanaka's \"Humanity and Paper Balloons\" (1937).\nFilm criticism shared this vitality, with many film journals such as \"Kinema Junpo\" and newspapers printing detailed discussions of the cinema of the day, both at home and abroad. A cultured \"impressionist\" criticism pursued by critics such as Tadashi Iijima, Fuyuhiko Kitagawa, and Matsuo Kishi was dominant, but opposed by leftist critics such as Akira Iwasaki and Genj\u016b Sasa who sought an ideological critique of films.\nThe 1930s also saw increased government involvement in cinema, which was symbolized by the passing of the Film Law, which gave the state more authority over the film industry, in 1939. The government encouraged some forms of cinema, producing propaganda films and promoting documentary films (also called \"bunka eiga\" or \"culture films\"), with important documentaries being made by directors such as Fumio Kamei. Realism was in favor; film theorists such as Taihei Imamura and Heiichi Sugiyama advocated for documentary or realist drama, while directors such as Hiroshi Shimizu and Tomotaka Tasaka produced fiction films that were strongly realistic in style. Films reinforced the importance of traditional Japanese values against the rise of the Westernised modern girl, a character epitomised by Shizue Tatsuta in Ozu's 1930 film \"Young Lady\".\nWartime movies.\nBecause of World War II and the weak economy, unemployment became widespread in Japan, and the cinema industry suffered.\nDuring this period, when Japan was expanding its Empire, the Japanese government saw cinema as a propaganda tool to show the glory and invincibility of the Empire of Japan. Thus, many films from this period depict patriotic and militaristic themes. In 1942, Kajiro Yamamoto's film \"The War at Sea from Hawaii to Malaya\" portrayed the attack on Pearl Harbor; the film made use of special effects directed by Eiji Tsuburaya, including a miniature scale model of Pearl Harbor itself.\nYoshiko Yamaguchi was a very popular actress. She rose to international stardom with 22 wartime movies. The Manchukuo Film Association let her use the Chinese name Li Xianglan so she could represent Chinese roles in Japanese propaganda movies. After the war she used her official Japanese name and starred in an additional 29 movies. She was elected as a member of the Japanese parliament in the 1970s and served for 18 years.\nAkira Kurosawa made his feature film debut with \"Sugata Sanshiro\" in 1943.\nAmerican occupation and Post-war period.\nIn 1945, Japan was defeated in World War II, the rule of Japan by the SCAP (Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers) began. Movies produced in Japan were managed by GHQ's subordinate organization CIE (Civil Information Educational Section, \u6c11\u9593\u60c5\u5831\u6559\u80b2\u5c40). This management system lasted until 1952, and it was the first time in the Japanese movie world that management and control by a foreign institution was implemented. During the planning and scripting stages it was translated to English, only the movies approved by the CIE were produced. For example, Akira Kurosawa's \u201cAkatsuki no Dass\u014d\u201d (1950) was originally a work depicting a Korean military comfort woman starring Yoshiko Yamaguchi, but with dozens of CIE censorship, it became an original work. The completed film was censored a second time by a CCD (Civil Censorship Detachment). The censorship was also carried out retroactively to past movie works. Japan was exposed to over a decade's worth of American animation that were banned under the war-time government.\nFurthermore, as part of the occupation policy, the issue of responsibility for war spread to the film industry, and when voices of banning war cooperators in movie production during the war began to be expressed, Nagamasa Kawakita, Kanichi Negishi, Shiro Kido in 1947, the person who was involved in such high-motion films was exiled. However, as in other genre pursuits, the position of responsibility for war has been dealt with vaguely in the film industry, and the above measures were lifted in 1950.\nThe first movie released after the war was \u201cSoyokaze\u201d (\u305d\u3088\u304b\u305c) 1945 by Yasushi Sasaki, and the theme song \u201cRingo no Uta\u201d by Michiko Namiki was a big hit.\nIn the production ban list promulgated in 1945 by CIE's David Conde, nationalism, patriotism, suicide and slaughter, brutal violent movies, etc. became prohibited items, making the production of historical drama virtually impossible . As a result, actors who have been using historical drama as their business appeared in contemporary drama. This includes Chiez\u014d Kataoka's \u201cBannai Tarao\u201d (1946), Tsumasabur\u014d Band\u014d's \u201cTorn Drum (\u7834\u308c\u592a\u9f13)\u201d (1949), Hiroshi Inagaki's \u201cThe Child Holding Hands (\u624b\u3092\u3064\u306a\u3050\u5b50\u7b49)\u201d, and Daisuke It\u014d's \u201cKing (\u738b\u5c06)\u201d.\nIn addition, many propaganda films were produced as democratic courtesy works recommended by SCAP. Significant movies among them are, Setsuko Hara appeared in Akira Kurosawa's \"No Regrets for Our Youth\" (1946), K\u014dzabur\u014d Yoshimura's \"A Ball at the Anjo House\" (1947), Tadashi Imai's \"Aoi sanmyaku\" (1949), etc. It gained national popularity as a star symbolizing the beginning of a new era. In Yasushi Sasaki's \"Hatachi no Seishun\" (1946), the first kiss scene of a Japanese movie was filmed. The Mainichi Film Award was also created in 1946.\nThe first collaborations between Akira Kurosawa and actor Toshiro Mifune were \"Drunken Angel\" in 1948 and \"Stray Dog\" in 1949. Yasujir\u014d Ozu directed the critically and commercially successful \"Late Spring\" in 1949.\nThe 1950s are widely considered the Golden Age of Japanese cinema. Three Japanese films from this decade (\"Rashomon\", \"Seven Samurai\" and \"Tokyo Story\") appeared in the top ten of \"Sight &amp; Sound\"'s critics' and directors' polls for the best films of all time in 2002. They also appeared in the 2012 polls, with \"Tokyo Story\" (1953) dethroning \"Citizen Kane\" at the top of the 2012 directors' poll.\nWar movies restricted by SCAP began to be produced, Hideo Sekigawa's \u201cListen to the Voices of the Sea\u201d (1950), Tadashi Imai's \u201cHimeyuri no T\u00f4 - Tower of the Lilies\u201d (1953), Keisuke Kinoshita's \u201cTwenty-Four Eyes\u201d (1954), \u201c Kon Ichikawa's \u201cThe Burmese Harp\u201d (1956), and other works aimed at the tragic and sentimental retrospective of the war experience, one after another, It became a social influence. Other Nostalgia films such as Battleship Yamato (1953) and Eagle of the Pacific (1953) were also mass-produced. Under these circumstances, movies such as \"Emperor Meiji and the Russo-Japanese War (\u660e\u6cbb\u5929\u7687\u3068\u65e5\u9732\u5927\u6226\u4e89)\" (1957), where Kanj\u016br\u014d Arashi played Emperor Meiji, also appeared. It was a situation that was unthinkable before the war, the commercialization of the Emperor who was supposed to be sacred and inviolable.\nThe period after the American Occupation led to a rise in diversity in movie distribution thanks to the increased output and popularity of the film studios of Toho, Daiei, Shochiku, Nikkatsu, and Toei. This period gave rise to the six great artists of Japanese cinema: Masaki Kobayashi, Akira Kurosawa, Ishir\u014d Honda, Eiji Tsuburaya, Kenji Mizoguchi, and Yasujir\u014d Ozu. Each director dealt with the effects the war and subsequent occupation by America in unique and innovative ways. During this decade, the works of Kurosawa, Honda, and Tsuburaya would become the first Japanese films to be widely distributed in foreign theaters.\nThe decade started with Akira Kurosawa's \"Rashomon\" (1950), which won the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival in 1951 and the Academy Honorary Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 1952, and marked the entrance of Japanese cinema onto the world stage. It was also the breakout role for legendary star Toshiro Mifune. In 1953, \"Entotsu no mieru basho\" by Heinosuke Gosho was in competition at the 3rd Berlin International Film Festival.\nThe first Japanese film in color was \"Carmen Comes Home\" directed by Keisuke Kinoshita and released in 1951. There was also a black-and-white version of this film available. \"Tokyo File 212\" (1951) was the first American feature film to be shot entirely in Japan. The lead roles were played by Florence Marly and Robert Peyton. It featured the geisha Ichimaru in a short cameo. Suzuki Ikuzo's Tonichi Enterprises Company co-produced the film. \"Gate of Hell\", a 1953 film by Teinosuke Kinugasa, was the first movie that filmed using Eastmancolor film, \"Gate of Hell\" was both Daiei's first color film and the first Japanese color movie to be released outside Japan, receiving an Academy Honorary Award in 1954 for Best Costume Design by Sanzo Wada and an Honorary Award for Best Foreign Language Film. It also won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival, the first Japanese film to achieve that honour.\nThe year 1954 saw two of Japan's most influential films released. The first was the Kurosawa epic \"Seven Samurai\", about a band of hired samurai who protect a helpless village from a rapacious gang of thieves. The same year, Kurosawa's friend and college Ishir\u014d Honda directed the anti-nuclear monster-drama \"Godzilla\", featuring award-winning effects by Eiji Tsuburaya. The latter film was first ever Japanese film to be given a wide release throughout the United States, where it was heavily re-edited, and featured new footage with actor Raymond Burr for its distribution in 1956 as \"Godzilla, King of the Monsters!\". Although it was edited for its Western release, Godzilla became an international icon of Japan and spawned an entire subgenre of \"kaiju\" films, as well as the longest-running film franchise in history. Also in 1954, another Kurosawa film, \"Ikiru\" was in competition at the 4th Berlin International Film Festival.\nIn 1955, Hiroshi Inagaki won an Academy Honorary Award for Best Foreign Language Film for of his \"Samurai\" trilogy and in 1958 won the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival for \"Rickshaw Man\". Kon Ichikawa directed two anti-war dramas: \"The Burmese Harp\" (1956), which was nominated for Best Foreign Language Film at the Academy Awards, and \"Fires On The Plain\" (1959), along with \"Enjo\" (1958), which was adapted from Yukio Mishima's novel \"Temple Of The Golden Pavilion\". Masaki Kobayashi made three films which would collectively become known as \"The Human Condition Trilogy\": \"No Greater Love\" (1959), and \"The Road To Eternity\" (1959). The trilogy was completed in 1961, with \"A Soldier's Prayer\".\nKenji Mizoguchi, who died in 1956, ended his career with a series of masterpieces including \"The Life of Oharu\" (1952), \"Ugetsu\" (1953) and \"Sansho the Bailiff\" (1954). He won the Silver Bear at the Venice Film Festival for \"Ugetsu\". Mizoguchi's films often deal with the tragedies inflicted on women by Japanese society. Mikio Naruse made \"Repast\" (1950), \"Late Chrysanthemums\" (1954), \"The Sound of the Mountain\" (1954) and \"Floating Clouds\" (1955). Yasujir\u014d Ozu began directing color films beginning with \"Equinox Flower\" (1958), and later \"Good Morning\" (1959) and \"Floating Weeds\" (1958), which was adapted from his earlier silent \"A Story of Floating Weeds\" (1934), and was shot by \"Rashomon\" and \"Sansho the Bailiff\" cinematographer Kazuo Miyagawa.\nThe Blue Ribbon Awards were established in 1950. The first winner for Best Film was \"Until We Meet Again\" by Tadashi Imai.\nThe number of films produced, and the cinema audience reached a peak in the 1960s. Most films were shown in double bills, with one half of the bill being a \"program picture\" or B-movie. A typical program picture was shot in four weeks. The demand for these program pictures in quantity meant the growth of film series such as \"The Hoodlum Soldier\" or \"Akumyo\".\nThe huge level of activity of 1960s Japanese cinema also resulted in many classics. Akira Kurosawa directed the 1961 classic \"Yojimbo\". Yasujir\u014d Ozu made his final film, \"An Autumn Afternoon\", in 1962. Mikio Naruse directed the wide screen melodrama \"When a Woman Ascends the Stairs\" in 1960; his final film was 1967's \"Scattered Clouds\".\nKon Ichikawa captured the watershed 1964 Olympics in his three-hour documentary \"Tokyo Olympiad\" (1965). Seijun Suzuki was fired by Nikkatsu for \"making films that don't make any sense and don't make any money\" after his surrealist yakuza flick \"Branded to Kill\" (1967).\nThe 1960s were the peak years of the \"Japanese New Wave\" movement, which began in the 1950s and continued through the early 1970s. Nagisa Oshima, Kaneto Shindo, Masahiro Shinoda, Susumu Hani and Shohei Imamura emerged as major filmmakers during the decade. Oshima's \"Cruel Story of Youth\", \"Night and Fog in Japan\" and \"Death By Hanging\", along with Shindo's \"Onibaba\", Hani's \"Kanojo to kare\" and Imamura's \"The Insect Woman\", became some of the better-known examples of Japanese New Wave filmmaking. Documentary played a crucial role in the New Wave, as directors such as Hani, Kazuo Kuroki, Toshio Matsumoto, and Hiroshi Teshigahara moved from documentary into fiction film, while feature filmmakers like Oshima and Imamura also made documentaries. Shinsuke Ogawa and Noriaki Tsuchimoto became the most important documentarists: \"two figures [that] tower over the landscape of Japanese documentary.\"\nTeshigahara's \"Woman in the Dunes\" (1964) won the Special Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival, and was nominated for Best Director and Best Foreign Language Film Oscars. Masaki Kobayashi's \"Kwaidan\" (1965) also picked up the Special Jury Prize at Cannes and received a nomination for Best Foreign Language Film at the Academy Awards. \"Bushido, Samurai Saga\" by Tadashi Imai won the Golden Bear at the 13th Berlin International Film Festival. \"Immortal Love\" by Keisuke Kinoshita and \"Twin Sisters of Kyoto\" and \"Portrait of Chieko\", both by Noboru Nakamura, also received nominations for Best Foreign Language Film at the Academy Awards. \"Lost Spring\", also by Nakamura, was in competition for the Golden Bear at the 17th Berlin International Film Festival.\nThe 1970s saw the cinema audience drop due to the spread of television. Total audience declined from 1.2 billion in 1960 to 0.2 billion in 1980.\nFilm companies fought back in various ways, such as the bigger budget films of Kadokawa Pictures, or including increasingly sexual or violent content and language which could not be shown on television. The resulting pink film industry became the stepping stone for many young independent filmmakers. The seventies also saw the start of the \"idol eiga\", films starring young \"idols\", who would bring in audiences due to their fame and popularity.\nToshiya Fujita made the revenge film \"Lady Snowblood\" in 1973. In the same year, Yoshishige Yoshida made the film \"Coup d'\u00c9tat\", a portrait of Ikki Kita, the leader of the Japanese coup of February 1936. Its experimental cinematography and mise-en-sc\u00e8ne, as well as its avant-garde score by Toshi Ichiyanagi, garnered it wide critical acclaim within Japan.\nIn 1976, the Hochi Film Award was created. The first winner for Best Film was \"The Inugamis\" by Kon Ichikawa. Nagisa Oshima directed \"In the Realm of the Senses\" (1976), a film detailing a crime of passion involving Sada Abe set in the 1930s. Controversial for its explicit sexual content, it has never been seen uncensored in Japan.\nKinji Fukasaku completed the epic \"Battles Without Honor and Humanity\" series of yakuza films. Yoji Yamada introduced the commercially successful \"Tora-San\" series, while also directing other films, notably the popular \"The Yellow Handkerchief\", which won the first Japan Academy Prize for Best Film in 1978. New wave filmmakers Susumu Hani and Sh\u014dhei Imamura retreated to documentary work, though Imamura made a dramatic return to feature filmmaking with \"Vengeance Is Mine\" (1979).\n\"Dodes'ka-den\" by Akira Kurosawa and \"Sandakan No. 8\" by Kei Kumai were nominated to the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.\nThe 1980s saw the decline of the major Japanese film studios and their associated chains of cinemas, with major studios Toho and Toei barely staying in business, Shochiku supported almost solely by the \"Otoko wa tsurai yo\" films, and Nikkatsu declining even further.\nOf the older generation of directors, Akira Kurosawa directed \"Kagemusha\" (1980), which won the Palme d'Or at the 1980 Cannes Film Festival, and \"Ran\" (1985). Seijun Suzuki made a comeback beginning with \"Zigeunerweisen\" in 1980. Shohei Imamura won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival for \"The Ballad of Narayama\" (1983). Yoshishige Yoshida made \"A Promise\" (1986), his first film since 1973's \"Coup d'\u00c9tat\".\nNew directors who appeared in the 1980s include actor Juzo Itami, who directed his first film, \"The Funeral\", in 1984, and achieved critical and box office success with \"Tampopo\" in 1985. Shinji S\u014dmai, an artistically inclined populist director who made films like the youth-focused \"Typhoon Club\", and the critically acclaimed Roman porno \"Love Hotel\" among others. Kiyoshi Kurosawa, who would generate international attention beginning in the mid-1990s, made his initial debut with pink films and genre horror.\nDuring the 1980s, anime rose in popularity, with new animated movies released every summer and winter, often based upon popular anime television series. Mamoru Oshii released his landmark \"Angel's Egg\" in 1985. Hayao Miyazaki adapted his manga series \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of Wind\" into a feature film of the same name in 1984. Katsuhiro Otomo followed suit by adapting his own manga \"Akira\" into a feature film of the same name in 1988.\nHome video made possible the creation of a direct-to-video film industry.\nMini theaters, a type of independent movie theater characterized by a smaller size and seating capacity in comparison to larger movie theaters, gained popularity during the 1980s. Mini theaters helped bring independent and arthouse films from other countries, as well as films produced in Japan by unknown Japanese filmmakers, to Japanese audiences.\nHeisei period.\nBecause of economic recessions, the number of movie theaters in Japan had been steadily decreasing since the 1960s. The 1990s saw the reversal of this trend and the introduction of the multiplex in Japan. At the same time, the popularity of mini theaters continued.\nTakeshi Kitano emerged as a significant filmmaker with works such as \"Sonatine\" (1993), \"Kids Return\" (1996) and \"Hana-bi\" (1997), which was given the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival. Sh\u014dhei Imamura again won the Golden Palm (shared with Iranian director Abbas Kiarostami), this time for \"The Eel\" (1997). He became the fifth two-time recipient, joining Alf Sj\u00f6berg, Francis Ford Coppola, Emir Kusturica and Bille August.\nKiyoshi Kurosawa gained international recognition following the release of \"Cure\" (1997). Takashi Miike launched a prolific career with titles such as \"Audition\" (1999), \"Dead or Alive\" (1999) and \"The Bird People in China\" (1998). Former documentary filmmaker Hirokazu Koreeda launched an acclaimed feature career with \"Maborosi\" (1996) and \"After Life\" (1999).\nHayao Miyazaki directed two mammoth box office and critical successes, \"Porco Rosso\" (1992)\u00a0\u2013 which beat \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" (1982) as the highest-grossing film in Japan\u00a0\u2013 and \"Princess Mononoke\" (1997), which also claimed the top box office spot until \"Titanic\" (1997).\nSeveral new anime directors rose to widespread recognition, bringing with them notions of anime as not only entertainment, but modern art. Mamoru Oshii released the internationally acclaimed philosophical science fiction action film \"Ghost in the Shell\" in 1996. Satoshi Kon directed the award-winning psychological thriller \"Perfect Blue\". Hideaki Anno also gained considerable recognition with \"The End of Evangelion\" in 1997.\nIn the beginning of 21st century, Japan has been referenced numerous times in popular culture, which was a relatively successful one for Japanese film industry. The country has appeared as a setting and topic multiple times in film, poetry, television, and music. The number of films being shown in Japan steadily increased, with about 821 films released in 2006. Films based on Japanese television series were especially popular during this period. Anime films now accounted for 60 percent of Japanese film production. The 1990s and 2000s are considered to be \"Japanese Cinema's Second Golden Age\", due to the immense popularity of anime, both within Japan and overseas.\nAlthough not a commercial success, \"All About Lily Chou-Chou\" directed by Shunji Iwai was honored at the Berlin, the Yokohama and the Shanghai Film Festivals in 2001. Takeshi Kitano appeared in \"Battle Royale\" and directed and starred in \"Dolls\" and \"Zatoichi\". Several horror films, \"Kairo\", \"Dark Water\", \"Yogen\", the \"Grudge\" series and \"One Missed Call\" met with commercial success. In 2004, \"\", directed by Ryuhei Kitamura, was released to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Godzilla. In 2005, director Seijun Suzuki made his 56th film, \"Princess Raccoon\". Hirokazu Koreeda claimed film festival awards around the world with two of his films \"Distance\" and \"Nobody Knows\". Female film director Naomi Kawase's film \"The Mourning Forest\" won the Grand Prix at the Cannes Film Festival in 2007. Yoji Yamada, director of the Otoko wa Tsurai yo series, made a trilogy of acclaimed revisionist samurai films, 2002's \"Twilight Samurai\", followed by \"The Hidden Blade\" in 2004 and \"Love and Honor\" in 2006. In 2008, \"Departures\" won the Academy Award for best foreign language film.\nIn anime, Hayao Miyazaki directed \"Spirited Away\" in 2001, breaking Japanese box office records and winning several awards\u2014including the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature in 2003\u2014followed by \"Howl's Moving Castle\" and \"Ponyo\" in 2004 and 2008 respectively. In 2004, Mamoru Oshii released the anime movie \"\" which received critical praise around the world. His 2008 film \"The Sky Crawlers\" was met with similarly positive international reception. Satoshi Kon also released three quieter, but nonetheless highly successful films: \"Millennium Actress\", \"Tokyo Godfathers\", and \"Paprika\". Katsuhiro Otomo released \"Steamboy\", his first animated project since the 1995 short film compilation \"Memories\", in 2004. In collaboration with Studio 4C, American director Michael Arias released \"Tekkon Kinkreet\" in 2008, to international acclaim. After several years of directing primarily lower-key live-action films, Hideaki Anno formed his own production studio and revisited his still-popular \"Evangelion\" franchise with the \"Rebuild of Evangelion\" tetralogy, a new series of films providing an alternate retelling of the original story.\nSome Hollywood directors have turned to Tokyo as a backdrop for movies set in Japan. Post-war period examples include Tokyo Joe, My Geisha, Tokyo Story and the James Bond film You Only Live Twice; recent examples include Lost in Translation and The Last Samurai (both in 2003), and and The Day After Tomorrow (all in 2004), Memoirs of a Geisha (2005), and Babel (both in 2006), The Day the Earth Stood Still (2008), 2012 (2009), Inception (2010), Emperor (2012), Pacific Rim and The Wolverine (both in 2013), Geostorm (2017), and (2019).\nSince February 2000, the Japan Film Commission Promotion Council was established. On November 16, 2001, the Japanese Foundation for the Promotion of the Arts laws were presented to the House of Representatives. These laws were intended to promote the production of media arts, including film scenery, and stipulate that the government\u00a0\u2013 on both the national and local levels\u00a0\u2013 must lend aid in order to preserve film media. The laws were passed on November 30 and came into effect on December 7. In 2003, at a gathering for the Agency of Cultural Affairs, twelve policies were proposed in a written report to allow public-made films to be promoted and shown at the Film Center of the National Museum of Modern Art.\nFour films have so far received international recognition by being selected to compete in major film festivals: \"Caterpillar\" by K\u014dji Wakamatsu was in competition for the Golden Bear at the 60th Berlin International Film Festival and won the Silver Bear for Best Actress, \"Outrage\" by Takeshi Kitano was In Competition for the Palme d'Or at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival, \"Himizu\" by Sion Sono was in competition for the Golden Lion at the 68th Venice International Film Festival.\nIn March 2011, Japanese film and television industry was afflicted by the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami and the subsequent Fukushima nuclear disaster, which was greatly suffered due to ongoing triple disaster. However, many Japanese studios were officially closed or reorganized to prevent the triple disaster. As of result, many of Japanese studios began to reopen and production rates have increased.\nIn October 2011 (after fully reopening of Japanese film and television industry), Takashi Miike's \"\" was In Competition for the Palme d'Or at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival, the first 3D film ever to screen In Competition at Cannes. The film was co-produced by British independent producer Jeremy Thomas, who had successfully broken Japanese titles such as Nagisa Oshima's \"Merry Christmas, Mr Lawrence\" and \" Taboo\", Takeshi Kitano's \"Brother\", and Miike's \"13 Assassins\" onto the international stage as producer.\nIn 2018, Hirokazu Kore-eda won the Palme d'Or for his movie \"Shoplifters\" at the 71st Cannes Film Festival, a festival that also featured Ry\u016bsuke Hamaguchi's \"Asako I &amp; II\" in competition.\nReiwa period.\nThe 2020 Japanese epic disaster drama film Fukushima 50, released on 6 March 2020, directed by Setsur\u014d Wakamatsu and written by Y\u014dichi Maekawa. The film is based on the book by Ryusho Kadota, titled \"On the Brink: The Inside Story of Fukushima Daiichi\", and it is the first Japanese film to depict the disaster.\nIn early 2020, Japanese film and television industry was afflicted by COVID-19 pandemic, which was greatly suffered due to health requirements, citing gave the nation its worst day of film and television industry impacted by health crisis since the end of World War II, and also were forced to suspend filming in an effort to keep their respective cast and crews safe from the infection. From the first (of many) 'health lockdowns' until the end of September 2021, many Japanese studios were closed or reorganized to suit the legal requirements for spread prevention.\nIn October 2020 (after the reopening film industry), a Japanese anime film ' based on the ' manga series broke all box-office records in the country, becoming the highest-grossing film of all time in Japan, the highest-grossing Japanese film of all time and the highest-grossing film of 2020.\nIn October 2021 (As Japan ahead of \"Living with COVID-19 endemic phase\"), a Japanese drama-road film Drive My Car won Best Foreign Language Film at the 79th Golden Globe Awards and received the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film at the 94th Academy Awards.\nFilm theorists.\nFilm scholars experts in Japanese cinema include:\nJavanese\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10791", "revid": "5973758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10791", "title": "Cinema of China", "text": "The cinema of China is one of three distinct historical threads of Chinese-language cinema together with the cinema of Hong Kong and the cinema of Taiwan.\nCinema was introduced in China in 1896 and the first Chinese film, \"Dingjun Mountain\", was made in 1905. In the early decades the film industry was centered on Shanghai. The 1920s was dominated by small studios and commercial films, especially in the action wuxia genre. The first sound film, \"Sing-Song Girl Red Peony\", using the sound-on-disc technology, was made in 1931. The 1930s, considered the first \"Golden Period\" of Chinese cinema, saw the advent of the leftist cinematic movement. The dispute between Nationalists and Communists was reflected in the films produced. After the Japanese invasion of China and the occupation of Shanghai, the industry in the city was severely curtailed, with filmmakers moving to Hong Kong, Chungking (Chongqing) and other places. A \"Solitary Island\" period began in Shanghai, where the filmmakers who remained worked in the foreign concessions. \"Princess Iron Fan\" (1941), the first Chinese animated feature film, was released at the end of this period. It influenced wartime Japanese animation and later Osamu Tezuka. After being completely engulfed by the occupation in 1941, and until the end of the war in 1945, the film industry in the city was under Japanese control.\nAfter the end of the war, a second golden age took place, with production in Shanghai resuming. \"Spring in a Small Town\" (1948) was named the best Chinese-language film at the 24th Hong Kong Film Awards. After the communist revolution in 1949, domestic films that were already released and a selection of foreign films were banned in 1951, marking a tirade of film censorship in China. Despite this, movie attendance increased sharply. During the Cultural Revolution, the film industry was severely restricted, coming almost to a standstill from 1967 to 1972. The industry flourished following the end of the Cultural Revolution, including the \"scar dramas\" of the 1980s, such as \"Evening Rain\" (1980), \"Legend of Tianyun Mountain\" (1980) and \"Hibiscus Town\" (1986), depicting the emotional traumas left by the period. Starting in the mid to late 1980s, with films such as \"One and Eight\" (1983) and \"Yellow Earth\" (1984), the rise of the Fifth Generation brought increased popularity to Chinese cinema abroad, especially among Western arthouse audiences. Films like \"Red Sorghum\" (1987), \"The Story of Qiu Ju\" (1992) and \"Farewell My Concubine\" (1993) won major international awards. The movement partially ended after the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre. The post-1990 period saw the rise of the Sixth Generation and post-Sixth Generation, both mostly making films outside the main Chinese film system which played mostly on the international film festival circuit.\nFollowing the international commercial success of films such as \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" (2000) and \"Hero\" (2002), the number of co-productions in Chinese-language cinema has increased and there has been a movement of Chinese-language cinema into a domain of large scale international influence. After \"The Dream Factory\" (1997) demonstrated the viability of the commercial model, and with the growth of the Chinese box office in the new millennium, Chinese films have broken box office records and, as of January 2017, 5 of the top 10 highest-grossing films in China are domestic productions. \"Lost in Thailand\" (2012) was the first Chinese film to reach \u00a5 at the Chinese box office. \"Monster Hunt\" (2015) was the first to reach \u00a5. \"The Mermaid\" (2016) was the first to \u00a5. \"Wolf Warrior 2\" (2017) beat them out to become the highest-grossing film in China.\nChina is the home of the largest movie and drama production complex and film studios in the world, the Oriental Movie Metropolis and Hengdian World Studios, and in 2010 it had the third largest film industry by number of feature films produced annually. In 2012 the country became the second-largest market in the world by box office receipts. In 2016, the gross box office in China was \u00a5 (US$). The country has the largest number of screens in the world since 2016, and is expected to become the largest theatrical market by 2019. China has also become a major hub of business for Hollywood studios.\nIn November 2016, China passed a film law banning content deemed harmful to the \"dignity, honor and interests\" of the People's Republic and encouraging the promotion of \"socialist core values\", approved by the National People's Congress Standing Committee. Due to industry regulations, films are typically allowed to stay in theaters for one month. However, studios may apply to regulators to have the limit extended.\nAs Chinese audiences have become increasingly interested in Chinese-language films produced domestically, production values in domestic films have been rising. According to the research firm Ampere Analysis, domestic films accounted for 85% of China's box office in 2020. Aynne Kokas, a media studies professor at the University of Virginia and author of the book \"Hollywood Made in China\" stated that, \"There are Chinese blockbusters that Chinese filmmakers are making that people want to watch, and they feel less derivative than those made in Hollywood.\" The high box office earnings of 2021 Chinese films like \"Hi, Mom\" and \"The Battle at Lake Changjin\" has indicated that the Chinese domestic film industry has reached self-reliance and does not need international audience appeal to produce commercially successful films.\nRecent patriotic films have been labelled as propaganda films by western mainstream media. However Richard Pe\u00f1a, a lecturer at Columbia University's School of the Arts in New York told VOA in regards to the claim of \"propaganda\" label that it was more a matter of perspective of \"the beholder\". Ian Huffer, Senior Lecturer in Media Studies at Massey University, added that \"Most recent Chinese blockbusters that have been characterised as propaganda by Western journalism are really more like those Hollywood films over the years that have used military conflicts to evoke jingoist feeling or that show the US saving the world from global catastrophe\".\nBeginnings.\nMotion pictures were introduced to China in 1896. China was one of the earliest countries to be exposed to the medium of film, due to Louis Lumi\u00e8re sending his cameraman to Shanghai a year after inventing cinematography. The first recorded screening of a motion picture in China took place in Shanghai on 11 August 1896, as an \"act\" on a variety bill. The first Chinese film, a recording of the Peking opera, \"Dingjun Mountain\", was made in November 1905 in Beijing. For the next decade the production companies were mainly foreign-owned, and the domestic film industry was centered on Shanghai, a thriving entrepot and the largest city in the Far East. In 1913, the first independent Chinese screenplay, \"The Difficult Couple\", was filmed in Shanghai by Zheng Zhengqiu and Zhang Shichuan. Zhang Shichuan then set up the first Chinese-owned film production company in 1916. The first full-length feature film was \"Yan Ruisheng\" () released in 1921. which was a docudrama about the killing of a Shanghai courtesan, although it was too crude a film to ever be considered commercially successful. During the 1920s film technicians from the United States trained Chinese technicians in Shanghai, and American influence continued to be felt there for the next two decades. Since film was still in its earliest stages of development, most Chinese silent films at this time were only comic skits or operatic shorts, and training was minimal at a technical aspect due to this being a period of experimental film.\nLater, after trial and error, China was able to draw inspiration from its own traditional values and began producing martial arts films, with the first being \"Burning of Red Lotus Temple\" (1928). \"Burning of Red Lotus Temple\" was so successful at the box office, the Star Motion Pictures (Mingxing) production later filmed 18 sequels, marking the beginning of China's esteemed martial arts films. Many imitators followed, including U. Lien (Youlian) Studio's \"Red Heroine\" (1929), which is still extant. It was during this period that some of the more important production companies first came into being, notably Mingxing and the Shaw brothers' Tianyi (\"Unique\"). Mingxing, founded by Zheng Zhengqiu and Zhang Shichuan in 1922, initially focused on comic shorts, including the oldest surviving complete Chinese film, \"Laborer's Love\" (1922). This soon shifted, however, to feature-length films and family dramas including \"Orphan Rescues Grandfather\" (1923). Meanwhile, Tianyi shifted their model towards folklore dramas, and also pushed into foreign markets; their film \"White Snake\" (1926) proved a typical example of their success in the Chinese communities of Southeast Asia. In 1931, the first Chinese sound film \"Sing-Song Girl Red Peony\" was made, the product of a cooperation between the Mingxing Film Company's image production and Path\u00e9 Fr\u00e8res's sound technology. However, the sound was disc-recorded, which was then played in the theatre in-sync with the action on the screen. The first sound-on-film talkie made in China was either \"Spring on Stage\" (\u6b4c\u5834\u6625\u8272) by Tianyi, or \"Clear Sky After Storm\" by Great China Studio and Jinan Studio. Musical films, such as \"Song at Midnight\" (1937) and \"Street Angels\" (1937), starring Zhou Xuan, became one of the most popular film genres in China.\nLeftist movement.\nHowever, the first truly important Chinese films were produced beginning in the 1930s, with the advent of the \"progressive\" or \"left-wing\" movement, like Cheng Bugao's \"Spring Silkworms\" (1933), Wu Yonggang's \"The Goddess\" (1934), and Sun Yu's \"The Great Road\", also known as \"The Big Road\" (1934). These films were noted for their emphasis on class struggle and external threats (i.e. Japanese aggression), as well as on their focus on common people, such as a family of silk farmers in \"Spring Silkworms\" and a prostitute in \"The Goddess\". In part due to the success of these kinds of films, this post-1930 era is now often referred to as the first \"golden period\" of Chinese cinema. The Leftist cinematic movement often revolved around the Western-influenced Shanghai, where filmmakers portrayed the struggling lower class of an overpopulated city.\nThree production companies dominated the market in the early to mid- 1930s: the newly formed Lianhua (\"United China\"), the older and larger Mingxing and Tianyi. Both Mingxing and Lianhua leaned left (Lianhua's management perhaps more so), while Tianyi continued to make less socially conscious fare.\nThe period also produced the first big Chinese movie stars, such as Hu Die, Ruan Lingyu, Li Lili, Chen Yanyan, Zhou Xuan, Zhao Dan and Jin Yan. Other major films of the period include \"Love and Duty\" (1931), \"Little Toys\" (1933), \"New Women\" (1934), \"Song of the Fishermen\" (1934), \"Plunder of Peach and Plum\" (1934), \"Crossroads\" (1937), and \"Street Angel\" (1937). Throughout the 1930s, the Nationalists and the Communists struggled for power and control over the major studios; their influence can be seen in the films the studios produced during this period.\nJapanese occupation and World War II.\nThe Japanese invasion of China in 1937, in particular the Battle of Shanghai, ended this golden run in Chinese cinema. All production companies except Xinhua Film Company (\"New China\") closed shop, and many of the filmmakers fled Shanghai, relocating to Hong Kong, the wartime Nationalist capital Chongqing, and elsewhere. The Shanghai film industry, though severely curtailed, did not stop however, thus leading to the \"Solitary Island\" period (also known as the \"Sole Island\" or \"Orphan Island\"), with Shanghai's foreign concessions serving as an \"island\" of production in the \"sea\" of Japanese-occupied territory. It was during this period that artists and directors who remained in the city had to walk a fine line between staying true to their leftist and nationalist beliefs and Japanese pressures. Director Bu Wancang's \"Hua Mu Lan\", also known as \"Mulan Joins the Army\" (1939), with its story of a young Chinese peasant fighting against a foreign invasion, was a particularly good example of Shanghai's continued film-production in the midst of war. This period ended when Japan declared war on the Western allies on 7 December 1941; the solitary island was finally engulfed by the sea of the Japanese occupation. With the Shanghai industry firmly in Japanese control, films like the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere-promoting \"Eternity\" (1943) were produced. At the end of World War II, one of the most controversial Japanese-authorized companies, Manchukuo Film Association, would be separated and integrated into Chinese cinema.\nSecond golden age.\nThe film industry continued to develop after 1945. Production in Shanghai once again resumed as a new crop of studios took the place that Lianhua and Mingxing studios had occupied in the previous decade. In 1945, Cai Chusheng returned to Shanghai to revive the Lianhua name as the \"Lianhua Film Society with Shi Dongshan, Meng Junmou and Zheng Junli.\" This in turn became Kunlun Studios which would go on to become one of the most important studios of the era, (Kunlun Studios merged with seven other studios to form Shanghai film studio in 1949) putting out the classics \"The Spring River Flows East\" (1947), \"Myriad of Lights\" (1948), \"Crows and Sparrows\" (1949) and \"Wanderings of Three-Hairs the Orphan\", also known as \"San Mao, The Little Vagabond\" (1949).\nMany of these films showed the disillusionment with the oppressive rule of Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist Party and the struggling oppression of nation by war. \"The Spring River Flows East\", a three-hour-long two-parter directed by Cai Chusheng and Zheng Junli, was a particularly strong success. Its depiction of the struggles of ordinary Chinese during the Second Sino-Japanese war, replete with biting social and political commentary, struck a chord with audiences of the time.\nMeanwhile, companies like the Wenhua Film Company (\"Culture Films\"), moved away from the leftist tradition and explored the evolution and development of other dramatic genres. Wenhua treated postwar problems in universalistic and humanistic ways, avoiding the family narrative and melodramatic formulae. Excellent examples of Wenhua's fare are its first two postwar features, \"Love Everlasting\" (\"Bu liaoqing\", 1947) and \"Fake Bride, Phony Bridegroom\" (1947). Another memorable Wenhua film is \"Long Live the Missus\" (1947), like \"Love Everlasting\" with an original screenplay by writer Eileen Chang. Wenhua's romantic drama \"Spring in a Small Town\" (1948), a film by director Fei Mu shortly prior to the revolution, is often regarded by Chinese film critics as one of the most important films in the history of Chinese cinema, in 2005, Hong Kong film awards it as the best 100 years of film. Ironically, it was precisely its artistic quality and apparent lack of \"political grounding\" that led to its labeling by the Communists as rightist or reactionary, and the film was quickly forgotten by those on the mainland following the Communist victory in China in 1949. However, with the China Film Archive's re-opening after the Cultural Revolution, a new print was struck from the original negative, allowing \"Spring of the Small Town\" to find a new and admiring audience and to influence an entire new generation of filmmakers. Indeed, an acclaimed remake was made in 2002 by Tian Zhuangzhuang. A Chinese Peking opera film, \"A Wedding in the Dream\" (1948), by the same director (Fei Mu), was the first Chinese color film.\nEarly Communist era.\nWith the communist revolution in China in 1949, the government saw motion pictures as an important mass production art form and tool for propaganda. Starting from 1951, pre-1949 Chinese films, Hollywood and Hong Kong productions were banned as the Chinese Communist Party sought to tighten control over mass media, producing instead movies centering on peasants, soldiers and workers, such as \"Bridge\" (1949) and \"The White Haired Girl\" (1950). One of the production bases in the middle of all the transition was the Changchun Film Studio.\nThe private studios in Shanghai, including Kunming, Wenhua, Guotai and Datong, were encouraged to make new films from 1949 to 1951. They made approximately 47 films during this period, but soon ran into trouble, owing to the furore over the Kunlun-produced drama \"The Life of Wu Xun\" (1950), directed by Sun Yu and starring veteran Zhao Dan. The feature was accused in an anonymous article in \"People's Daily\" in May 1951 of spreading feudal ideas. After the article was revealed to be penned by Mao Zedong, the film was banned, a Film Steering Committee was formed to \"re-educate\" the film industry and within two years, these private studios were all incorporated into the state-run Shanghai Film Studio.\nThe Communist regime solved the problem of a lack of film theaters by building mobile projection units which could tour the remote regions of China, ensuring that even the poorest could have access to films. By 1965 there were around 20,393 such units. The number of movie-viewers hence increased sharply, partly bolstered by the fact that film tickets were given out to work units and attendance was compulsory, with admissions rising from 47 million in 1949 to 4.15 billion in 1959. In the 17 years between the founding of the People's Republic of China and the Cultural Revolution, 603 feature films and 8,342 reels of documentaries and newsreels were produced, sponsored mostly as Communist propaganda by the government. For example, in \"Guerrilla on the Railroad\" (\u94c1\u9053\u6e38\u51fb\u961f), dated 1956, the Chinese Communist Party was depicted as the primary resistance force against the Japanese in the war against invasion. Chinese filmmakers were sent to Moscow to study the Soviet socialist realism style of filmmaking. The Beijing Film Academy established in 1950 and in 1956, the Beijing Film Academy was officially opened. One important film of this era is \"This Life of Mine\" (1950), directed by Shi Hu, which follows an old beggar reflecting on his past life as a policeman working for the various regimes since 1911. The first widescreen Chinese film was produced in 1960. Animated films using a variety of folk arts, such as papercuts, shadow plays, puppetry, and traditional paintings, also were very popular for entertaining and educating children. The most famous of these, the classic \"Havoc in Heaven\" (two parts, 1961, 4), was made by Wan Laiming of the Wan Brothers and won Outstanding Film award at the London International Film Festival.\nThe thawing of censorship in 1956\u201357 (known as the Hundred Flowers Campaign) and the early 1960s led to more indigenous Chinese films being made which were less reliant on their Soviet counterparts. During this campaign the sharpest criticisms came from the satirical comedies of L\u00fc Ban. \"Before the New Director Arrives\" exposes the hierarchical relationships occurring between the cadres, while his next film, \"The Unfinished Comedy\" (1957), was labelled as a \"poisonous weed\" during the Anti-Rightist Movement and L\u00fc was banned from directing for life.\"The Unfinished Comedy\" was only screened after Mao's death. Other noteworthy films produced during this period were adaptations of literary classics, such as Sang Hu's \"The New Year's Sacrifice\" (1956; adapted from a Lu Xun story) and Shui Hua's \"The Lin Family Shop\" (1959; adapted from a Mao Dun story). The most prominent filmmaker of this era was Xie Jin, whose three films in particular, \"Woman Basketball Player No. 5\" (1957), \"The Red Detachment of Women\" (1961) and \"Two Stage Sisters\" (1964), exemplify China's increased expertise at filmmaking during this time. Films made during this period are polished and exhibit high production value and elaborate sets. While Beijing and Shanghai remained the main centers of production, between 1957\u201360 the government built regional studios in Guangzhou, Xi'an and Chengdu to encourage representations of ethnic minorities in films. Chinese cinema began to directly address the issue of such ethnic minorities during the late 1950s and early 1960s, in films like \"Five Golden Flowers\" (1959), \"Third Sister Liu\" (1960), \"Serfs\" (1963), \"Ashima\" (1964).\nFilms of the Cultural Revolution.\nDuring the Cultural Revolution, the film industry was severely restricted. Almost all previous films were banned, and only a few new ones were produced, the so-called \"revolutionary model operas\". The most notable of these was a ballet version of the revolutionary opera \"The Red Detachment of Women\", directed by Pan Wenzhan and Fu Jie in 1970. Feature film production came almost to a standstill in the early years from 1967 to 1972. Movie production revived after 1972 under the strict jurisdiction of the Gang of Four until 1976, when they were overthrown. The few films that were produced during this period, such as 1975's \"Breaking with Old Ideas\", were highly regulated in terms of plot and characterization.\nPost-Cultural Revolution.\nBox office boom after the Cultural Revolution.\nIn the years immediately following the Cultural Revolution, the film industry again flourished as a medium of popular entertainment. Production rose steadily, from 19 features in 1977 to 125 in 1986. Domestically produced films played to large audiences, and tickets for foreign film festivals sold quickly. The industry tried to revive crowds by making more innovative and \"exploratory\" films like their counterparts in the West.\nAfter the Cultural Revolution had ended in 1976, Chinese cinema grew significantly in the late 1970s. In 1979, annual box office admissions reached a peak of 29.3 billion tickets sold, equivalent to an average of 30 films per person. Chinese cinema continued to prosper into the early 1980s. In 1980, annual box office admissions stood at 23.4 billion tickets sold, equivalent to an average of 29 films per person. In terms of box office admissions, this period represented the peak ticket sales in the history of the Chinese box office. High ticket sales were driven by low ticket prices, with a cinema ticket typically costing between \u00a50.1 ($) and \u00a50.3 ($) at the time.\nA number of films during this period drew box office admissions in the hundreds of millions. China's highest-grossing film in box office admissions was \"Legend of the White Snake\" (1980) with an estimated 700 million admissions, followed by \"In-Laws\" (\"Full House of Joy\") (1981) and \"The Undaunted Wudang\" (1983) with more than 600 million ticket sales each. The highest-grossing foreign film was the Japanese film \"Kimi yo Fundo no Kawa o Watare\" (1976), which released in 1978 and sold more than 330 million tickets, followed by the Indian film \"Caravan\" (1971) which released in 1979 and sold about 300 million tickets.\nIn the late 1980s the film industry fell on hard times, faced with the dual problems of competition from other forms of entertainment and concern on the part of the authorities that many of the popular thriller and martial arts films were socially unacceptable. In January 1986 the film industry was transferred from the Ministry of Culture to the newly formed Ministry of Radio, Cinema, and Television to bring it under \"stricter control and management\" and to \"strengthen supervision over production.\"\n\"Scar dramas\".\nThe end of the Cultural Revolution brought the release of \"scar dramas\" (\u50b7\u75d5\u5267 \"sh\u0101ngh\u00e9n j\u00f9\"), which depicted the emotional traumas left by this period. The best-known of these is probably Xie Jin's \"Hibiscus Town\" (1986), although they could be seen as late as the 1990s with Tian Zhuangzhuang's \"The Blue Kite\" (1993). In the 1980s, open criticism of certain past Communist Party policies was encouraged by Deng Xiaoping as a way to reveal the excesses of the Cultural Revolution and the earlier Anti-Rightist Campaign, also helping to legitimize Deng's new policies of \"reform and opening up.\" For instance, the Best Picture prize in the inaugural 1981 Golden Rooster Awards was given to two \"scar dramas\", \"Evening Rain\" (Wu Yonggang, Wu Yigong, 1980) and \"Legend of Tianyun Mountain\" (Xie Jin, 1980).\nMany scar dramas were made by members of the Fourth Generation whose own careers or lives had suffered during the events in question, while younger, Fifth Generation directors such as Tian tended to focus on less controversial subjects of the immediate present or the distant past. Official enthusiasm for scar dramas waned by the 1990s when younger filmmakers began to confront negative aspects of the Mao era. \"The Blue Kite\", though sharing a similar subject as the earlier scar dramas, was more realistic in style, and was made only through obfuscating its real script. Shown abroad, it was banned from release in mainland China, while Tian himself was banned from making any films for nearly a decade afterward. After the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre, few if any scar dramas were released domestically in mainland China.\nRise of the fifth generation.\nBeginning in the mid-late 1980s, the rise of the so-called fifth generation of Chinese filmmakers brought increased popularity of Chinese cinema abroad. Most of the filmmakers who made up the Fifth Generation had graduated from the Beijing Film Academy in 1982 and included Zhang Yimou, Tian Zhuangzhuang, Chen Kaige, Zhang Junzhao, Li Shaohong, Wu Ziniu and others. These graduates constituted the first group of filmmakers to graduate since the Cultural Revolution and they soon jettisoned traditional methods of storytelling and opted for a more free and unorthodox symbolic approach. After the so-called scar literature in fiction had paved the way for frank discussion, Zhang Junzhao's \"One and Eight\" (1983) and Chen Kaige's \"Yellow Earth\" (1984) in particular were taken to mark the beginnings of the Fifth Generation. The most famous of the Fifth Generation directors, Chen Kaige and Zhang Yimou, went on to produce celebrated works such as \"King of the Children\" (1987), \"Ju Dou\" (1989), \"Raise the Red Lantern\" (1991) and \"Farewell My Concubine\" (1993), which were not only acclaimed by Chinese cinema-goers but by the Western arthouse audience. Tian Zhuangzhuang's films, though less well known by Western viewers, were well noted by directors such as Martin Scorsese. It was during this period that Chinese cinema began reaping the rewards of international attention, including the 1988 Golden Bear for \"Red Sorghum\", the 1992 Golden Lion for \"The Story of Qiu Ju\", the 1993 Palme d'Or for \"Farewell My Concubine\", and three Best Foreign Language Film nominations from the Academy Awards. All these award-winning films starred actress Gong Li, who became the Fifth Generation's most recognizable star, especially to international audiences.\nDiverse in style and subject, the Fifth Generation directors' films ranged from black comedy (Huang Jianxin's \"The Black Cannon Incident\", 1985) to the esoteric (Chen Kaige's \"Life on a String\", 1991), but they share a common rejection of the socialist-realist tradition worked by earlier Chinese filmmakers in the Communist era. Other notable Fifth Generation directors include Wu Ziniu, Hu Mei, Li Shaohong and Zhou Xiaowen. Fifth Generation filmmakers reacted against the ideological purity of Cultural Revolution cinema. By relocating to regional studios, they began to explore the actuality of local culture in a somewhat documentarian fashion. Instead of stories depicting heroic military struggles, the films were built out of the drama of ordinary people's daily lives. They also retained political edge, but aimed at exploring issues rather than recycling approved policy. While Cultural Revolution films used character, the younger directors favored psychological depth along the lines of European cinema. They adopted complex plots, ambiguous symbolism, and evocative imagery. Some of their bolder works with political overtones were banned by Chinese authorities.\nThese films came with a creative genres of stories, new style of shooting as well, directors utilized extensive color and long shots to present and explore history and structure of national culture. As a result of the new films being so intricate, the films were for more educated audiences than anything. The new style was profitable for some and helped filmmakers to make strides in the business. It allowed directors to get away from reality and show their artistic sense.\nThe Fourth Generation also returned to prominence. Given their label after the rise of the Fifth Generation, these were directors whose careers were stalled by the Cultural Revolution and who were professionally trained prior to 1966. Wu Tianming, in particular, made outstanding contributions by helping to finance major Fifth Generation directors under the auspices of the Xi'an Film Studio (which he took over in 1983), while continuing to make films like \"Old Well\" (1986) and \"The King of Masks\" (1996).\nThe Fifth Generation movement ended in part after the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre, although its major directors continued to produce notable works. Several of its filmmakers went into self-imposed exile: Wu Tianming moved to the United States (but later returned), Huang Jianxin left for Australia, while many others went into television-related works.\nMain melody dramas.\nDuring a period when socialist dramas were beginning to lose viewership, the Chinese government began to involve itself deeper into the world of popular culture and cinema by creating the official genre of the \"main melody\" (\u4e3b\u65cb\u5f8b \"zh\u01d4xu\u00e1nl\u01dc\"), inspired by Hollywood's strides in musical dramas. In 1987, the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television issued a statement encouraging the making of movies which emphasizes the main melody to \"invigorate national spirit and national pride\". The expression \"main melody\" refers to the musical term \"leitmotif\", which translates to the 'theme of our times', which scholars suggest is representative of China's socio-political climate and cultural context of popular cinema. These main melody films, still produced regularly in modern times, try to emulate the commercial mainstream by the use of Hollywood-style music and special effects. A significant feature of these films is the incorporation of a \"red song\", which is a song written as propaganda to support the People's Republic of China. By revolving the film around the motif of a red song, the film is able to gain traction at the box office as songs are generally thought to be more accessible than a film. Theoretically, once the red song dominates the charts, it will stir interest in the film that which it accompanies.\nMain melody dramas are often subsidized by the state and have free access to government and military personnel. The Chinese government spends between \"one and two million RMBs\" annually to support the production of films in the main melody genre. August 1st Film Studio, the film and TV production arm of the People's Liberation Army, is a studio that produces main melody cinema. Main melody films, which often depict past military engagements or are biopics of first-generation CCP leaders, have won several Best Picture prizes at the Golden Rooster Awards. Some of the more famous main melody dramas include the ten-hour epic \"Decisive Engagement\" (\u5927\u51b3\u6218, 1991), directed by Cai Jiawei, Yang Guangyuan and Wei Lian; \"The Opium War\" (1997), directed by Xie Jin; and \"The Founding of a Republic\" (2009), directed by Han Sanping and Fifth Generation director Huang Jianxin. \"The Founding of an Army\" (2017) was commissioned by the government to celebrate the 90th anniversary of the People's Liberation Army, and is the third instalment in The Founding of a Republic series. The film featured many young Chinese pop singers that are already well-established in the industry, including Li Yifeng, Liu Haoran, and Lay Zhang, so as to further the film's reputation as a main melody drama.\nThe sixth generation.\nThe post-1990 era has been labelled the \"return of the amateur filmmaker\" as state censorship policies after the Tiananmen Square demonstrations produced an edgy underground film movement loosely referred to as the Sixth Generation. Owing to the lack of state funding and backing, these films were shot quickly and cheaply, using materials like 16 mm film and digital video and mostly non-professional actors and actresses, producing a documentary feel, often with long takes, hand-held cameras, and ambient sound; more akin to Italian neorealism and cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 than the often lush, far more considered productions of the Fifth Generation. Unlike the Fifth Generation, the Sixth Generation brings a more individualistic, anti-romantic life-view and pays far closer attention to contemporary urban life, especially as affected by disorientation, rebellion and dissatisfaction with China's contemporary social marketing economic tensions and comprehensive cultural background. Many were made with an extremely low budget (an example is Jia Zhangke, who shoots on digital video, and formerly on 16\u00a0mm; Wang Xiaoshuai's \"The Days\" (1993) was made for US$10,000). The title and subjects of many of these films reflect the Sixth Generation's concerns. The Sixth Generation takes an interest in marginalized individuals and the less represented fringes of society. For example, Zhang Yuan's hand-held \"Beijing Bastards\" (1993) focuses on youth punk subculture, featuring artists like Cui Jian, Dou Wei and He Yong frowned upon by many state authorities, while Jia Zhangke's debut film \"Xiao Wu\" (1997) concerns a provincial pickpocket.\nAs the Sixth Generation gained international exposure, many subsequent movies were joint ventures and projects with international backers, but remained quite resolutely low-key and low budget. Jia's \"Platform\" (2000) was funded in part by Takeshi Kitano's production house, while his \"Still Life\" was shot on HD video. \"Still Life\" was a surprise addition and Golden Lion winner of the 2006 Venice International Film Festival. \"Still Life\", which concerns provincial workers around the Three Gorges region, sharply contrasts with the works of Fifth Generation Chinese directors like Zhang Yimou and Chen Kaige who were at the time producing \"House of Flying Daggers\" (2004) and \"The Promise\" (2005). It featured no star of international renown and was acted mostly by non-professionals.\nMany Sixth Generation films have highlighted the negative attributes of China's entry into the modern capitalist market. Li Yang's \"Blind Shaft\" (2003) for example, is an account of two murderous con-men in the unregulated and notoriously dangerous mining industry of northern China. (Li refused the tag of Sixth Generation, although admitted he was not Fifth Generation). While Jia Zhangke's \"The World\" (2004) emphasizes the emptiness of globalization in the backdrop of an internationally themed amusement park.\nSome of the more prolific Sixth Generation directors to have emerged are Wang Xiaoshuai (\"The Days\", \"Beijing Bicycle\", \"So Long, My Son\"), Zhang Yuan (\"Beijing Bastards\", \"East Palace West Palace\"), Jia Zhangke (\"Xiao Wu\", \"Unknown Pleasures\", \"Platform\", \"The World\", \"A Touch of Sin\", \"Mountains May Depart\", \"Ash Is Purest White\"), He Jianjun (\"Postman\") and Lou Ye (\"Suzhou River\", \"Summer Palace\"). One director of their generation who does not share most of the concerns of the Sixth Generation is Lu Chuan (\"\", 2004; \"City of Life and Death\", 2010).\nNotable Sixth Generation directors.\nIn the 2018 Cannes Film Festival, two of China's Sixth generation filmmakers, Jia Zhangke and Zhang Meng \u2013 whose grim works transformed Chinese cinema in the 1990s \u2013 showed on the French Riviera. While both directors represent Chinese cinema, their profiles are quite different. The 49-year-old Jia set up the Pingyao International Film Festival in 2017 and on the other hand is Zhang, a 56-year-old film school professor who spent years working on government commissions and domestic TV shows after struggling with his own projects. Despite their different profiles, they mark an important cornerstone in Chinese cinema and are both credited with bringing Chinese movies to the international big screen. Chinese director Jia Zhangke's latest film \"Ash Is Purest White\" has been selected to compete in the official competition for the Palme d'Or of the 71st Cannes Film Festival, the highest prize awarded at the film festival. It is Jia\u2019s fifth movie, a gangster revenge drama that is his most expensive and mainstream film to date. Back in 2013, Jia won Best Screenplay Award for \"A Touch of Sin\", following nominations for \"Unknown Pleasures\" in 2002 and \"24 City\" in 2008. In 2014, he was a member of the official jury and the following year his film \"Mountains May Depart\" was nominated. According to entertainment website Variety, a record number of Chinese films were submitted this year but only Jia's romantic drama was selected to compete for the Palme d'Or. Meanwhile, Zhang will make his debut at Cannes with \"The Pluto Moment\", a slow-moving relationship drama about a team of filmmakers scouting for locations and musical talent in China\u2019s rural hinterland. The film is Zhang\u2019s highest profile production so far, as it stars actor Wang Xuebing in the leading role. The film was partly financed by iQiyi, the company behind one of China\u2019s most popular online video browsing sharing sites. Diao Yinan is also a notable member of the sixth generation whose works include \"Black Coal Thin Ice\", \"Wild Goose Lake\", \"Night Train\" and \"Uniform\" which have premiered at festivals such as Cannes and received acclaim abroad.\nOther directors.\nHe Ping is a director of mostly Western-like films set in Chinese locale. His \"Swordsmen in Double Flag Town\" (1991) and \"Sun Valley\" (1995) explore narratives set in the sparse terrain of West China near the Gobi Desert. His historical drama \"Red Firecracker, Green Firecracker\" (1994) won a myriad of prizes home and abroad.\nRecent cinema has seen Chinese cinematographers direct some acclaimed films. Other than Zhang Yimou, L\u00fc Yue made \"Mr. Zhao\" (1998), a black comedy film well received abroad. Gu Changwei's minimalist epic \"Peacock\" (2005), about a quiet, ordinary Chinese family with three very different siblings in the post-Cultural Revolution era, took home the Silver Bear prize for 2005 Berlin International Film Festival. Hou Yong is another cinematographer who made films (\"Jasmine Women\", 2004) and TV series. There are actors who straddle the dual roles of acting and directing. Xu Jinglei, a popular Chinese actress, has made six movies to date. Her second film \"Letter from an Unknown Woman\" (2004) landed her the San Sebasti\u00e1n International Film Festival Best Director award. Another popular actress and director is Zhao Wei, whose directorial debut \"So Young\" (2013) was a huge box office and critical success.\nThe most highly regarded Chinese actor-director is undoubtedly Jiang Wen, who has directed several critically acclaimed movies while following on his acting career. His directorial debut, \"In the Heat of the Sun\" (1994) was the first PRC film to win Best Picture at the Golden Horse Film Awards held in Taiwan. His other films, like \"Devils on the Doorstep\" (2000, Cannes Grand Prix) and \"Let the Bullets Fly\" (2010), were similarly well received. By the early 2011, \"Let the Bullets Fly\" had become the highest grossing domestic film in China's history.\nGeneration-independent movement.\nThere is a growing number of independent seventh or post-Sixth Generation filmmakers making films with extremely low budgets and using digital equipment. They are the so-called dGeneration (for digital). These films, like those from Sixth Generation filmmakers, are mostly made outside the Chinese film system and are shown mostly on the international film festival circuit. Ying Liang and Jian Yi are two of these generation filmmakers. Ying's \"Taking Father Home\" (2005) and \"The Other Half\" (2006) are both representative of the generation trends of the feature film. Liu Jiayin made two dGeneration feature films, \"Oxhide\" (2004) and \"Oxhide II\" (2010), blurring the line between documentary and narrative film. \"Oxhide\", made by Liu when she was a film student, frames herself and her parents in their claustrophobic Beijing apartment in a narrative praised by critics. \"An Elephant Sitting Still\", considered one of the greatest film debuts in Chinese cinema, is also the only film by the late Hu Bo.\nNew documentary movement.\nTwo decades of reform and commercialization have brought dramatic social changes in mainland China, reflected not only in fiction film but in a growing documentary movement. Wu Wenguang's 70-minute \"\" (1990) is now seen as one of the first works of this \"New Documentary Movement\" (NDM) in China. \"Bumming\", made between 1988 and 1990, contains interviews with five young artists eking out a living in Beijing, subject to state authorized tasks. Shot using a camcorder, the documentary ends with four of the artists moving abroad after the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre. \"Dance with the Farm Workers\" (2001) is another documentary by Wu.\nAnother internationally acclaimed documentary is Wang Bing's nine-hour tale of deindustrialization ' (2003). Wang's subsequent documentaries, ' (2007), \"Crude Oil\" (2008), \"Man with no name\" (2009), \"Three Sisters\" (2012) and \"Feng ai\" (2013), cemented his reputation as a leading documentarist of the movement.\nLi Hong, the first woman in the NDM, in \"Out of Phoenix Bridge\" (1997) relates the story of four young women, who moving from rural areas to the big cities like millions of other men and women, have come to Beijing to make a living.\nThe New Documentary Movement in recent times has overlapped with the dGeneration filmmaking, with most documentaries being shot cheaply and independently in the digital format. Xu Xin's \"Karamay\" (2010), Zhao Liang's Behemoth, Huang Weikai's \"Disorder\" (2009), Zhao Dayong's \"Ghost Town\" (2009), Du Haibing's \"1428\" (2009), Xu Tong's \"Fortune Teller\" (2009) and Li Ning\u2019s \"Tape\" (2010) were all shot in digital format. All had made their impact in the international documentary scene and the use of digital format allows for works of vaster lengths.\nAnimation.\nBefore the 1950s.\nInspired by the success of Disney animation, the self-taught pioneers Wan brothers, Wan Laiming and Wan Guchan, made the first Chinese animated short in the 1920s, thus inaugurating the history of Chinese animation. (Chen Yuanyuan 175) Many live-action films of the Republican era also included animated sequences.\nIn 1937, the Wan brothers decided to produce \u300a\u94c1\u6247\u516c\u4e3b\u300b\" Princess Iron Fan\", which was the first Chinese animated feature film and the fourth, after the American feature films \"Snow White\", \"Gulliver\u2019s Travels\", and \"The Adventures of Pinocchio\". It was at this time that Chinese animation as an art form had risen to prominence on the world stage. Completed in 1941, the film was released under China United Pictures and aroused a great response in Asia. Japanese animator Shigeru Tezuka once said that he gave up medicine after watching the cartoon and decided to pursue animation.\n1950s\u20131980s.\nDuring this golden era, Chinese animation had developed a variety of styles, including ink animation, shadow play animation, puppet animation, and so on. Some of the most representative works are \u300a\u5927\u95f9\u5929\u5bab\u300b\" Uproar in Heaven\", \u300a\u54ea\u5412\u95f9\u6d77\u300b \"Nezha's Rebellion in the Sea\" and\u300a\u5929\u4e66\u5947\u8c08\u300b \"Heavenly Book\", which have also won lofty praise and numerous awards in the world.\n1980s\u20131990s.\nAfter Deng Xiaoping\u2019s Reform Period and the \"opening up\" of China, the movies\u300a\u846b\u82a6\u5144\u5f1f\u300b \"Calabash Brothers\", \u300a\u9ed1\u732b\u8b66\u957f\u300b\"Black Cat Sheriff\", \u300a\u963f\u51e1\u63d0\u300b\"Avanti Story\" and other impressive animated movies were released. However, at this time, China still favored the Japanese\u2019s more unique, American and European-influenced animated works over the less-advanced domestic ones.\n1990s\u20132010s.\nIn the 1990s, digital production methods replaced manual hand-drawing methods; however, even with the use of advanced technology, none of the animated works were considered to be a breakthrough film. Animated films that tried to cater to all age groups, such as \"Lotus Lantern\" and \"Storm Resolution\", did not attract much attention. The only animated works that seemed to achieve popularity were the ones for catered for children, such as \"Pleasant Goat and Big Big Wolf\"\u300a\u559c\u7f8a\u7f8a\u4e0e\u7070\u592a\u72fc\u300b.\n2010s\u2013present.\nDuring this period, the technical level of Chinese domestic animation production has been established comprehensively, and 3D animation films have become the mainstream. However, as more and more foreign films (such as ones from Japan, Europe, and the United States) are being imported into China, Chinese animated works is left in the shadows of these animated foreign films.\nIt was only with the release of \u300a\u897f\u6e38\u8bb0\u4e4b\u5927\u5723\u5f52\u6765\u300b\"\" in 2015, a computer animated film, that Chinese animated works took back the rein. The film was a huge hit and broke the record for Chinese domestic animated movies with CN\u00a5956 million at China\u2019s box office. After the success of \"Journey to the West\", several other high-quality animated films were released, such as\u300a\u5927\u9c7c\u6d77\u68e0\u300b \"Big Fish and Begonia\" and \u300a\u767d\u86c7\u7f18\u8d77\u300b \"White Snake\". Though none of these movies made headway in regards to the box office, they did make filmmakers more and more interested in animated works.\nThis all changed with the breakthrough animated film, \u300a\u54ea\u5412\u4e4b\u9b54\u7ae5\u964d\u4e16\u300b\"Ne Zha\". Released in 2019, it became the second highest-grossing film of all time in China, the highest-grossing animated non-English film, and the highest-grossing animated film in a single territory. It was with this film that Chinese animated films, as a medium, finally broke the notion in China that domestic animated films are only for children. With \"Nezha\", and a spinoff, \"Jiang Ziya\", Chinese animation has now come to be known as a veritable source of entertainment for all ages.\nNew models and the new Chinese cinema.\nCommercial successes.\nWith China's liberalization in the late 1970s and its opening up to foreign markets, commercial considerations have made its impact in post-1980s filmmaking. Traditionally arthouse movies screened seldom make enough to break even. An example is Fifth Generation director Tian Zhuangzhuang's \"The Horse Thief\" (1986), a narrative film with minimal dialog on a Tibetan horse thief. The film, showcasing exotic landscapes, was well received by Chinese and some Western arthouse audiences, but did poorly at the box office.\nTian's later \"The Warrior and the Wolf\" (2010) was a similar commercial failure. Prior to these, there were examples of successful commercial films in the post-liberalization period. One was the romance film \"Romance on the Lu Mountain\" (1980), which was a success with older Chinese. The film broke the Guinness Book of Records as the longest-running film on a first run. Jet Li's cinematic debut \"Shaolin Temple\" (1982) was an instant hit at home and abroad (in Japan and the Southeast Asia, for example). Another successful commercial film was \"Murder in 405\" (405\u8c0b\u6740\u6848, 1980), a murder thriller.\nFeng Xiaogang's \"The Dream Factory\" (1997) was heralded as a turning point in Chinese movie industry, a \"hesui pian\" (Chinese New Year-screened film) which demonstrated the viability of the commercial model in China's socialist market economy. Feng has become one of the most successful commercial director in the post-1997 era. Almost all his films made high returns domestically while he used ethnic Chinese co-stars like Rosamund Kwan, Jacqueline Wu, Rene Liu and Shu Qi to boost his films' appeal.\nIn the decade following 2010, owing to the influx of Hollywood films (though the number screened each year is curtailed), Chinese domestic cinema faces mounting challenges. The industry is growing and domestic films are starting to achieve the box office impact of major Hollywood blockbusters. However, not all domestic films are successful financially. In January 2010 James Cameron's \"Avatar\" was pulled out from non-3D theaters for Hu Mei's biopic \"Confucius\", but this move led to a backlash on Hu's film. Zhang Yang's 2005 \"Sunflower\" also made little money, but his earlier, low-budget \"Spicy Love Soup\" (1997) grossed ten times its budget of \u00a53 million. Likewise, the 2006 \"Crazy Stone\", a sleeper hit, was made for just 3 million HKD/US$400,000. In 2009\u201311, Feng's \"Aftershock\" (2009) and Jiang Wen's \"Let the Bullets Fly\" (2010) became China's highest grossing domestic films, with \"Aftershock\" earning \u00a5670 million (US$105 million) and \"Let the Bullets Fly\" \u00a5674 million (US$110 million). \"Lost in Thailand\" (2012) became the first Chinese film to reach \u00a51 billion at the Chinese box office and \"Monster Hunt\" (2015) became the first to reach \u00a5. As of 2021, 9 of the top 10 highest-grossing films in China are domestic productions. On 8 February 2016, the Chinese box office set a new single-day gross record, with \u00a5, beating the previous record of \u00a5 on 18 July 2015. Also in February 2016, \"The Mermaid\", directed by Stephen Chow, became the highest-grossing film in China, overtaking \"Monster Hunt\". It is also the first film to reach \u00a5.\nUnder the influence of Hollywood science fiction movies like \"Prometheus\", published on 8 June 2012, such genres especially the space science films have risen rapidly in the Chinese film market in recent years. On 5 February 2019, the film \"The Wandering Earth\" directed by Frant Kwo reached $699.8 million worldwide, which became the third highest-grossing film in the history of Chinese cinema.\nChinese international cinema and successes abroad.\nSince the late 1980s and progressively in the 2000s, Chinese films have enjoyed considerable box office success abroad. Formerly viewed only by cineastes, its global appeal mounted after the international box office and critical success of Ang Lee's period wuxia film \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" which won Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 2000. This multi-national production increased its appeal by featuring stars from all parts of the Chinese-speaking world. It provided an introduction to Chinese cinema (and especially the wuxia genre) for many and increased the popularity of many earlier Chinese films. To date \"Crouching Tiger\" remains the most commercially successful foreign-language film in U.S. history.\nSimilarly, in 2002, Zhang Yimou's \"Hero\" was another international box office success. Its cast featured famous actors from Mainland China and Hong Kong who were also known to some extent in the West, including Jet Li, Zhang Ziyi, Maggie Cheung and Tony Leung Chiu-Wai. Despite criticisms by some that these two films pander somewhat to Western tastes, \"Hero\" was a phenomenal success in most of Asia and topped the U.S. box office for two weeks, making enough in the U.S. alone to cover the production costs.\nOther films such as \"Farewell My Concubine\", \"2046\", \"Suzhou River\", \"The Road Home\" and \"House of Flying Daggers\" were critically acclaimed around the world. The Hengdian World Studios can be seen as the \"Chinese Hollywood\", with a total area of up to 330 ha. and 13 shooting bases, including a 1:1 copy of the Forbidden City.\nThe successes of \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" and \"Hero\" make it difficult to demarcate the boundary between \"Mainland Chinese\" cinema and a more international-based \"Chinese-language cinema\". \"Crouching Tiger\", for example, was directed by a Taiwan-born American director (Ang Lee) who works often in Hollywood. Its pan-Chinese leads include Mainland Chinese (Zhang Ziyi), Hong Kong (Chow Yun-Fat), Taiwan (Chang Chen) and Malaysian (Michelle Yeoh) actors and actresses; the film was co-produced by an array of Chinese, American, Hong Kong, and Taiwan film companies. Likewise, Lee's Chinese-language \"Lust, Caution\" (2007) drew a crew and cast from Mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, and includes an orchestral score by French composer Alexandre Desplat. This merging of people, resources and expertise from the three regions and the broader East Asia and the world, marks the movement of Chinese-language cinema into a domain of large scale international influence. Other examples of films in this mold include \"The Promise\" (2005), \"The Banquet\" (2006), \"Fearless\" (2006), \"The Warlords\" (2007), \"Bodyguards and Assassins\" (2009) and \"Red Cliff\" (2008-09). The ease with which ethnic Chinese actresses and actors straddle the mainland and Hong Kong has significantly increased the number of co-productions in Chinese-language cinema. Many of these films also feature South Korean or Japanese actors to appeal to their East Asian neighbours. Some artistes originating from the mainland, like Hu Jun, Zhang Ziyi, Tang Wei and Zhou Xun, obtained Hong Kong residency under the Quality Migrant Admission Scheme and have acted in many Hong Kong productions.\nIndustry.\nBox office and screens.\nIn 2010, Chinese cinema was the third largest film industry by number of feature films produced annually. In 2013, China's gross box office was \u00a521.8 billion (US$3.6 billion), the second-largest film market in the world by box office receipts. In January 2013, \"Lost in Thailand\" (2012) became the first Chinese film to reach \u00a51 billion at the box office. As of May 2013, 7 of the top 10 highest-grossing films in China were domestic productions. As of 2014, around half of all tickets are sold online, with the largest ticket selling sites being Maoyan.com (82 million), Gewara.com (45 million) and Wepiao.com (28 million). In 2014, Chinese films earned \u00a51.87 billion outside China. By December 2013 there were 17,000 screens in the country. By 6 January 2014, there were 18,195 screens in the country. Greater China has around 251 IMAX theaters. There were 299 cinema chains (252 rural, 47 urban), 5,813 movie theaters and 24,317 screens in the country in 2014.\nThe country added about 8,035 screens in 2015 (at an average of 22 new screens per day, increasing its total by about 40% to around 31,627 screens, which is about 7,373 shy of the number of screens in the United States. Chinese films accounted for 61.48% of ticket sales in 2015 (up from 54% last year) with more than 60% of ticket sales being made online. Average ticket price was down about 2.5% to $5.36 in 2015. It also witnessed 51.08% increase in admissions, with 1.26 billion people buying tickets to the cinema in 2015. Chinese films grossed US$ overseas in 2015. During the week of the 2016 Chinese New Year, the country set a new record for the highest box office gross during one week in one territory with US$, overtaking the previous record of US$ of 26 December 2015 to 1 January 2016 in the United States and Canada. Chinese films grossed \u00a5 (US$) in foreign markets in 2016.\nFilm companies.\nAs of April 2015, the largest Chinese film company by worth was Alibaba Pictures (US$8.77 billion). Other large companies include Huayi Brothers Media (US$7.9 billion), Enlight Media (US$5.98 billion) and Bona Film Group (US$542 million). The biggest distributors by market share in 2014 were: China Film Group (32.8%), Huaxia Film (22.89%), Enlight Pictures (7.75%), Bona Film Group (5.99%), Wanda Media (5.2%), Le Vision Pictures (4.1%), Huayi Brothers (2.26%), United Exhibitor Partners (2%), Heng Ye Film Distribution (1.77%) and Beijing Anshi Yingna Entertainment (1.52%). The biggest cinema chains in 2014 by box office gross were: Wanda Cinema Line (US$), China Film Stellar (393.35 million), Dadi Theater Circuit (378.17 million), Shanghai United Circuit (355.07 million), Guangzhou Jinyi Zhujiang (335.39 million), China Film South Cinema Circuit (318.71 million), Zhejiang Time Cinema (190.53 million), China Film Group Digital Cinema Line (177.42 million), Hengdian Cinema Line (170.15 million) and Beijing New Film Association (163.09 million).\nNotable independent (non-state-owned) film companies.\nHuayi Brothers is China\u2019s most powerful independent (i.e., non state-owned) entertainment company, Beijing-based Huayi Brothers is a diversified company engaged in film and TV production, distribution, theatrical exhibition, as well as talent management. Notable films include 2004's \"Kung Fu Hustle\"; and 2010's \"Aftershock\", which had a 91% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.\nBeijing Enlight Media focuses on the action and romance genres. Enlight usually places several films in China\u2019s top 20 grossers. Enlight is also a major player in China\u2019s TV series production and distribution businesses. Under the leadership of its CEO Wang Changtian, the publicly traded, Beijing-based company has achieved a market capitalization of nearly US$1 billion.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10793", "revid": "24323093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10793", "title": "Cinema of the United Kingdom", "text": "Overview of the cinema of the United Kingdom\nThe United Kingdom has had a significant film industry for over a century. While film production reached an all-time high in 1936, the \"golden age\" of British cinema is usually thought to have occurred in the 1940s, during which the directors David Lean, Michael Powell, (with Emeric Pressburger) and Carol Reed produced their most critically acclaimed works. Many British actors have accrued critical success and worldwide recognition, such as Audrey Hepburn, Olivia de Havilland, Vivien Leigh, Glynis Johns, Maggie Smith, Roger Moore, Michael Caine, Sean Connery, Joan Collins, Judi Dench, Julie Andrews, Daniel Day-Lewis, Gary Oldman, Emma Thompson, Hugh Grant and Kate Winslet. Some of the films with the largest ever box office returns have been made in the United Kingdom, including the third and sixth highest-grossing film franchises (\"Harry Potter\" and \"James Bond\").\nThe identity of the British film industry, particularly as it relates to Hollywood, has often been the subject of debate. Its history has often been affected by attempts to compete with the American industry. The career of the producer Alexander Korda was marked by this objective, the Rank Organisation attempted to do so in the 1940s, and Goldcrest in the 1980s. Numerous British-born directors, including Alfred Hitchcock, Christopher Nolan and Ridley Scott, and performers, such as Charlie Chaplin and Cary Grant, have achieved success primarily through their work in the United States.\nIn 2009, British films grossed around $2\u00a0billion worldwide and achieved a market share of around 7% globally and 17% in the United Kingdom. UK box-office takings totalled \u00a31.1\u00a0billion in 2012, with 172.5\u00a0million admissions.\nThe British Film Institute has produced a poll ranking what they consider to be the 100 greatest British films of all time, the BFI Top 100 British films. The annual BAFTA Awards hosted by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts are considered to be the British equivalent of the Academy Awards.\nHistory.\nOrigins and silent films.\nThe world's first moving picture was shot in Leeds by Louis Le Prince in 1888 and the first moving pictures developed on celluloid film were made in Hyde Park, London in 1889 by British inventor William Friese Greene, who patented the process in 1890.\nThe first people to build and run a working 35 mm camera in Britain were Robert W. Paul and Birt Acres. They made the first British film \"Incident at Clovelly Cottage\" in February 1895, shortly before falling out over the camera's patent. Soon several British film companies had opened to meet the demand for new films, such as Mitchell and Kenyon in Blackburn.\nAlthough the earliest British films were of everyday events, the early 20th century saw the appearance of narrative shorts, mainly comedies and melodramas. The early films were often melodramatic in tone, and there was a distinct preference for story lines already known to the audience, in particular, adaptations of Shakespeare plays and Dickens novels.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers first brought their show to London in 1896. In 1898 American producer Charles Urban expanded the London-based Warwick Trading Company to produce British films, mostly documentary and news.\nIn 1898 Gaumont-British Picture Corp. was founded as a subsidiary of the French Gaumont Film Company, constructing Lime Grove Studios in West London in 1915 in the first building built in Britain solely for film production. Also in 1898 Hepworth Studios was founded in Lambeth, South London by Cecil Hepworth, the Bamforths began producing films in Yorkshire, and William Haggar began producing films in Wales.\nDirected by Walter R. Booth in 1901, \"Scrooge, or, Marley's Ghost\" is the earliest film adaptation of Charles Dickens's festive novella \"A Christmas Carol\". Booth's \"The Hand of the Artist\" (1906) has been described as the first British animated film.\nIn 1902 Ealing Studios was founded by Will Barker, becoming the oldest continuously-operating film studio in the world.\nIn 1902 the earliest colour film in the world was made; like other films made at the time, it is of everyday events. In 2012 it was found by the National Science and Media Museum in Bradford after lying forgotten in an old tin for 110 years. The previous title for earliest colour film, using Urban's inferior Kinemacolor process, was thought to date from 1909. The re-discovered films were made by pioneer Edward Raymond Turner from London who patented his process on 22 March 1899.\nIn 1903 Urban formed the Charles Urban Trading Company, which produced early colour films using his patented Kinemacolor process. This was later challenged in court by Greene, causing the company to go out of business in 1915.\nIn 1903, Cecil Hepworth and Percy Stow directed \"Alice in Wonderland\", the first film adaptation of Lewis Carroll's children's book \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\".\nIn 1903 Frank Mottershaw of Sheffield produced the film \"A Daring Daylight Robbery\", which launched the chase genre.\nIn 1911 the Ideal Film Company was founded in Soho, London, distributing almost 400 films by 1934, and producing 80.\nIn 1913 stage director Maurice Elvey began directing British films, becoming Britain's most prolific film director, with almost 200 by 1957.\nIn 1914 Elstree Studios was founded, and acquired in 1928 by German-born Ludwig Blattner, who invented a magnetic steel tape recording system that was adopted by the BBC in 1930.\nIn 1915, the Kinematograph Renters\u2019 Society of Great Britain and Ireland was formed to represent the film distribution companies. It is the oldest film trade body in the world. It was known as the Society of Film Distributors until it changed its name again to the Film Distributors\u2019 Association (FDA).\nIn 1920 Gaumont opened Islington Studios, where Alfred Hitchcock got his start, selling out to Gainsborough Pictures in 1927. Also in 1920 Cricklewood Studios was founded by Sir Oswald Stoll, becoming Britain's largest film studio, known for Fu Manchu and Sherlock Holmes film series.\nIn 1920 the short-lived company Minerva Films was founded in London by the actor Leslie Howard (also producer and director) and his friend and story editor Adrian Brunel. Some of their early films include four written by A. A. Milne including \"The Bump\", starring C. Aubrey Smith; \"Twice Two\"; \"Five Pound Reward\"; and \"Bookworms\".\nBy the mid-1920s the British film industry was losing out to heavy competition from the United States, which was helped by its much larger home market \u2013 in 1914 25% of films shown in the UK were British, but by 1926 this had fallen to 5%. The Slump of 1924 caused many British film studios to close, resulting in the passage of the Cinematograph Films Act 1927 to boost local production, requiring that cinemas show a certain percentage of British films. The act was technically a success, with audiences for British films becoming larger than the quota required, but it had the effect of creating a market for poor quality, low cost films, made to satisfy the quota. The \"quota quickies\", as they became known, are often blamed by historians for holding back the development of the industry. However, some British film makers, such as Michael Powell, learnt their craft making such films. The act was modified with the Cinematograph Films Act 1938 assisted the British film industry by specifying only films made by and shot in Great Britain would be included in the quota, an act that severely reduced Canadian and Australian film production.\nIronically, the biggest star of the silent era, English comedian Charlie Chaplin, was Hollywood-based.\nThe early sound period.\nScottish solicitor John Maxwell founded British International Pictures (BIP) in 1927. Based at the former British National Pictures Studios in Elstree, the facilities original owners, including producer-director Herbert Wilcox, had run into financial difficulties. One of the company's early films, Alfred Hitchcock's \"Blackmail\" (1929), is often regarded as the first British sound feature. It was a part-talkie with a synchronised score and sound effects. Earlier in 1929, the first all-talking British feature, \"The Clue of the New Pin\" was released. It was based on a novel by Edgar Wallace, starring Donald Calthrop, Benita Home and Fred Raines, which was made by British Lion at their Beaconsfield Studios. John Maxwell's BIP became the Associated British Picture Corporation (ABPC) in 1933. ABPC's studios in Elstree came to be known as the \"porridge factory\", according to Lou Alexander, \"for reasons more likely to do with the quantity of films that the company turned out, than their quality\". Elstree (strictly speaking almost all the studios were in neighbouring Borehamwood) became the centre of the British film industry, with six film complexes over the years all in close proximity to each other.\nBy 1927, the largest cinema chains in the United Kingdom consisted of around 20 cinemas but the following year Gaumont-British expanded significantly to become the largest, controlling 180 cinemas by 1928 and up to 300 by 1929. Maxwell formed ABC Cinemas in 1927 which became a subsidiary of BIP and went on to become one of the largest in the country, together with Odeon Cinemas, founded by Oscar Deutsch, who opened his first cinema in 1928. By 1937, these three chains controlled almost a quarter of all cinemas in the country. A booking by one of these chains was indispensable for the success of any British film.\nWith the advent of sound films, many foreign actors were in less demand, with English received pronunciation commonly used; for example, the voice of Czech actress Anny Ondra in \"Blackmail\" was substituted by an off-camera Joan Barry during Ondra's scenes.\nStarting with John Grierson's \"Drifters\" (also 1929), the period saw the emergence of the school of realist Documentary Film Movement, from 1933 associated with the GPO Film Unit. It was Grierson who coined the term \"documentary\" to describe a non-fiction film, and he produced the movement's most celebrated early films, \"Night Mail\" (1936), written and directed by Basil Wright and Harry Watt, and incorporating the poem by W. H. Auden towards the end of the short.\nMusic halls also proved influential in comedy films of this period, and a number of popular personalities emerged, including George Formby, Gracie Fields, Jessie Matthews and Will Hay. These stars often made several films a year, and their productions remained important for morale purposes during World War II.\nMany of the British films with larger budgets during the 1930s were produced by London Films, founded by Hungarian \"emigre\" Alexander Korda. The success of \"The Private Life of Henry VIII\" (1933), made at British and Dominions Elstree Studios, persuaded United Artists and The Prudential to invest in Korda's Denham Film Studios, which opened in May 1936, but both investors suffered losses as a result. Korda's films before the war included \"Things to Come\", \"Rembrandt\" (both 1936) and \"Knight Without Armour\" (1937), as well as the early Technicolour films \"The Drum\" (1938) and \"The Four Feathers\" (1939). These had followed closely on from \"Wings of the Morning\" (1937), the UK's first three-strip Technicolour feature film, made by the local offshoot of 20th Century Fox. Although some of Korda's films indulged in \"unrelenting pro-Empire flag waving\", those featuring Sabu turned him into \"a huge international star\"; \"for many years\" he had the highest profile of any actor of Indian origin. Paul Robeson was also cast in leading roles when \"there were hardly any opportunities\" for African Americans \"to play challenging roles\" in their own country's productions.\nIn 1933, the British Film Institute was established as the lead organisation for film in the UK. They set up the National Film Library in 1935 (now known as the BFI National Archive), with Ernest Lindgren as its curator.\nIn 1934, J. Arthur Rank became a co-founder of British National Films Company and they helped create Pinewood Studios, which opened in 1936. Also in 1936, Rank took over General Film Distributors and in 1937, Rank founded The Rank Organisation. In 1938, General Film Distributors became affiliated with Odeon Cinemas.\nRising expenditure and over-optimistic expectations of expansion into the American market caused a financial crisis in 1937, after an all-time high of 192 films were released in 1936. Of the 640 British production companies registered between 1925 and 1936, only 20 were still active in 1937. Moreover, the 1927 Films Act was up for renewal. The replacement Cinematograph Films Act 1938 provided incentives, via a \"quality test\", for UK companies to make fewer films, but of higher quality, and to eliminate the \"quota quickies\". Influenced by world politics, it encouraged American investment and imports. One result was the creation of MGM-British, an English subsidiary of the largest American studio, which produced four films before the war, including \"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\" (1939).\nThe new venture was initially based at Denham Studios. Korda himself lost control of the facility in 1939 to the Rank Organisation. Circumstances forced Korda's \"The Thief of Bagdad\" (1940), a spectacular fantasy film, to be completed in California, where Korda continued his film career during the war.\nBy now contracted to Gaumont British, Alfred Hitchcock had settled on the thriller genre by the mid-1930s with \"The Man Who Knew Too Much\" (1934), \"The 39 Steps\" (1935) and \"The Lady Vanishes\" (1938). Lauded in Britain where he was dubbed \"Alfred the Great\" by \"Picturegoer\" magazine, Hitchcock's reputation was beginning to develop overseas, with a \"New York Times\" feature writer asserting; \"Three unique and valuable institutions the British have that we in America have not. Magna Carta, the Tower Bridge and Alfred Hitchcock, the greatest director of screen melodramas in the world.\" Hitchcock was then signed up to a seven-year contract by Selznick and moved to Hollywood.\nSecond World War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The idea of a nation of devoted cinema-goers is inextricably linked with the number of classic films released during the war years. This was British cinema\u2019s \u2018golden age\u2019, a period in which filmmakers such as Humphrey Jennings, David Lean, Powell and Pressburger, and Carol Reed came to the fore.\"\nPublished in \"The Times\" on 5 September 1939, two days after Britain declared war on Germany, George Bernard Shaw\u2019s letter protested against a government order to close all places of entertainment, including cinemas. \u2018What agent of Chancellor Hitler is it who has suggested that we should all cower in darkness and terror \u201cfor the duration\u201d?\u2019. Within two weeks of the order cinemas in the provinces were reopened, followed by central London within a month. In 1940, cinema admissions figures rose, to just over 1 billion for the year, and they continued rising to over 1.5 billion in 1943, 1944 and 1945.\nHumphrey Jennings began his career as a documentary film maker just before the war, in some cases working in collaboration with co-directors. \"London Can Take It\" (with Harry Wat, 1940) detailed the Blitz while \"Listen to Britain\" (with Stewart McAllister, 1942) looked at the home front. The Crown Film Unit, part of the Ministry of Information took over the responsibilities of the GPO Film Unit in 1940. Paul Rotha and Alberto Cavalcanti were colleagues of Jennings. British films began to make use of documentary techniques; Cavalcanti joined Ealing for \"Went the Day Well?\" (1942),\nMany other films helped to shape the popular image of the nation at war. Among the best known of these films are \"In Which We Serve\" (1942), \"We Dive at Dawn\" (1943), \"Millions Like Us\" (1943) and \"The Way Ahead\" (1944). The war years also saw the emergence of The Archers partnership between director Michael Powell and the Hungarian-born writer-producer Emeric Pressburger with films such as \"The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp\" (1943) and \"A Canterbury Tale\" (1944).\nTwo Cities Films, an independent production company releasing their films through a Rank subsidiary, also made some important films, including the No\u00ebl Coward and David Lean collaborations \"This Happy Breed\" (1944) and \"Blithe Spirit\" (1945) as well as Laurence Olivier's \"Henry V\" (1944). By this time, Gainsborough Studios were releasing their series of critically derided but immensely popular period melodramas, including \"The Man in Grey\" (1943) and \"The Wicked Lady\" (1945). New stars, such as Margaret Lockwood and James Mason, emerged in the Gainsborough films.\nPost-war cinema.\nTowards the end of the 1940s, the Rank Organisation became the dominant force behind British film-making, having acquired a number of British studios and the Gaumont chain (in 1941) to add to its Odeon Cinemas. Rank's serious financial crisis in 1949, a substantial loss and debt, resulted in the contraction of its film production. In practice, Rank maintained an industry duopoly with ABPC (later absorbed by EMI) for many years.\nFor the moment, the industry hit new heights of creativity in the immediate post-war years. Among the most significant films produced during this period were David Lean's \"Brief Encounter\" (1945) and his Dickens adaptations \"Great Expectations\" (1946) and \"Oliver Twist\" (1948), Ken Annakin's comedy \"Miranda\" (1948) starring Glynis Johns, Carol Reed's thrillers \"Odd Man Out\" (1947) and \"The Third Man\" (1949), and Powell and Pressburger's \"A Matter of Life and Death\" (1946), \"Black Narcissus\" (1947) and \"The Red Shoes\" (1948), the most commercially successful film of its year in the United States. Laurence Olivier's \"Hamlet\" (also 1948), was the first non-American film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture. Ealing Studios (financially backed by Rank) began to produce their most celebrated comedies, with three of the best remembered films, \"Whisky Galore\" (1948), \"Kind Hearts and Coronets\" and \"Passport to Pimlico\" (both 1949), being on release almost simultaneously. Their portmanteau horror film \"Dead of Night\" (1945) is also particularly highly regarded.\nUnder the Import Duties Act 1932, HM Treasury levied a 75% tariff on all film imports on 6 August 1947 which became known as Dalton Duty (after Hugh Dalton then the Chancellor of the Exchequer). The tax came into effect on 8 August, applying to all imported films, of which the overwhelming majority came from the United States; American film studio revenues from the UK had been in excess of US$68 million in 1946. The following day, 9 August, the Motion Picture Association of America announced that no further films would be supplied to British cinemas until further notice. The Dalton Duty was ended on 3 May 1948 with the American studios again exported films to the UK though the Marshall Plan prohibited US film companies from taking foreign exchange out of the nations their films played in.\nFollowing the Cinematograph Film Production (Special Loans) Act 1949, the National Film Finance Corporation (NFFC) was established as a British film funding agency.\nThe Eady Levy, named after Sir Wilfred Eady was a tax on box office receipts in the United Kingdom in order to support the British Film industry. It was established in 1950 coming into effect in 1957. A direct governmental payment to British-based producers would have qualified as a subsidy under the terms of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and would have led to objections from American film producers. An indirect levy did not qualify as a subsidy, and so was a suitable way of providing additional funding for the UK film industry whilst avoiding criticism from abroad.\nIn 1951, the National Film Theatre was initially opened in a temporary building at the Festival of Britain. It moved to its present location on the South Bank in London for the first London Film Festival on 16 October 1957 run by the BFI.\nDuring the 1950s, the British industry began to concentrate on popular comedies and World War II dramas aimed more squarely at the domestic audience. The war films were often based on true stories and made in a similar low-key style to their wartime predecessors. They helped to make stars of actors like John Mills, Jack Hawkins and Kenneth More. Some of the most successful included \"The Cruel Sea\" (1953), \"The Dam Busters\" (1954), \"The Colditz Story\" (1955) and \"Reach for the Sky\" (1956).\nThe Rank Organisation produced some comedy successes, such as \"Genevieve\" (1953). The writer/director/producer team of twin brothers John and Roy Boulting also produced a series of successful satires on British life and institutions, beginning with \"Private's Progress\" (1956), and continuing with (among others) \"Brothers in Law\" (1957), \"Carlton-Browne of the F.O.\" (1958), and \"I'm All Right Jack\" (1959). Starring in \"School for Scoundrels\" (1960), the British Film Institute thought Terry-Thomas was \"outstanding as a classic British bounder\".\nPopular comedy series included the \"Doctor\" series, beginning with \"Doctor in the House\" (1954). The series originally starred Dirk Bogarde, probably the British industry's most popular star of the 1950s, though later films had Michael Craig and Leslie Phillips in leading roles. The Carry On series began in 1958 with regular instalments appearing for the next twenty years. The Italian director-producer Mario Zampi also made a number of successful black comedies, including \"Laughter in Paradise\" (1951), \"The Naked Truth\" (1957) and \"Too Many Crooks\" (1958). Ealing Studios had continued its run of successful comedies, including \"The Lavender Hill Mob\" (1951) and \"The Ladykillers\" (1955), but the company ceased production in 1958, after the studios had already been bought by the BBC.\nLess restrictive censorship towards the end of the 1950s encouraged film producer Hammer Films to embark on their series of commercially successful horror films. Beginning with adaptations of Nigel Kneale's BBC science fiction serials \"The Quatermass Experiment\" (1955) and \"Quatermass II\" (1957), Hammer quickly graduated to \"The Curse of Frankenstein\" (1957) and \"Dracula\" (1958), both deceptively lavish and the first gothic horror films in colour. The studio turned out numerous sequels and variants, with English actors Peter Cushing and Christopher Lee being the most regular leads. \"Peeping Tom\" (1960), a now highly regarded thriller, with horror elements, set in the contemporary period, was badly received by the critics at the time, and effectively finished the career of Michael Powell, its director.\nSocial realism.\nThe British New Wave film makers attempted to produce social realist films (see also 'kitchen sink realism') attempted in commercial feature films released between around 1959 and 1963 to convey narratives about a wider spectrum of people in Britain than the country's earlier films had done. These individuals, principally Karel Reisz, Lindsay Anderson and Tony Richardson, were also involved in the short lived Oxford film journal \"Sequence\" and the \"Free Cinema\" documentary film movement. The 1956 statement of Free Cinema, the name was coined by Anderson, asserted: \"No film can be too personal. The image speaks. Sounds amplifies and comments. Size is irrelevant. Perfection is not an aim. An attitude means a style. A style means an attitude.\" Anderson, in particular, was dismissive of the commercial film industry. Their documentary films included Anderson's \"Every Day Except Christmas\", among several sponsored by Ford of Britain, and Richardson's \"Momma Don't Allow\". Another member of this group, John Schlesinger, made documentaries for the BBC's \"Monitor\" arts series.\nTogether with future James Bond co-producer Harry Saltzman, dramatist John Osborne and Tony Richardson established the company Woodfall Films to produce their early feature films. These included adaptations of Richardson's stage productions of Osborne's \"Look Back in Anger\" (1959), with Richard Burton, and \"The Entertainer\" (1960) with Laurence Olivier, both from Osborne's own screenplays. Such films as Reisz's \"Saturday Night and Sunday Morning\" (also 1960), Richardson's \"A Taste of Honey\" (1961), Schlesinger's \"A Kind of Loving\" (1962) and \"Billy Liar\" (1963), and Anderson's \"This Sporting Life\" (1963) are often associated with a new openness about working-class life or previously taboo issues.\nThe team of Basil Dearden and Michael Relph, from an earlier generation, \"probe[d] into the social issues that now confronted social stability and the establishment of the promised peacetime consensus\". \"Pool of London\" (1950). and \"Sapphire\" (1959) were early attempts to create narratives about racial tensions and an emerging multi-cultural Britain. Dearden and Relph's \"Victim\" (1961), was about the blackmail of homosexuals. Influenced by the Wolfenden report of four years earlier, which advocated the decriminalising of homosexual sexual activity, this was \"the first British film to deal explicitly with homosexuality\". Unlike the New Wave film makers though, critical responses to Dearden's and Relph's work have not generally been positive.\nThe 1960s.\nAs the 1960s progressed, American studios returned to financially supporting British films, especially those that capitalised on the \"swinging London\" image propagated by \"Time\" magazine in 1966. Films like \"Darling\", \"The Knack ...and How to Get It\" (both 1965), \"Alfie\" and \"Georgy Girl\" (both 1966), all explored this phenomenon. \"Blowup\" (also 1966), and later \"Women in Love\" (1969), showed female and then male full-frontal nudity on screen in mainstream British films for the first time.\nAt the same time, film producers Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli combined sex with exotic locations, casual violence and self-referential humour in the phenomenally successful James Bond series with Sean Connery in the leading role. The first film \"Dr. No\" (1962) was a sleeper hit in the UK and the second, \"From Russia with Love\" (1963), a hit worldwide. By the time of the third film, \"Goldfinger\" (1964), the series had become a global phenomenon, reaching its commercial peak with \"Thunderball\" the following year. The series' success led to a spy film boom with many Bond imitations. Bond co-producer Saltzman also instigated a rival series of more realistic spy films based on the novels of Len Deighton. Michael Caine starred as bespectacled spy Harry Palmer in \"The Ipcress File\" (1965), and two sequels in the next few years. Other more downbeat espionage films were adapted from John le Carr\u00e9 novels, such as \"The Spy Who Came in from the Cold\" (1965) and \"The Deadly Affair\" (1966).\nAmerican directors were regularly working in London throughout the decade, but several became permanent residents in the UK. Blacklisted in America, Joseph Losey had a significant influence on British cinema in the 1960s, particularly with his collaborations with playwright Harold Pinter and leading man Dirk Bogarde, including \"The Servant\" (1963) and \"Accident\" (1967). Voluntary exiles Richard Lester and Stanley Kubrick were also active in the UK. Lester had major hits with The Beatles film \"A Hard Day's Night\" (1964) and \"The Knack ...and How to Get It\" (1965) and Kubrick with \"Dr. Strangelove\" (1963) and \"\" (1968). While Kubrick settled in Hertfordshire in the early 1960s and would remain in England for the rest of his career, these two films retained a strong American influence. Other films of this era involved prominent filmmakers from elsewhere in Europe, \"Repulsion\" (1965) and \"Blowup\" (1966) were the first English language films of the Polish director Roman Polanski and the Italian Michelangelo Antonioni respectively.\nHistorical films as diverse as \"Lawrence of Arabia\" (1962), \"Tom Jones\" (1963), and \"A Man for All Seasons\" (1966) benefited from the investment of American studios. Major films like \"Becket\" (1964), \"Khartoum\" (1966) and \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\" (1968) were regularly mounted, while smaller-scale films, including \"Accident\" (1967), were big critical successes. Four of the decade's Academy Award winners for best picture were British productions, including six Oscars for the film musical \"Oliver!\" (1968), based on the Charles Dickens novel \"Oliver Twist\".\nAfter directing several contributions to the BBC's \"Wednesday Play\" anthology series, Ken Loach began his feature film career with the social realist \"Poor Cow\" (1967) and \"Kes\" (1969). Meanwhile, the controversy around Peter Watkins \"The War Game\" (1965), which won the Best Documentary Film Oscar in 1967, but had been suppressed by the BBC who had commissioned it, would ultimately lead Watkins to work exclusively outside Britain.\n1970s.\nAmerican studios cut back on British productions, and in many cases withdrew from financing them altogether. Films financed by American interests were still being made, including Billy Wilder's \"The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes\" (1970), but for a time funds became hard to come by.\nMore relaxed censorship also brought several controversial films, including Nicolas Roeg and Donald Cammell's \"Performance\", Ken Russell's \"The Devils\" (1971), Sam Peckinpah's \"Straw Dogs\" (1971), and Stanley Kubrick's \"A Clockwork Orange\" (1971) starring Malcolm McDowell as the leader of a gang of thugs in a dystopian future Britain.\nOther films during the early 1970s included the Edwardian drama \"The Go-Between\" (1971), which won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival, Nicolas Roeg's Venice-set supernatural thriller \"Don't Look Now\" (1973) and Mike Hodges' gangster drama \"Get Carter\" (1971) starring Michael Caine. Alfred Hitchcock returned to Britain to shoot \"Frenzy\" (1972), Other productions such as Richard Attenborough's \"Young Winston\" (1972) and \"A Bridge Too Far\" (1977) met with mixed commercial success. The British horror film cycle associated with Hammer Film Productions, Amicus and Tigon drew to a close, despite attempts by Hammer to spice up the formula with added nudity and gore. Although some attempts were made to broaden the range of British horror films, such as with \"The Wicker Man\" (1973), these films made little impact at the box office, In 1976, British Lion, who produced \"The Wicker Man\", were finally absorbed into the film division of EMI, who had taken over ABPC in 1969. The duopoly in British cinema exhibition, via Rank and now EMI, continued.\nIn the early 1970s, the government reduced its funding of the National Film Finance Corporation so the NFFC started to operate as a consortium, including with banks, which led to them using more commercial criteria for funding British films rather than focusing on quality or new talent, moving to fund films based on TV shows such as \"Up Pompeii\" (1971).\nSome other British producers, including Hammer, turned to television for inspiration, and big screen versions of popular sitcoms like \"On the Buses\" (1971) and \"Steptoe and Son\" (1972) proved successful with domestic audiences, the former had greater domestic box office returns in its year than the Bond film, \"Diamonds Are Forever\" and in 1973, an established British actor Roger Moore was cast as Bond in, \"Live and Let Die\", it was a commercial success and Moore would continue the role for the next 12 years. Low-budget British sex comedies included the \"Confessions of\u00a0...\" series starring Robin Askwith, beginning with \"Confessions of a Window Cleaner\" (1974). More elevated comedy films came from the Monty Python team, also from television. Their two most successful films were \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" (1975) and \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\" (1979), the latter a major commercial success, probably at least in part due to the controversy at the time surrounding its subject.\nSome American productions did return to the major British studios in 1977\u201379, including the original \"Star Wars\" (1977) at Elstree Studios, \"Superman\" (1978) at Pinewood, and \"Alien\" (1979) at Shepperton. Successful adaptations were made in the decade of the Agatha Christie novels \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1974) and \"Death on the Nile\" (1978). The entry of Lew Grade's company ITC into film production in the latter half of the decade brought only a few box office successes and an unsustainable number of failures\n1980s.\nIn 1980, only 31 British films were made, a 50% decline from the previous year and the lowest number since 1914, and production fell again in 1981 to 24 films. The industry suffered further blows from falling cinema attendances, which reached a record low of 54 million in 1984, and the elimination of the 1957 Eady Levy, a tax concession, in the same year. The concession had made it possible for an overseas based film company to write off a large amount of its production costs by filming in the UK \u2013 this was what attracted a succession of big-budget American productions to British studios in the 1970s. These factors led to significant changes in the industry, with the profitability of British films now \"increasingly reliant on secondary markets such as video and television, and Channel 4\u00a0... [became] a crucial part of the funding equation.\"\nWith the removal of the levy, multiplex cinemas were introduced to the United Kingdom with the opening of a ten-screen cinema by AMC Cinemas at The Point in Milton Keynes in 1985 and the number of screens in the UK increased by around 500 over the decade leading to increased attendances of almost 100 million by the end of the decade.\nThe 1980s soon saw a renewed optimism, led by smaller independent production companies such as Goldcrest, HandMade Films and Merchant Ivory Productions.\nHandmade Films, which was partly owned by George Harrison, was originally formed to take over the production of \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\", after EMI's Bernard Delfont (Lew Grade's brother) had pulled out. Handmade also bought and released the gangster drama \"The Long Good Friday\" (1980), produced by a Lew Grade subsidiary, after its original backers became cautious. Members of the Python team were involved in other comedies during the decade, including Terry Gilliam's fantasy films \"Time Bandits\" (1981) and \"Brazil\" (1985), the black comedy \"Withnail &amp; I\" (1987), and John Cleese's hit \"A Fish Called Wanda\" (1988), while Michael Palin starred in \"A Private Function\" (1984), from Alan Bennett's first screenplay for the cinema screen.\nGoldcrest producer David Puttnam has been described as \"the nearest thing to a mogul that British cinema has had in the last quarter of the 20th century.\" Under Puttnam, a generation of British directors emerged making popular films with international distribution. Some of the talent backed by Puttnam \u2014 Hugh Hudson, Ridley Scott, Alan Parker, and Adrian Lyne \u2014 had shot commercials; Puttnam himself had begun his career in the advertising industry. When Hudson's \"Chariots of Fire\" (1981) won 4 Academy Awards in 1982, including Best Picture, its writer Colin Welland declared \"the British are coming!\". When \"Gandhi\" (1982), another Goldcrest film, picked up a Best Picture Oscar, it looked as if he was right.\nIt prompted a cycle of period films \u2013 some with a large budget for a British film, such as David Lean's final film \"A Passage to India\" (1984), alongside the lower-budget Merchant Ivory adaptations of the works of E. M. Forster, such as \"A Room with a View\" (1986). But further attempts to make 'big' productions for the US market ended in failure, with Goldcrest losing its independence after \"Revolution\" (1985) and \"Absolute Beginners\" (1986) were commercial and critical flops. Another Goldcrest film, Roland Joff\u00e9's \"The Mission\" (also 1986), won the 1986 Palme d'Or, but did not go into profit either. Joff\u00e9's earlier \"The Killing Fields\" (1984) had been both a critical and financial success. These were Joff\u00e9's first two feature films and were amongst those produced by Puttnam.\nMainly outside the commercial sector, film makers from the new commonwealth countries had begun to emerge during the 1970s. Horace Ov\u00e9's \"Pressure\" (1975) had been funded by the British Film Institute as was \"A Private Enterprise\" (1974), these being the first Black British and Asian British films, respectively. The 1980s however saw a wave of new talent, with films such as Franco Rosso's \"Babylon\" (1980), Menelik Shabazz's \"Burning an Illusion\" (1981) and Po-Chih Leong's \"Ping Pong\" (1986; one of the first films about Britain's Chinese community). Many of these films were assisted by the newly formed Channel 4, which had an official remit to provide for \"minority audiences.\" Commercial success was first achieved with \"My Beautiful Laundrette\" (1985). Dealing with racial and gay issues, it was developed from Hanif Kureishi's first film script. \"My Beautiful Laundrette\" features Daniel Day-Lewis in a leading role. Day-Lewis and other young British actors who were becoming stars, such as Gary Oldman, Colin Firth, Tim Roth and Rupert Everett, were dubbed the Brit Pack.\nWith the involvement of Channel 4 in film production, talents from television moved into feature films with Stephen Frears (\"My Beautiful Laundrette\") and Mike Newell with \"Dance with a Stranger\" (1985). John Boorman, who had been working in the US, was encouraged back to the UK to make \"Hope and Glory\" (1987). Channel Four also became a major sponsor of the British Film Institute's Production Board, which backed three of Britain's most critically acclaimed filmmakers: Derek Jarman (\"The Last of England\", 1987), Terence Davies (\"Distant Voices, Still Lives\", 1988), and Peter Greenaway; the latter of whom gained surprising commercial success with \"The Draughtsman's Contract\" (1982) and \"The Cook, the Thief, His Wife &amp; Her Lover\" (1989). Stephen Woolley's company Palace Pictures also produced some successful films, including Neil Jordan's \"The Company of Wolves\" (1984) and \"Mona Lisa\" (1986), before collapsing amid a series of unsuccessful films. Amongst the other British films of the decade were Bill Forsyth's \"Gregory's Girl\" (1981) and \"Local Hero\" (1983), Lewis Gilbert's \"Educating Rita\" (1983), Peter Yates' \"The Dresser\" (1983) and Kenneth Branagh's directorial debut, \"Henry V\" (1989).\n1990s.\nCompared to the 1980s, investment in film production rose dramatically. In 1989, annual investment was a meagre \u00a3104 million. By 1996, this figure had soared to \u00a3741 million. Nevertheless, the dependence on finance from television broadcasters such as the BBC and Channel 4 meant that budgets were often low and indigenous production was very fragmented: the film industry mostly relied on Hollywood inward investment. According to critic Neil Watson, it was hoped that the \u00a390 million apportioned by the new National Lottery into three franchises (The Film Consortium, Path\u00e9 Pictures, and DNA) would fill the gap, but \"corporate and equity finance for the UK film production industry continues to be thin on the ground and most production companies operating in the sector remain hopelessly under-capitalised.\"\nThese problems were mostly compensated by PolyGram Filmed Entertainment, a film studio whose British subsidiary Working Title Films released a Richard Curtis-scripted comedy \"Four Weddings and a Funeral\" (1994). It grossed $244 million worldwide and introduced Hugh Grant to global fame, led to renewed interest and investment in British films, and set a pattern for British-set romantic comedies, including \"Sliding Doors\" (1998) and \"Notting Hill\" (1999). Other Working Titles films included \"Bean\" (1997), \"Elizabeth\" (1998) and \"Captain Corelli's Mandolin\" (2001). PFE was eventually sold and merged with Universal Pictures in 1999, the hopes and expectations of \"building a British-based company which could compete with Hollywood in its home market [had] eventually collapsed.\"\nTax incentives allowed American producers to increasingly invest in UK-based film production throughout the 1990s, including films such as \"Interview with the Vampire\" (1994), ' (1996), \"Saving Private Ryan\" (1998), ' (1999) and \"The Mummy\" (1999). Miramax also distributed Neil Jordan's acclaimed thriller \"The Crying Game\" (1992), which was generally ignored on its initial release in the UK, but was a considerable success in the United States. The same company also enjoyed some success releasing the BBC period drama \"Enchanted April\" (1992) and \"The Wings of the Dove\" (1997).\nAmong the more successful British films were the Merchant Ivory productions \"Howards End\" (1992) and \"The Remains of the Day\" (1993), Richard Attenborough's \"Shadowlands\" (1993), and Kenneth Branagh's Shakespeare adaptations. \"The Madness of King George\" (1994) proved there was still a market for British costume dramas, and other period films followed, including \"Sense and Sensibility\" (1995), \"Restoration\" (1995), \"Emma\" (1996), \"Mrs. Brown\" (1997), \"Basil\" (1998), \"Shakespeare in Love\" (1998) and \"Topsy-Turvy\" (1999).\nAfter a six-year hiatus for legal reasons the James Bond films returned to production with the 17th Bond film, \"GoldenEye\". With their traditional home Pinewood Studios fully booked, a new studio was created for the film in a former Rolls-Royce aero-engine factory at Leavesden in Hertfordshire.\nMike Leigh emerged as a significant figure in British cinema in the 1990s, with a series of films financed by Channel 4 about working and middle class life in modern England, including \"Life Is Sweet\" (1991), \"Naked\" (1993) and his biggest hit \"Secrets &amp; Lies\" (1996), which won the Palme d'Or at Cannes.\nOther new talents to emerge during the decade included the writer-director-producer team of John Hodge, Danny Boyle and Andrew Macdonald responsible for \"Shallow Grave\" (1994) and \"Trainspotting\" (1996). The latter film generated interested in other \"regional\" productions, including the Scottish films \"Small Faces\" (1996), \"Ratcatcher\" (1999) and \"My Name Is Joe\" (1998).\n2000s.\nThe first decade of the 21st century was a relatively successful one for the British film industry. Many British films found a wide international audience due to funding from BBC Films, Film 4 and the UK Film Council, and some independent production companies, such as Working Title, secured financing and distribution deals with major American studios. Working Title scored three major international successes, all starring Hugh Grant and Colin Firth, with the romantic comedies \"Bridget Jones's Diary\" (2001), which grossed $254 million worldwide; the sequel \"\", which earned $228 million; and Richard Curtis's directorial debut \"Love Actually\" (2003), which grossed $239 million. The most successful of all, Phyllida Lloyd's \"Mamma Mia!\" (2008), grossed $601 million.\nThe new decade saw a major new film series in the Harry Potter films, beginning with \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" in 2001. David Heyman's company Heyday Films has produced seven sequels, with the final title released in two parts \u2013 \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows \u2013 Part 1\" in 2010 and \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows \u2013 Part 2\" in 2011. All were filmed at Leavesden Studios in England.\nAardman Animations' Nick Park, the creator of Wallace and Gromit and the Creature Comforts series, produced his first feature-length film, \"Chicken Run\" in 2000. Co-directed with Peter Lord, the film was a major success worldwide and one of the most successful British films of its year. Park's follow up, \"\" was another worldwide hit: it grossed $56 million at the US box office and \u00a332 million in the UK. It also won the 2005 Academy Award for Best Animated Feature.\nHowever it was usually through domestically funded features throughout the decade that British directors and films won awards at the top international film festivals. In 2003, Michael Winterbottom won the Golden Bear at the Berlin Film Festival for \"In This World\". In 2004, Mike Leigh directed \"Vera Drake\", an account of a housewife who leads a double life as an abortion provider in 1950s London. The film won the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival. In 2006 Stephen Frears directed \"The Queen\" based on the events surrounding the death of Princess Diana, which won the Best Actress prize at the Venice Film Festival and Academy Awards and the BAFTA for Best Film. In 2006, Ken Loach won the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival with his account of the struggle for Irish Independence in \"The Wind That Shakes the Barley\". Joe Wright's adaptation of the Ian McEwan novel \"Atonement\" was nominated for 7 Academy Awards, including Best Film and won the Golden Globe and BAFTA for Best Film. \"Slumdog Millionaire\" was filmed entirely in Mumbai with a mostly Indian cast, though with a British director (Danny Boyle), producer (Christian Colson), screenwriter (Simon Beaufoy) and star (Dev Patel)\u2014the film was all-British financed via Film4 and Celador. It has received worldwide critical acclaim. It has won four Golden Globes, seven BAFTA Awards and eight Academy Awards, including Best Director and Best Film. \"The King's Speech\", which tells the story of King George VI's attempts to overcome his speech impediment, was directed by Tom Hooper and filmed almost entirely in London. It received four Academy Awards (including Best Film, Best Director, Best Actor and Best Screenplay) in 2011.\nThe start of the 21st century saw Asian British cinema assert itself at the box office, starting with \"East Is East\" (1999) and continuing with \"Bend It Like Beckham\" (2002). Other notable British Asian films from this period include \"My Son the Fanatic\" (1997), \"Ae Fond Kiss... (2004)\", \"Mischief Night (2006)\", \"Yasmin\" (2004) and \"Four Lions\" (2010). Some argue it has brought more flexible attitudes towards casting Black and Asian British actors, with Robbie Gee and Naomie Harris take leading roles in \"Underworld\" and \"28 Days Later\" respectively.\n2005 saw the emergence of The British Urban Film Festival, a timely addition to the film festival calendar, which recognised the influence of urban and black films on UK audiences and consequently began to showcase a growing profile of films in a genre previously not otherwise regularly seen in the capital's cinemas. Then, in 2006, \"Kidulthood\", a film depicting a group of teenagers growing up on the streets of West London, had a limited release. This was successfully followed up with a sequel \"Adulthood\" (2008) that was written and directed by actor Noel Clarke. The success of \"Kidulthood\" and \"Adulthood\" led to the release of several other films in the 2000s and 2010s such as \"Bullet Boy\" (2004), \"Life and Lyrics\" (2006), \"The Intent\" (2016), its sequel \"\" (2018), \"Blue Story\" and \"Rocks\" (both 2019), all of starred Black-British actors.\nLike the 1960s, this decade saw plenty of British films directed by imported talent. The American Woody Allen shot \"Match Point\" (2005) and three later films in London. The Mexican director Alfonso Cuar\u00f3n helmed \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\" (2004) and \"Children of Men\" (2006); New Zealand filmmaker Jane Campion made \"Bright Star\" (2009), a film set in 19th century London; Danish director Nicolas Winding Refn made \"Bronson\" (2008), a biopic about the English criminal Michael Gordon Peterson; the Spanish filmmaker Juan Carlos Fresnadillo directed \"28 Weeks Later\" (2007), a sequel to a British horror film; and two John le Carr\u00e9 adaptations were also directed by foreigners\u2014\"The Constant Gardener\" by the Brazilian Fernando Meirelles and \"Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy\" by the Swedish Tomas Alfredson. The decade also saw English actor Daniel Craig became the new James Bond with \"Casino Royale\", the 21st entry in the official Eon Productions series.\nDespite increasing competition from film studios in Australia and Eastern Europe, British studios such as Pinewood, Shepperton and Leavesden remained successful in hosting major productions, including \"Finding Neverland\", \"Closer\", \"Batman Begins\", \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\", \"United 93\", \"The Phantom of the Opera\", ', \"Fantastic Mr. Fox\", \"Robin Hood\", ', \"Hugo\" and \"War Horse\".\nIn February 2007, the UK became home to Europe's first DCI-compliant fully digital multiplex cinemas with the launch of Odeon Hatfield and Odeon Surrey Quays (in London), with a total of 18 digital screens.\nIn November 2010, Warner Bros. completed the acquisition of Leavesden Film Studios, becoming the first Hollywood studio since the 1940s to have a permanent base in the UK, and announced plans to invest \u00a3100 million in the site.\nA study by the British Film Institute published in December 2013 found that of the 613 tracked British films released between 2003 and 2010 only 7% made a profit. Films with low budgets, those that cost below \u00a3500,000 to produce, were even less likely to gain a return on outlay. Of these films, only 3.1% went into the black. At the top end of budgets for the British industry, under a fifth of films that cost \u00a310million went into profit.\n2010s.\nOn 26 July 2010 it was announced that the UK Film Council, which was the main body responsible for the development of promotion of British cinema during the 2000s, would be abolished, with many of the abolished body's functions being taken over by the British Film Institute. Actors and professionals, including James McAvoy, Emily Blunt, Pete Postlethwaite, Damian Lewis, Timothy Spall, Daniel Barber and Ian Holm, campaigned against the Council's abolition. The move also led American actor and director Clint Eastwood (who had filmed \"Hereafter\" in London) to write to the British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne in August 2010 to protest the decision to close the Council. Eastwood warned Osborne that the closure could result in fewer foreign production companies choosing to work in the UK. A grass-roots online campaign was launched and a petition established by supporters of the Council.\nCountering this, a few professionals, including Michael Winner and Julian Fellowes, supported the Government's decision. A number of other organisations responded positively.\nAt the closure of the UK Film Council on 31 March 2011, \"The Guardian\" reported that \"The UKFC's entire annual budget was a reported \u00a33m, while the cost of closing it down and restructuring is estimated to have been almost four times that amount.\" One of the UKFC's last films, \"The King's Speech\", is estimated to have cost $15m to make and grossed $235m, besides winning several Academy Awards. UKFC invested $1.6m for a 34% share of net profits, a valuable stake that will pass to the British Film Institute.\nIn June 2012, Warner opened the re-developed Leavesden studio for business. The most commercially successful British directors in recent years are Paul Greengrass, Mike Newell, Christopher Nolan, Ridley Scott and David Yates.\nIn January 2012, at Pinewood Studios to visit film-related businesses, UK Prime Minister David Cameron said that his government had bold ambitions for the film industry: \"Our role, and that of the BFI, should be to support the sector in becoming even more dynamic and entrepreneurial, helping UK producers to make commercially successful pictures that rival the quality and impact of the best international productions. Just as the British Film Commission has played a crucial role in attracting the biggest and best international studios to produce their films here, so we must incentivise UK producers to chase new markets both here and overseas.\"\nThe film industry remains an important earner for the British economy. According to a UK Film Council press release of 20 January 2011, \u00a31.115 billion was spent on UK film production during 2010. A 2014 survey suggested that British-made films were generally more highly rated than Hollywood productions, especially when considering low-budget UK productions.\n2020s.\nIn November 2022, director Danny Boyle expressed a negative sentiment of the British film industry in recent years, stating that \"I am not sure we are great filmmakers, to be absolutely honest. As a nation, our two artforms are theatre, in a middle-class sense, and pop music, because we are extraordinary at it.\"\nArt cinema.\nAlthough it had been funding British experimental films as early as 1952, the British Film Institute's foundation of a production board in 1964\u2014and a substantial increase in public funding from 1971 onwards\u2014enabled it to become a dominant force in developing British art cinema in the 1970s and 80s: from the first of Bill Douglas's Trilogy \"My Childhood\" (1972), and of Terence Davies' Trilogy \"Childhood\" (1978), via Peter Greenaway's earliest films (including the surprising commercial success of \"The Draughtsman's Contract\" (1982)) and Derek Jarman's championing of the New Queer Cinema. The first full-length feature produced under the BFI's new scheme was Kevin Brownlow and Andrew Mollo's \"Winstanley\" (1975), while others included \"Moon Over the Alley\" (1975), \"Requiem for a Village\" (1975), the openly avant-garde \"Central Bazaar\" (1973), \"Pressure\" (1975) and \"A Private Enterprise\" (1974) \u2013 the last two being, respectively, the first British Black and Asian features.\nThe release of Derek Jarman's \"Jubilee\" (1978) marked the beginning of a successful period of UK art cinema, continuing into the 1980s with filmmakers like Sally Potter. Unlike the previous generation of British film makers who had broken into directing and production after careers in the theatre or on television, the Art Cinema Directors were mostly the products of Art Schools. Many of these filmmakers were championed in their early career by the London Film Makers Cooperative and their work was the subject of detailed theoretical analysis in the journal \"Screen Education\". Peter Greenaway was an early pioneer of the use of computer generated imagery blended with filmed footage and was also one of the first directors to film entirely on high definition video for a cinema release.\nWith the launch of Channel 4 and its Film on Four commissioning strand, Art Cinema was promoted to a wider audience. However, the Channel had a sharp change in its commissioning policy in the early 1990s and Greenaway and others were forced to seek European co-production financing.\nFilm technology.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, British studios established a reputation for great special effects in films such as \"Superman\" (1978), \"Alien\" (1979), and \"Batman\" (1989). Some of this reputation was founded on the core of talent brought together for the filming of \"\" (1968) who subsequently worked together on series and feature films for Gerry Anderson. Thanks to the Bristol-based Aardman Animations, the UK is still recognised as a world leader in the use of stop-motion animation.\nBritish special effects technicians and production designers are known for creating visual effects at a far lower cost than their counterparts in the US, as seen in \"Time Bandits\" (1981) and \"Brazil\" (1985). This reputation has continued through the 1990s and into the 21st century with films such as the James Bond series, \"Gladiator\" (2000) and the Harry Potter franchise.\nFrom the 1990s to the present day, there has been a progressive movement from traditional film opticals to an integrated digital film environment, with special effects, cutting, colour grading, and other post-production tasks all sharing the same all-digital infrastructure. The London-based visual effects company Framestore, with Tim Webber the visual effects supervisor, have worked on some of the most technically and artistically challenging projects, including, \"The Dark Knight\" (2008) and \"Gravity\" (2013), with new techniques involved in \"Gravity\" realized by Webber and the Framestore team taking three years to complete.\nThe availability of high-speed internet has made the British film industry capable of working closely with U.S. studios as part of globally distributed productions. As of 2005, this trend is expected to continue with moves towards (currently experimental) digital distribution and projection as mainstream technologies. The British film \"This Is Not a Love Song\" (2003) was the first to be streamed live on the Internet at the same time as its cinema premiere.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10794", "revid": "7226930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10794", "title": "History of cinema in India", "text": ""}
{"id": "10796", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10796", "title": "Feminist film theory", "text": "Theoretical film criticism derived from feminist theory and politics\nFeminist film theory is a theoretical film criticism derived from feminist politics and feminist theory influenced by second-wave feminism and brought about around the 1970s in the United States. With the advancements in film throughout the years feminist film theory has developed and changed to analyse the current ways of film and also go back to analyse films past. Feminists have many approaches to cinema analysis, regarding the film elements analyzed and their theoretical underpinnings.\nHistory.\nThe development of feminist film theory was influenced by second wave feminism and women's studies in the 1960s and 1970s. Initially in the United States in the early 1970s feminist film theory was generally based on sociological theory and focused on the function of female characters in film narratives or genres. Feminist film theory, such as Marjorie Rosen's \"Popcorn Venus: Women, Movies, and the American Dream\" (1973) and Molly Haskell\u2019s \"From Reverence to Rape: The Treatment of Women in Movies\" (1974) analyze the ways in which women are portrayed in film, and how this relates to a broader historical context. Additionally, feminist critiques also examine common stereotypes depicted in film, the extent to which the women were shown as active or passive, and the amount of screen time given to women.\nIn contrast, film theoreticians in England concerned themselves with critical theory, psychoanalysis, semiotics, and Marxism. Eventually, these ideas gained hold within the American scholarly community in the 1980s. Analysis generally focused on the meaning within a film's text and the way in which the text constructs a viewing subject. It also examined how the process of cinematic production affects how women are represented and reinforces sexism.\nBritish feminist film theorist, Laura Mulvey, best known for her essay, \"Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema\", written in 1973 and published in 1975 in the influential British film theory journal, \"Screen\" was influenced by the theories of Sigmund Freud and Jacques Lacan. \"Visual Pleasure\" is one of the first major essays that helped shift the orientation of film theory towards a psychoanalytic framework. Prior to Mulvey, film theorists such as Jean-Louis Baudry and Christian Metz used psychoanalytic ideas in their theoretical accounts of cinema. Mulvey's contribution, however, initiated the intersection of film theory, psychoanalysis and feminism.\nIn 1976, the journal Camera Obscura was published by beginning graduate students Janet Bergstrom, Sandy Flitterman, Elisabeth Lyon, and Constance Penley. They discussed how women where portrayed in films, but excluded from the development process. Camera Obscura is still published to this day by Duke University Press and has moved from just film theory to media studies.\nOther key influences come from Metz's essay \"The Imaginary Signifier\", \"Identification, Mirror,\" where he argues that viewing film is only possible through scopophilia (pleasure from looking, related to voyeurism), which is best exemplified in silent film. Also, according to Cynthia A. Freeland in \"Feminist Frameworks for Horror Films,\" feminist studies of horror films have focused on psychodynamics where the chief interest is \"on viewers' motives and interests in watching horror films\".\nBeginning in the early 1980s feminist film theory began to look at film through a more intersectional lens. The film journal \"Jump Cut\" published a special issue about titled \"Lesbians and Film\" in 1981 which examined the lack of lesbian identities in film. Jane Gaines's essay \"White Privilege and Looking Relations: Race and Gender in Feminist Film Theory\" examined the erasure of black women in cinema by white male filmmakers. While Lola Young argues that filmmakers of all races fail to break away from the use to tired stereotypes when depicting black women. Other theorists who wrote about feminist film theory and race include bell hooks and Michele Wallace.\nFrom 1985 onward the Matrixial theory of artist and psychoanalyst Bracha L. Ettinger revolutionized feminist film theory. \n Her concept, from her book, The Matrixial Gaze, has established a feminine gaze and has articulated its differences from the phallic gaze and its relation to feminine as well as maternal specificities and potentialities of \"coemergence\", offering a critique of Sigmund Freud's and Jacques Lacan's psychoanalysis, is extensively used in analysis of films, by female directors, like Chantal Akerman, as well as by male directors, like Pedro Almodovar. The matrixial gaze offers the female the position of a subject, not of an object, of the gaze, while deconstructing the structure of the subject itself, and offers border-time, border-space and a possibility for compassion and witnessing. Ettinger's notions articulate the links between aesthetics, ethics and trauma.\nRecently, scholars have expanded their work to include analysis of television and digital media. Additionally, they have begun to explore notions of difference, engaging in dialogue about the differences among women (part of movement away from essentialism in feminist work more generally), the various methodologies and perspectives contained under the umbrella of feminist film theory, and the multiplicity of methods and intended effects that influence the development of films. Scholars are also taking increasingly global perspectives, responding to postcolonialist criticisms of perceived Anglo- and Eurocentrism in the academy more generally. Increased focus has been given to, \"disparate feminisms, nationalisms, and media in various locations and across class, racial, and ethnic groups throughout the world\". Scholars in recent years have also turned their attention towards women in the silent film industry and their erasure from the history of those films and women's bodies and how they are portrayed in the films. Jane Gaines's Women's Film Pioneer Project (WFPP), a database of women who worked in the silent-era film industry, has been cited as a major achievement in recognizing pioneering women in the field of silent and non-silent film by scholars such as Rachel Schaff.\nAs of recent years many believe feminist film theory to be a fading area of feminism with the massive amount of coverage currently around media studies and theory. As these areas have grown the framework created in feminist film theory have been adapted to fit into analysing other forms of media.\nKey themes.\nThe gaze and the female spectator.\nConsidering the way that films are put together, many feminist film critics have pointed to what they argue is the \"male gaze\" that predominates classical Hollywood filmmaking. Budd Boetticher summarizes the view:\n\"What counts is what the heroine provokes, or rather what she represents. She is the one, or rather the love or fear she inspires in the hero, or else the concern he feels for her, who makes him act the way he does. In herself, the woman has not the slightest importance.\"\nLaura Mulvey expands on this conception to argue that in cinema, women are typically depicted in a passive role that provides visual pleasure through scopophilia, and identification with the on-screen male actor. She asserts: \"In their traditional exhibitionist role women are simultaneously looked at and displayed, with their appearance coded for strong visual and erotic impact so that they can be said to connote \"to-be-looked-at-ness\",\" and as a result contends that in film a woman is the \"bearer of meaning, not maker of meaning.\" Mulvey argues that the psychoanalytic theory of Jacques Lacan is the key to understanding how film creates such a space for female sexual objectification and exploitation through the combination of the patriarchal order of society, and 'looking' in itself as a pleasurable act of scopophilia, as \"the cinema satisfies a primordial wish for pleasurable looking.\"\nWhile Laura Mulvey's paper has a particular place in the feminist film theory, it is important to note that her ideas regarding ways of watching the cinema (from the voyeuristic element to the feelings of identification) are important to some feminist film theorists in terms of defining spectatorship from the psychoanalytical viewpoint.\nMulvey identifies three \"looks\" or perspectives that occur in film which, she argues, serve to sexually objectify women. The first is the perspective of the male character and how he perceives the female character. The second is the perspective of the spectator as they see the female character on screen. The third \"look\" joins the first two looks together: it is the male audience member's perspective of the male character in the film. This third perspective allows the male audience to take the female character as his own personal sex object because he can relate himself, through looking, to the male character in the film.\nIn the paper, Mulvey calls for a destruction of modern film structure as the only way to free women from their sexual objectification in film. She argues for a removal of the voyeurism encoded into film by creating distance between the male spectator and the female character. The only way to do so, Mulvey argues, is by destroying the element of voyeurism and \"the invisible guest\". Mulvey also asserts that the dominance men embody is only so because women exist, as without a woman for comparison, a man and his supremacy as the controller of visual pleasure are insignificant. For Mulvey, it is the presence of the female that defines the patriarchal order of society as well as the male psychology of thought.\nMulvey's argument is likely influenced by the time period in which she was writing. \"Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema\" was composed during the period of second-wave feminism, which was concerned with achieving equality for women in the workplace, and with exploring the psychological implications of sexual stereotypes. Mulvey calls for an eradication of female sexual objectivity, aligning herself with second-wave feminism. She argues that in order for women to be equally represented in the workplace, women must be portrayed as men are: as lacking sexual objectification.\nMulvey proposes in her notes to the Criterion Collection DVD of Michael Powell's controversial film, \"Peeping Tom\" (a film about a homicidal voyeur who films the deaths of his victims), that the cinema spectator's own voyeurism is made shockingly obvious and even more shockingly, the spectator identifies with the perverted protagonist. The inference is that she includes female spectators in that, identifying with the male observer rather than the female object of the gaze.\nRealism and counter cinema.\nThe early work of Marjorie Rosen and Molly Haskell on the representation of women in film was part of a movement to depict women more realistically, both in documentaries and narrative cinema. The growing female presence in the film industry was seen as a positive step toward realizing this goal, by drawing attention to feminist issues and putting forth an alternative, true-to-life view of women. However, Rosen and Haskell argue that these images are still mediated by the same factors as traditional film, such as the \"moving camera, composition, editing, lighting, and all varieties of sound.\" While acknowledging the value in inserting positive representations of women in film, some critics asserted that real change would only come about from reconsidering the role of film in society, often from a semiotic point of view.\nClaire Johnston put forth the idea that women's cinema can function as \"counter cinema.\" Through consciousness of the means of production and opposition of sexist ideologies, films made by women have the potential to posit an alternative to traditional Hollywood films. Initially, the attempt to show \"real\" women was praised, eventually critics such as Eileen McGarry claimed that the \"real\" women being shown on screen were still just contrived depictions. In reaction to this article, many women filmmakers integrated \"alternative forms and experimental techniques\" to \"encourage audiences to critique the seemingly transparent images on the screen and to question the manipulative techniques of filming and editing\".\nAdditional theories.\nB. Ruby Rich argues that feminist film theory should shift to look at films in a broader sense. Rich's essay \"In the Name of Feminist Film Criticism\" claims that films by women often receive praise for certain elements, while feminist undertones are ignored. Rich goes on to say that because of this feminist theory needs to focus on how film by women are being received.\nComing from a black feminist perspective, American scholar, bell hooks, put forth the notion of the \u201coppositional gaze,\u201d encouraging black women not to accept stereotypical representations in film, but rather actively critique them. The \u201coppositional gaze\u201d is a response to Mulvey's \"visual pleasure\" and states that just as women do not identify with female characters that are not \"real,\" women of color should respond similarly to the one denominational caricatures of black women.\nJanet Bergstrom's article \u201cEnunciation and Sexual Difference\u201d (1979) uses Sigmund Freud's ideas of bisexual responses, arguing that women are capable of identifying with male characters and men with women characters, either successively or simultaneously. Miriam Hansen, in \"Pleasure, Ambivalence, Identification: Valentino and Female Spectatorship\" (1984) put forth the idea that women are also able to view male characters as erotic objects of desire. In \"The Master's Dollhouse: Rear Window,\" Tania Modleski argues that Hitchcock's film, \"Rear Window\", is an example of the power of male gazer and the position of the female as a prisoner of the \"master's dollhouse\".\nCarol Clover, in her popular and influential book, \"Men, Women, and Chainsaws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film\" (Princeton University Press, 1992), argues that young male viewers of the Horror Genre (young males being the primary demographic) are quite prepared to identify with the female-in-jeopardy, a key component of the horror narrative, and to identify on an unexpectedly profound level. Clover further argues that the \"final girl\" in the psychosexual subgenre of exploitation horror invariably triumphs through her own resourcefulness, and is not by any means a passive, or inevitable, victim. Laura Mulvey, in response to these and other criticisms, revisited the topic in \"Afterthoughts on 'Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema' inspired by \"Duel in the Sun\"\" (1981). In addressing the heterosexual female spectator, she revised her stance to argue that women can take two possible roles in relation to film: a masochistic identification with the female object of desire that is ultimately self-defeating, or an identification with men as the active viewers of the text. A new version of the gaze was offered in the early 1990s by Bracha Ettinger, who proposed the notion of the \"matrixial gaze\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10798", "revid": "10027499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10798", "title": "Formalist film theory", "text": "Emphasis on style &amp; form over content or possible meanings of films\nFormalist film theory is an approach to film theory that is focused on the formal or technical elements of a film: i.e., the lighting, scoring, sound and set design, use of color, shot composition, and editing. This approach was proposed by Hugo M\u00fcnsterberg, Rudolf Arnheim, Sergei Eisenstein, and B\u00e9la Bal\u00e1zs. Today, it is a major approach in film studies.\nOverview.\nFormalism, at its most general, considers the synthesis (or lack of synthesis) of the multiple elements of film production, and the effects, emotional and intellectual, of that synthesis and of the individual elements. For example, take the single element of editing. A formalist might study how standard Hollywood \"continuity editing\" creates a more comforting effect and non-continuity or jump cut editing might become more disconcerting or volatile.\nOr one might consider the synthesis of several elements, such as editing, shot composition, and music. The shoot-out that ends Sergio Leone's Spaghetti Western \"Dollars Trilogy\" is a notable example of how these elements work together to produce an effect: the shot selection goes from very wide to very close and tense; the length of shots decreases as the sequence progresses towards its end; the music builds. All of these elements, in combination rather than individually, create tension. \nFormalism is unique in that it embraces both ideological and auteurist branches of criticism. In both these cases, the common denominator for formalist criticism is style. Ideologues focus on how socio-economic pressures create a particular style, and auteurists on how auteurs put their own stamp on the material. Formalism is primarily concerned with style and how it communicates ideas, emotions, and themes (rather than, as critics of formalism point out, concentrating on the themes of a work itself).\nIdeological formalism.\nTwo examples of ideological interpretations that are related to formalism are the classical Hollywood cinema and film noir.\nThe classical Hollywood cinema has a very distinct style, sometimes called the institutional mode of representation: continuity editing, massive coverage, three-point lighting, \"mood\" music, dissolves, all designed to make the experience as pleasant as possible. The socio-economic ideological explanation for this is that Hollywood wants to make as much money and appeal to as many ticket-buyers as possible.\nFilm noir, which was given its name by Nino Frank, is marked by lower production values, darker images, under lighting, location shooting, and general nihilism: this is because, we are told, during the war and post-war years filmmakers (as well as filmgoers) were generally more pessimistic. Also, the German Expressionists (including Fritz Lang, who was not technically an expressionist as popularly believed) immigrated to America and brought their stylized lighting effects (and disillusionment due to the war) to American soil.\nIt can be argued that, by this approach, the style or 'language' of these films is directly affected not by the individuals responsible, but by social, economic, and political pressures, of which the filmmakers themselves may be aware or not. It is this branch of criticism that gives us such categories as the classical Hollywood cinema, the American independent movement, the new queer cinema, and the French, German, and Czech new waves.\nFormalism in auteur theory.\nIf the ideological approach is concerned with broad movements and the effects of the world around the filmmaker, then the auteur theory is diametrically opposite to it, celebrating the individual, usually in the person of the filmmaker, and how their personal decisions, thoughts, and style manifest themselves in the material.\nThis branch of criticism, begun by Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut and the other young film critics writing for \"\", was created for two reasons.\nFirst, it was created to redeem the art of film itself. By arguing that films had auteurs, or authors, Truffaut sought to make films (and their directors) at least as important as the more widely accepted art forms, such as literature, music, and painting. Each of these art forms, and the criticism thereof, is primarily concerned with a sole creative force: the author of a novel (not, for example, their editor or type-setter), the composer of a piece of music (though sometimes the performers are given credence, akin to actors in film today), or the painter of a fresco (not their assistants who mix the colours or often do some of the painting themselves). By elevating the director, and not the screenwriter, to the same importance as novelists, composers, or painters, it sought to free the cinema from its popular conception as a bastard art, somewhere between theater and literature.\nSecondly, it sought to redeem many filmmakers who were looked down upon by mainstream film critics. It argued that genre filmmakers and low-budget B-movies were just as important, if not more, than the prestige pictures commonly given more press and legitimacy in France and the United States. According to Truffaut's theory, auteurs took material that was beneath their talents\u2014a thriller, a pulpy action film, a romance\u2014and, through their style, put their own personal stamp on it.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
