{"id": "10004", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10004", "title": "Educational essentialism", "text": "Educational essentialism is an educational philosophy whose adherents believe that children should learn the traditional basic subjects thoroughly. In this philosophical school of thought, the aim is to instill students with the \"essentials\" of academic knowledge, enacting a back-to-basics approach. Essentialism ensures that the accumulated wisdom of our civilization as taught in the traditional academic disciplines is passed on from teacher to student. Such disciplines might include Reading, Writing, Literature, Foreign Languages, History, Mathematics, Classical Languages, Science, Art, and Music. Moreover, this traditional approach is meant to train the mind, promote reasoning, and ensure a common culture.\nPrinciples of essentialism.\nEssentialism is a relatively conservative stance to education that strives to teach students the knowledge of a society and civilization through a core curriculum. This core curriculum involves such areas that include; the study of the surrounding environment, basic natural laws, and the disciplines that promote a happier, more educated living. Other non-traditional areas are also integrated as well in moderation to balance the education. Essentialists' goals are to instill students with the \"essentials\" of academic knowledge, patriotism, and character development through traditional (or back-to-basic) approaches. This is to promote reasoning, train the mind, and ensure a common culture for all citizens.\nEssentialism is the most typically enacted philosophy in American classrooms today. Traces of this can be found in the organized learning centered on teachers and textbooks, in addition to the regular assignments and evaluations.\nEssentialism as a teacher-centered philosophy.\nThe role of the teacher as the leader of the classroom is a very important tenet of Educational essentialism. The teacher is the center of the classroom, so they should be rigid and disciplinary. Establishing order in the classroom is crucial for student learning; effective teaching cannot take place in a loud and disorganized environment. It is the teacher's responsibility to keep order in the classroom. The teacher must interpret essentials of the learning process, take the leadership position and set the tone of the classroom. These needs require an educator who is academically well-qualified with an appreciation for learning and development. The teacher must control the students with distributions of rewards and penalties.\nHistory of essentialism.\nThe Essentialist movement first began in the United States in the year 1938. In Atlantic City, New Jersey, a group met for the first time called \"The Essentialist's Committee for the Advancement of Education.\" Their emphasis was to reform the educational system to a rationality-based system.\nThe term essentialist first appeared in the book \"An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education\" which was written by Michael John Demiashkevich. In his book, Demiashkevich labels some specific educators (including William C. Bagley) as \u201cessentialists.\" Demiashkevich compared the essentialists to the different viewpoints of the Progressive Education Association. He described how the Progressives preached a \u201chedonistic doctrine of change\u201d whereas the essentialists stressed the moral responsibility of man for his actions and looked toward permanent principles of behavior (Demiashkevich likened the arguments to those between the Socratics and the Sophists in Greek philosophy). In 1938 Bagley and other educators met together where Bagley gave a speech detailing the main points of the essentialism movement and attacking the public education in the United States. One point that Bagley noted was that students in the U.S. were not getting an education on the same levels as students in Europe who were the same age.\nA recent branch has emerged within the essentialist school of thought called \"neoessentialism.\" Emerging in the eighties as a response to the essentialist ideals of the thirties as well as to the criticism of the fifties and the advocates for education in the seventies, neoessentialism was created to try to appease the problems facing the United States at the time. The most notable change within this school of thought is that it called for the creation of a new discipline, computer science.\nRenowned essentialists.\nWilliam Bagley (1874\u20131946) was an important historical essentialist. William C. Bagley completed his undergraduate degree at Michigan Agricultural College in 1895. It wasn't until after finishing his undergraduate studies that he truly wanted to be a teacher. Bagley did his Graduate studies at the University of Chicago and at Cornell University. He acquired his Ph.D. in 1900, after which he took his first school job as a Principal in a St. Louis, Missouri Elementary School. Bagley's devotion increased during his work at Montana State Normal School in Dillon, Montana. It was here where he decided to dedicate his time to the education of teachers and where he published \"The Educative Process\", launching his name across the nation. Throughout his career Bagley argued against the conservative position that teachers were not in need of special training for their work. He believed that liberal arts material was important in teacher education. Bagley also believed the dominant theories of education of the time were weak and lacking.\nIn April 1938, he published the \"Essentialist's Platform\", in which he outlined three major points of essentialism. He described the right of students to a well-educated and culturally knowledgeable teacher. Secondly, he discussed the importance of teaching the ideals of community to each group of students. Lastly, Bagley wrote of the importance of accuracy, thoroughness and effort on the part of the student in the classroom.\nAnother important essentialist is E. D. Hirsch (1928-). Hirsch was Founder and Chairman of the Core Knowledge Foundation and authored several books concerning fact-based approaches to education. Now retired, he spent many years teaching at the University of Virginia while also being an advocate for the \"back to basics\" movement. In his most popular book, \"Cultural Literacy \u2014 What Every American Needs To Know\", he offers lists, quotations, and information regarding what he believes is essential knowledge.\nSee also Arthur Bestor.\nSchools enacting an essentialist curriculum.\nThe Core Knowledge Schools were founded on the philosophy of essentialist E.D. Hirsch. Although it is difficult to maintain a pure and strict essentialist-only curriculum, these schools have the central aim of establishing a common knowledge base for all citizens. To do so, they follow a nationwide, content-specific, and teacher-centered curriculum. The Core Knowledge curriculum also allows for local variance above and beyond the core curriculum. Central curricular aims are academic excellence and the learning of knowledge, and teachers who are masters of their knowledge areas serve this aim.\nCriticism of essentialism.\nBecause Essentialism is largely teacher-centered, the role of the student is often called into question. Presumably, in an essentialist classroom, the teacher is the one designing the curriculum for the students based upon the core disciplines. Moreover, he or she is enacting the curriculum and setting the standards which the students must meet. The teacher's evaluative role may undermine students' interest in study. As a result, the students begin to take on more of a passive role in their education as they are forced to meet and learn such standards and information.\nFurthermore, there is also speculation that an essentialist education helps in promoting the cultural lag. This philosophy of education is very traditional in the mindset of passing on the knowledge of the culture via the academic disciplines. Thus, students are forced to think in the mindset of the larger culture, and individual creativity, and subversive investigation are often not emphasized, or even outright discouraged."}
{"id": "10005", "revid": "43715014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10005", "title": "Progressive education", "text": "Pedagogical movement\nProgressive education, or educational progressivism, is a pedagogical movement that began in the late 19th century and has persisted in various forms to the present. In Europe, progressive education took the form of the New Education Movement. The term \"progressive\" was engaged to distinguish this education from the traditional curricula of the 19th century, which was rooted in classical preparation for the early-industrial university and strongly differentiated by social class. By contrast, progressive education finds its roots in modern, post-industrial experience. Most progressive education programs have these qualities in common: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEducational theory.\nProgressive education can be traced back to the works of John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, both of whom are known as forerunners of ideas that would be developed by theorists such as John Dewey. Considered one of the first of the British empiricists, Locke believed that \"truth and knowledge\u2026 arise out of observation and experience rather than manipulation of accepted or given ideas\". He further discussed the need for children to have concrete experiences in order to learn. Rousseau deepened this line of thinking in Emile, or On Education, where he argued that subordination of students to teachers and memorization of facts would not lead to an education.\nJohann Bernhard Basedow.\nIn Germany, Johann Bernhard Basedow (1724\u20131790) established the Philanthropinum at Dessau in 1774. He developed new teaching methods based on conversation and play with the child, and a program of physical development. Such was his success that he wrote a treatise on his methods, \"On the best and hitherto unknown method of teaching children of noblemen\".\nChristian Gotthilf Salzmann.\nChristian Gotthilf Salzmann (1744\u20131811) was the founder of the Schnepfenthal institution, a school dedicated to new modes of education (derived heavily from the ideas of Jean-Jacques Rousseau). He wrote \"Elements of Morality, for the Use of Children\", one of the first books translated into English by Mary Wollstonecraft.\nJohann Heinrich Pestalozzi.\nJohann Heinrich Pestalozzi (1746\u20131827) was a Swiss pedagogue and educational reformer who exemplified Romanticism in his approach. He founded several educational institutions both in German- and French-speaking regions of Switzerland and wrote many works explaining his revolutionary modern principles of education. His motto was \"Learning by head, hand and heart\". His research and theories closely resemble those outlined by Rousseau in Emile. He is further considered by many to be the \"father of modern educational science\" His psychological theories pertain to education as they focus on the development of object teaching, that is, he felt that individuals best learned through experiences and through a direct manipulation and experience of objects. He further speculated that children learn through their own internal motivation rather than through compulsion. (See Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic motivation). A teacher's task will be to help guide their students as individuals through their learning and allow it to unfold naturally.\nFriedrich Fr\u00f6bel.\nFriedrich Wilhelm August Fr\u00f6bel (1782\u20131852) was a student of Pestalozzi who laid the foundation for modern education based on the recognition that children have unique needs and capabilities. He believed in \"self-activity\" and play as essential factors in child education. The teacher's role was not to indoctrinate but to encourage self-expression through play, both individually and in group activities. He created the concept of kindergarten.\nJohann Friedrich Herbart.\nJohann Friedrich Herbart (1776\u20131841) emphasized the connection between individual development and the resulting societal contribution. The five key ideas which composed his concept of individual maturation were Inner Freedom, Perfection, Benevolence, Justice, and Equity or Recompense. According to Herbart, abilities were not innate but could be instilled, so a thorough education could provide the framework for moral and intellectual development. In order to develop a child to lead to a consciousness of social responsibility, Herbart advocated that teachers utilize a methodology with five formal steps: \"Using this structure a teacher prepared a topic of interest to the children, presented that topic, and questioned them inductively, so that they reached new knowledge based on what they had already known, looked back, and deductively summed up the lesson's achievements, then related them to moral precepts for daily living\".\nJohn Melchior Bosco.\nJohn Melchior Bosco (1815\u20131888) was concerned about the education of street children who had left their villages to find work in the rapidly industrialized city of Turin, Italy. Exploited as cheap labor or imprisoned for unruly behavior, Bosco saw the need for creating a space where they would feel at home. He called it an 'Oratory' where they could play, learn, share friendships, express themselves, develop their creative talents and pick up skills for gainful self-employment. With those who had found work, he set up a mutual-fund society (an early version of the Grameen Bank) to teach them the benefits of saving and self-reliance. The principles underlying his educational method that won over the hearts and minds of thousands of youth who flocked to his oratory were: 'be reasonable', 'be kind', 'believe' and 'be generous in service'. Today his method of education is practiced in nearly 3000 institutions set up around the world by the members of the Salesian Society he founded in 1873.\nCecil Reddie.\nWhile studying for his doctorate in G\u00f6ttingen in 1882\u20131883, Cecil Reddie was greatly impressed by the progressive educational theories being applied there. Reddie founded Abbotsholme School in Derbyshire, England, in 1889. Its curriculum enacted the ideas of progressive education. Reddie rejected rote learning, classical languages and corporal punishment. He combined studies in modern languages and the sciences and arts with a program of physical exercise, manual labour, recreation, crafts and arts. Schools modeling themselves after Abbotsholme were established throughout Europe, and the model was particularly influential in Germany. Reddie often engaged foreign teachers, who learned its practices, before returning home to start their own schools. Hermann Lietz an Abbotsholme teacher founded five schools (Landerziehungsheime f\u00fcr Jungen) on Abbotsholme's principles. Other people he influenced included Kurt Hahn, Adolphe Ferri\u00e8re and Edmond Demolins. His ideas also reached Japan, where it turned into \"Taisho-era Free Education Movement\" (Taisho Jiyu Kyoiku Undo)\nJohn Dewey.\nEducation according to John Dewey is the \"participation of the individual in the social consciousness of the race\" (Dewey, 1897, para. 1). As such, education should take into account that the student is a social being. The process begins at birth with the child unconsciously gaining knowledge and gradually developing their knowledge to share and partake in society.\nFor Dewey, education, which regulates \"the process of coming to share in the social consciousness,\" is the \"only sure\" method of ensuring social progress and reform (Dewey, 1897, para. 60). In this respect, Dewey foreshadows Social Reconstructionism, whereby schools are a means to reconstruct society. As schools become a means for social reconstruction, they must be given the proper equipment to perform this task and guide their students.\nHelen Parkhurst.\nThe American teacher Helen Parkhurst (1886\u20131973) developed the Dalton Plan at the beginning of the twentieth century with the goal of reforming the then current pedagogy and classroom management. She wanted to break the teacher-centered lockstep teaching. During her first experiment, which she implemented in a small elementary school as a young teacher in 1904, she noticed that when students are given freedom for self-direction and self-pacing and to help one another, their motivation increases considerably and they learn more. In a later experiment in 1911 and 1912, Parkhurst re-organized the education in a large school for nine- to fourteen-year-olds. Instead of each grade, each subject was appointed its own teacher and its own classroom. The subject teachers made assignments: they converted the subject matter for each grade into learning assignments. In this way, learning became the students' own work; they could carry out their work independently, work at their own pace and plan their work themselves. The classroom turned into a laboratory, a place where students are working, furnished and equipped as work spaces, tailored to meet the requirements of specific subjects. Useful and attractive learning materials, instruments and reference books were put within the students' reach. The benches were replaced by large tables to facilitate co-operation and group instruction. This second experiment formed the basis for the next experiments, those in Dalton and New York, from 1919 onwards. The only addition was the use of graphs, charts enabling students to keep track of their own progress in each subject.\nIn the nineteen-twenties and nineteen-thirties, Dalton education spread throughout the world. There is no certainty regarding the exact numbers of Dalton schools, but there was Dalton education in America, Australia, England, Germany, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union, India, China and Japan.\nRudolf Steiner.\nRudolf Steiner (1869\u20131925) first described the principles of what was to become Waldorf education in 1907. He established a series of schools based on these principles beginning in 1919. The focus of the education is on creating a developmentally appropriate curriculum that holistically integrates practical, artistic, social, and academic experiences. There are more than a thousand schools and many more early childhood centers worldwide; it has also become a popular form of homeschooling.\nMaria Montessori.\nMaria Montessori (1870\u20131952) began to develop her philosophy and methods in 1897. She based her work on her observations of children and experimentation with the environment, materials, and lessons available to them. She frequently referred to her work as \"scientific pedagogy\", arguing for the need to go beyond observation and measurement of students, to developing new methods to transform them. Although Montessori education spread to the United States in 1911 there were conflicts with the American educational establishment and was opposed by William Heard Kilpatrick. However Montessori education returned to the United States in 1960 and has since spread to thousands of schools there.\nIn 1914 the Montessori Society in England organised its first conference. Hosted by Rev Bertram Hawker, who had set up, in partnership with his local elementary school in the Norfolk coastal village of East Runton, the first Montessori School in England. Pictures of this school, and its children, illustrated the 'Montessori's Own Handbook' (1914). Hawker had been impressed by his visit to Montessori's Casa dei Bambini in Rome, he gave numerous talks on Montessori's work after 1912, assisting in generating a national interest in her work. He organised the Montessori Conference 1914 in partnership with Edmond Holmes, ex-Chief Inspector of Schools, who had written a government report on Montessori. The conference decided that its remit was to promote the 'liberation of the child in the school', and though inspired by Montessori, would encourage, support and network teachers and educationalists who sought, through their schools and methods, that aim. They changed their name the following year to New Ideals in Education. Each subsequent conference was opened with reference to its history and origin as a Montessori Conference recognising her inspiration, reports italicized the members of the Montessori Society in the delegate lists, and numerous further events included Montessori methods and case studies. Montessori, through New Ideals in Education, its committee and members, events and publications, greatly influenced progressive state education in England. (references to be added).\nRobert Baden-Powell.\nIn July 1906, Ernest Thompson Seton sent Robert Baden-Powell a copy of his book \"The Birchbark Roll of the Woodcraft Indians\". Seton was a British-born Canadian-American living in the United States. They shared ideas about youth training programs. In 1907 Baden-Powell wrote a draft called \"Boy Patrols\". In the same year, to test his ideas, he gathered 21 boys of mixed social backgrounds and held a week-long camp in August on Brownsea Island in England. His organizational method, now known as the Patrol System and a key part of Scouting training, allowed the boys to organize themselves into small groups with an elected patrol leader. Baden Powell then wrote \"Scouting for Boys\" (London, 1908). The Brownsea camp and the publication of \"Scouting for Boys\" are generally regarded as the start of the Scout movement which spread throughout the world. Baden-Powell and his sister Agnes Baden-Powell introduced the Girl Guides in 1910.\nComparison with traditional education.\nTraditional education uses extrinsic motivation, such as grades and prizes. Progressive education is more likely to use intrinsic motivation, basing activities on the interests of the child. Praise may be discouraged as a motivator. Progressive education is a response to traditional methods of teaching. It is defined as an educational movement which gives more value to experience than formal learning. It is based more on experiential learning that concentrate on the development of a child's talents.\n21st century skills.\n21st century skills are a series of higher-order skills, abilities, and learning dispositions that have been identified as being required for success in the rapidly changing, digital society and workplaces. Many of these skills are also defining qualities of \"progressive education\" as well as being associated with deeper learning, which is based on mastering skills such as analytic reasoning, complex problem solving, and teamwork. These skills differ from traditional academic skills in that they are not primarily content knowledge-based.\nIn the West.\nGermany.\nHermann Lietz founded three Landerziehungsheime (country boarding schools) in 1904 based on Reddie's model for boys of different ages. Lietz eventually succeeded in establishing five more Landerziehungsheime. Edith and Paul Geheeb founded Odenwaldschule in Heppenheim in the Odenwald in 1910 using their concept of progressive education, which integrated the work of the head and hand.\nPoland.\nJanusz Korczak was one notable follower and developer of Pestalozzi's ideas. He wrote\n\"The names of Pestalozzi, Froebel and Spencer shine with no less brilliance than the names of the greatest inventors of the twentieth century. For they discovered more than the unknown forces of nature; they discovered the unknown half of humanity: children.\" His Orphan's Home in Warsaw became a model institution and exerted influence on the educational process in other orphanages of the same type.\nIreland.\nThe Quaker school run in Ballitore, Co Kildare in the 18th century had students from as far away as Bordeaux (where there was a substantial Irish \u00e9migr\u00e9 population), the Caribbean and Norway. Notable pupils included Edmund Burke and Napper Tandy.\nSgoil \u00c9anna, or in English St Enda's was founded in 1908 by P\u00e1draig Pearse on Montessori principles. Its former assistant headmaster Thomas MacDonagh and other teachers including Pearse; games master Con Colbert; Pearse's brother, Willie, the art teacher, and Joseph Plunkett, and occasional lecturer in English, were executed by the British after the 1916 Rising. Pearse and MacDonagh were two of the seven leaders who signed the Irish Declaration of Independence. Pearse's book \"The Murder Machine\" was a denunciation of the English school system of the time and a declaration of his own educational principles.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, an early proponent of progressive education was Alva Myrdal, who with her husband Gunnar co-wrote \"Kris i befolkningsfr\u00e5gan\" (1934), a most influential program for the social-democratic hegemony (1932\u20131976) popularly known as \"Folkhemmet\". School reforms went through government reports in the 1940s and trials in the 1950s, resulting in the introduction in 1962 of public comprehensive schools (\"grundskola\") instead of the previously separated parallel schools for theoretical and non-theoretical education.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe ideas from Reddie's Abbotsholme spread to schools such as Bedales School (1893), King Alfred School, London (1898) and St Christopher School, Letchworth (1915), as well as all the Friends' schools, Steiner Waldorf schools and those belonging to the Round Square Conference. The King Alfred School was radical for its time in that it provided a secular education and that boys and girls were educated together. Alexander Sutherland Neill believed children should achieve self-determination and should be encouraged to think critically rather than blindly obeying. He implemented his ideas with the founding of Summerhill School in 1921. Neill believed that children learn better when they are not compelled to attend lessons. The school was also managed democratically, with regular meetings to determine school rules. Pupils had equal voting rights with school staff.\nUnited States.\nEarly practitioners.\nFr\u00f6bel's student Margarethe Schurz founded the first kindergarten in the United States at Watertown, Wisconsin, in 1856, and she also inspired Elizabeth Peabody, who went on to found the first English-speaking kindergarten in the United States \u2013 the language at Schurz's kindergarten had been German, to serve an immigrant community \u2013 in Boston in 1860. This paved the way for the concept's spread in the USA. The German \u00e9migr\u00e9 Adolph Douai had also founded a kindergarten in Boston in 1859, but was obliged to close it after only a year. By 1866, however, he was founding others in New York City.\nWilliam Heard Kilpatrick (1871\u20131965) was a pupil of Dewey and one of the most effective practitioners of the concept as well as the more adept at proliferating the progressive education movement and spreading word of the works of Dewey. He is especially well known for his \"project method of teaching\". This developed the progressive education notion that students were to be engaged and taught so that their knowledge may be directed to society for a socially useful need. Like Dewey he also felt that students should be actively engaged in their learning rather than actively disengaged with the simple reading and regurgitation of material.\nThe most famous early practitioner of progressive education was Francis Parker; its best-known spokesperson was the philosopher John Dewey. In 1875 Francis Parker became superintendent of schools in Quincy, Massachusetts, after spending two years in Germany studying emerging educational trends on the continent. Parker was opposed to rote learning, believing that there was no value in knowledge without understanding. He argued instead schools should encourage and respect the child's creativity. Parker's Quincy System called for child-centered and experience-based learning. He replaced the traditional curriculum with integrated learning units based on core themes related to the knowledge of different disciplines. He replaced traditional readers, spellers and grammar books with children's own writing, literature, and teacher prepared materials. In 1883 Parker left Massachusetts to become Principal of the Cook County Normal School in Chicago, a school that also served to train teachers in Parker's methods. In 1894 Parker's Talks on Pedagogics, which drew heavily on the thinking of Fr\u00f6bel, Pestalozzi and Herbart, became one of the first American writings on education to gain international fame.\nThat same year, philosopher John Dewey moved from the University of Michigan to the newly established University of Chicago where he became chair of the department of philosophy, psychology and education. He and his wife enrolled their children in Parker's school before founding their own school two years later.\nWhereas Parker started with practice and then moved to theory, Dewey began with hypotheses and then devised methods and curricula to test them. By the time Dewey moved to Chicago at the age of thirty-five, he had already published two books on psychology and applied psychology. He had become dissatisfied with philosophy as pure speculation and was seeking ways to make philosophy directly relevant to practical issues. Moving away from an early interest in Hegel, Dewey proceeded to reject all forms of dualism and dichotomy in favor of a philosophy of experience as a series of unified wholes in which everything can be ultimately related.\nIn 1896, John Dewey opened what he called the laboratory school to test his theories and their sociological implications. With Dewey as the director and his wife as principal, the University of Chicago Laboratory school, was dedicated \"to discover in administration, selection of subject-matter, methods of learning, teaching, and discipline, how a school could become a cooperative community while developing in individuals their own capacities and satisfy their own needs.\" (Cremin, 136) For Dewey the two key goals of developing a cooperative community and developing individuals' own capacities were not at odds; they were necessary to each other. This unity of purpose lies at the heart of the progressive education philosophy. In 1912, Dewey sent out students of his philosophy to found The Park School of Buffalo and The Park School of Baltimore to put it into practice. These schools operate to this day within a similar progressive approach.\nAt Columbia, Dewey worked with other educators such as Charles Eliot and Abraham Flexner to help bring progressivism into the mainstream of American education. In 1917 Columbia established the Lincoln School of Teachers College \"as a laboratory for the working out of an elementary and secondary curriculum which shall eliminate obsolete material and endeavor to work up in usable form material adapted to the needs of modern living.\" (Cremin, 282) Based on Flexner's demand that the modern curriculum \"include nothing for which an affirmative case can not be made out\" (Cremin, 281) the new school organized its activities around four fundamental fields: science, industry, aesthetics and civics. The Lincoln School built its curriculum around \"units of work\" that reorganized traditional subject matter into forms embracing the development of children and the changing needs of adult life. The first and second grades carried on a study of community life in which they actually built a city. A third grade project growing out of the day-to-day life of the nearby Hudson River became one of the most celebrated units of the school, a unit on boats, which under the guidance of its legendary teacher Miss Curtis, became an entr\u00e9e into history, geography, reading, writing, arithmetic, science, art and literature. Each of the units was broadly enough conceived so that different children could concentrate on different aspects depending on their own interests and needs. Each of the units called for widely diverse student activities, and each sought to deal in depth with some critical aspect of contemporary civilization. Finally each unit engaged children working together cooperatively and also provided opportunities for individual research and exploration.\nIn 1924, Agnes de Lima, the lead writer on education for \"The New Republic\" and \"The Nation\", published a collection of her articles on progressive education as a book, titled \"Our Enemy the Child\".\nIn 1918, the National Education Association, representing superintendents and administrators in smaller districts across the country, issued its report \"Cardinal Principles of Secondary Education.\" It emphasized the education of students in terms of health, a command of fundamental processes, worthy home membership, vocation, citizenship, worthy use of leisure, and ethical character. They emphasized life adjustment and reflected the social efficiency model of progressive education.\nFrom 1919 to 1955, the Progressive Education Association founded by Stanwood Cobb and others worked to promote a more student-centered approach to education. During the Great Depression the organization conducted the Eight-Year Study, evaluating the effects of progressive programs. More than 1500 students over four years were compared to an equal number of carefully matched students at conventional schools. When they reached college, the experimental students were found to equal or surpass traditionally educated students on all outcomes: grades, extracurricular participation, dropout rates, intellectual curiosity, and resourcefulness. Moreover, the study found that the more the school departed from the traditional college preparatory program, the better was the record of the graduates. (Kohn, Schools, 232)\nBy mid-century, many public school programs had also adopted elements of progressive curriculum. At mid-century Dewey believed that progressive education had \"not really penetrated and permeated the foundations of the educational institution.\"(Kohn, Schools, 6,7) As the influence of progressive pedagogy grew broader and more diffuse, practitioners began to vary their application of progressive principles. As varying interpretations and practices made evaluation of progressive reforms more difficult to assess, critics began to propose alternative approaches.\nThe seeds of the debate over progressive education can be seen in the differences of Parker and Dewey. These have to do with how much and by whom curriculum should be worked out from grade to grade, how much the child's emerging interests should determine classroom activities, the importance of child-centered vs. societal\u2013centered learning, the relationship of community building to individual growth, and especially the relationship between emotion, thought and experience.\nIn 1955, the publication of Rudolf Flesch's \"Why Johnny Can't Read\" leveled criticism of reading programs at the progressive emphasis on reading in context. The conservative McCarthy era raised questions about the liberal ideas at the roots of the progressive reforms. The launching of Sputnik in 1957 at the height of the Cold War gave rise to a number of intellectually competitive approaches to disciplinary knowledge, such as BSCS biology PSSC physics, led by university professors such as Jerome Bruner and Jerrold Zacharias.\nSome Cold War reforms incorporated elements of progressivism. For example, the work of Zacharias and Bruner was based in the developmental psychology of Jean Piaget and incorporated many of Dewey's ideas of experiential education. Bruner's analysis of developmental psychology became the core of a pedagogical movement known as constructivism, which argues that the child is an active participant in making meaning and must be engaged in the progress of education for learning to be effective. This psychological approach has deep connections to the work of both Parker and Dewey and led to a resurgence of their ideas in second half of the century.\nIn 1965, President Johnson inaugurated the Great Society and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act suffused public school programs with funds for sweeping education reforms. At the same time the influx of federal funding also gave rise to demands for accountability and the behavioral objectives approach of Robert F. Mager and others foreshadowed the No Child Left Behind Act passed in 2002. Against these critics eloquent spokespersons stepped forward in defense of the progressive tradition. The Open Classroom movement, led by Herb Kohl and George Dennison, recalled many of Parker's child centered reforms.\nThe late 1960s and early 1970s saw a rise and decline in the number of progressive schools. There were several reasons for the decline:\nProgressive education has been viewed as an alternative to the test-oriented instruction legislated by the No Child Left Behind educational funding act. Alfie Kohn has been an outspoken critic of the No Child Left Behind Act and a passionate defender of the progressive tradition.\nIn the East.\nIndia.\nRabindranath Tagore (1861\u20131941) was one of the most effective practitioners of the concept of progressive education. He expanded Santiniketan, which is a small town near Bolpur in the Birbhum district of West Bengal, India, approximately 160\u00a0km north of Kolkata. He de-emphasized textbook learning in favor of varied learning resources from nature. The emphasis here was on self-motivation rather than on discipline, and on fostering intellectual curiosity rather than competitive excellence. There were courses on a great variety of cultures, and study programs devoted to China, Japan, and the Middle East. He was of the view that education should be a \"joyous exercise of our inventive and constructive energies that help us to build up character.\"\nJapan.\nSeikatsu tsuzurikata is a grassroots movement in Japan that has many parallels to the progressive education movement, but it developed completely independently, beginning in\nthe late 1920s. The Japanese progressive educational movement was one of the stepping stones to the modernization of Japan and it has resonated down to the present.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10006", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10006", "title": "Electronic musical instrument", "text": "Musical instrument that uses electronic circuits to generate sound\nAn electronic musical instrument or electrophone is a musical instrument that produces sound using electronic circuitry. Such an instrument sounds by outputting an electrical, electronic or digital audio signal that ultimately is plugged into a power amplifier which drives a loudspeaker, creating the sound heard by the performer and listener.\nAn electronic instrument might include a user interface for controlling its sound, often by adjusting the pitch, frequency, or duration of each note. A common user interface is the musical keyboard, which functions similarly to the keyboard on an acoustic piano where the keys are each linked mechanically to swinging string hammers - whereas with an electronic keyboard, the keyboard interface is linked to a synth module, computer or other electronic or digital sound generator, which then creates a sound. However, it is increasingly common to separate user interface and sound-generating functions into a music controller (input device) and a music synthesizer, respectively, with the two devices communicating through a musical performance description language such as MIDI or Open Sound Control. The solid state nature of electronic keyboards also offers differing \"feel\" and \"response\", offering a novel experience in playing relative to operating a mechanically linked piano keyboard.\nAll electronic musical instruments can be viewed as a subset of audio signal processing applications. Simple electronic musical instruments are sometimes called sound effects; the border between sound effects and actual musical instruments is often unclear.\nIn the 21st century, electronic musical instruments are now widely used in most styles of music. In popular music styles such as electronic dance music, almost all of the instrument sounds used in recordings are electronic instruments (e.g., bass synth, synthesizer, drum machine). Development of new electronic musical instruments, controllers, and synthesizers continues to be a highly active and interdisciplinary field of research. Specialized conferences, notably the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, have organized to report cutting-edge work, as well as to provide a showcase for artists who perform or create music with new electronic music instruments, controllers, and synthesizers.\nClassification.\nIn musicology, electronic musical instruments are known as electrophones. Electrophones are the fifth category of musical instrument under the Hornbostel-Sachs system. Musicologists typically only classify music as electrophones if the sound is initially produced by electricity, excluding electronically controlled acoustic instruments such as pipe organs and amplified instruments such as electric guitars.\nThe category was added to the Hornbostel-Sachs musical instrument classification system by Sachs in 1940, in his 1940 book \"The History of Musical Instruments\"; the original 1914 version of the system did not include it. Sachs divided electrophones into three subcategories:\nThe last category included instruments such as theremins or synthesizers, which he called radioelectric instruments.\nFrancis William Galpin provided such a group in his own classification system, which is closer to Mahillon than Sachs-Hornbostel. For example, in Galpin's 1937 book \"A Textbook of European Musical Instruments\", he lists electrophones with three second-level divisions for sound generation (\"by oscillation\", \"electro-magnetic\", and \"electro-static\"), as well as third-level and fourth-level categories based on the control method.\nPresent-day ethnomusicologists, such as Margaret Kartomi and Terry Ellingson, suggest that, in keeping with the spirit of the original Hornbostel Sachs classification scheme, if one categorizes instruments by what first produces the initial sound in the instrument, that only subcategory 53 should remain in the electrophones category. Thus, it has been more recently proposed, for example, that the pipe organ (even if it uses electric key action to control solenoid valves) remain in the aerophones category, and that the electric guitar remain in the chordophones category, and so on.\nEarly examples.\nIn the 18th-century, musicians and composers adapted a number of acoustic instruments to exploit the novelty of electricity. Thus, in the broadest sense, the first electrified musical instrument was the Denis d'or keyboard, dating from 1753, followed shortly by the clavecin \u00e9lectrique by the Frenchman Jean-Baptiste de Laborde in 1761. The Denis d'or consisted of a keyboard instrument of over 700 strings, electrified temporarily to enhance sonic qualities. The clavecin \u00e9lectrique was a keyboard instrument with plectra (picks) activated electrically. However, neither instrument used electricity as a sound-source.\nThe first electric synthesizer was invented in 1876 by Elisha Gray. The \"Musical Telegraph\" was a chance by-product of his telephone technology when Gray discovered that he could control sound from a self-vibrating electromagnetic circuit and so invented a basic oscillator. The Musical Telegraph used steel reeds oscillated by electromagnets and transmitted over a telephone line. Gray also built a simple loudspeaker device into later models, which consisted of a diaphragm vibrating in a magnetic field.\nA significant invention, which later had a profound effect on electronic music, was the audion in 1906. This was the first thermionic valve, or vacuum tube and which led to the generation and amplification of electrical signals, radio broadcasting, and electronic computation, among other things. Other early synthesizers included the Telharmonium (1897), the Theremin (1919), J\u00f6rg Mager's Spharophon (1924) and Partiturophone, Taubmann's similar Electronde (1933), Maurice Martenot's ondes Martenot (\"Martenot waves\", 1928), Trautwein's Trautonium (1930). The Mellertion (1933) used a non-standard scale, Bertrand's Dynaphone could produce octaves and perfect fifths, while the Emicon was an American, keyboard-controlled instrument constructed in 1930 and the German Hellertion combined four instruments to produce chords. Three Russian instruments also appeared, Oubouhof's Croix Sonore (1934), Ivor Darreg's microtonal 'Electronic Keyboard Oboe' (1937) and the ANS synthesizer, constructed by the Russian scientist Evgeny Murzin from 1937 to 1958. Only two models of this latter were built and the only surviving example is currently stored at the Lomonosov University in Moscow. It has been used in many Russian movies\u2014like \"Solaris\"\u2014to produce unusual, \"cosmic\" sounds.\nHugh Le Caine, John Hanert, Raymond Scott, composer Percy Grainger (with Burnett Cross), and others built a variety of automated electronic-music controllers during the late 1940s and 1950s. In 1959 Daphne Oram produced a novel method of synthesis, her \"Oramics\" technique, driven by drawings on a 35\u00a0mm film strip; it was used for a number of years at the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. This workshop was also responsible for the theme to the TV series \"Doctor Who\" a piece, largely created by Delia Derbyshire, that more than any other ensured the popularity of electronic music in the UK.\nTelharmonium.\nIn 1897 Thaddeus Cahill patented an instrument called the Telharmonium (or Teleharmonium, also known as the Dynamaphone). Using tonewheels to generate musical sounds as electrical signals by additive synthesis, it was capable of producing any combination of notes and overtones, at any dynamic level. This technology was later used to design the Hammond organ. Between 1901 and 1910 Cahill had three progressively larger and more complex versions made, the first weighing seven tons, the last in excess of 200 tons. Portability was managed only by rail and with the use of thirty boxcars. By 1912, public interest had waned, and Cahill's enterprise was bankrupt.\nTheremin.\nAnother development, which aroused the interest of many composers, occurred in 1919\u20131920. In Leningrad, Leon Theremin built and demonstrated his Etherophone, which was later renamed the Theremin. This led to the first compositions for electronic instruments, as opposed to noisemakers and re-purposed machines. The Theremin was notable for being the first musical instrument played without touching it. In 1929, Joseph Schillinger composed \"First Airphonic Suite for Theremin and Orchestra\", premi\u00e8red with the Cleveland Orchestra with Leon Theremin as soloist. The next year Henry Cowell commissioned Theremin to create the first electronic rhythm machine, called the Rhythmicon. Cowell wrote some compositions for it, which he and Schillinger premiered in 1932.\nOndes Martenot.\nThe ondes Martenot is played with a keyboard or by moving a ring along a wire, creating \"wavering\" sounds similar to a theremin. It was invented in 1928 by the French cellist Maurice Martenot, who was inspired by the accidental overlaps of tones between military radio oscillators, and wanted to create an instrument with the expressiveness of the cello.\nThe French composer Olivier Messiaen used the ondes Marteno in pieces such as his 1949 symphony \"Turangal\u00eela-Symphonie,\" and his sister-in-law Jeanne Loriod was a celebrated player. It appears in numerous film and television soundtracks, particularly science fiction and horror films. Contemporary users of the ondes Martenot include Tom Waits, Daft Punk and the Radiohead guitarist Jonny Greenwood.\nTrautonium.\nThe Trautonium was invented in 1928. It was based on the subharmonic scale, and the resulting sounds were often used to emulate bell or gong sounds, as in the 1950s Bayreuth productions of \"Parsifal\". In 1942, Richard Strauss used it for the bell- and gong-part in the Dresden premi\u00e8re of his \"Japanese Festival Music\". This new class of instruments, microtonal by nature, was only adopted slowly by composers at first, but by the early 1930s there was a burst of new works incorporating these and other electronic instruments.\nHammond organ and Novachord.\nIn 1929 Laurens Hammond established his company for the manufacture of electronic instruments. He went on to produce the Hammond organ, which was based on the principles of the Telharmonium, along with other developments including early reverberation units. The Hammond organ is an electromechanical instrument, as it used both mechanical elements and electronic parts. A Hammond organ used spinning metal tonewheels to produce different sounds. A magnetic pickup similar in design to the pickups in an electric guitar is used to transmit the pitches in the tonewheels to an amplifier and speaker enclosure. While the Hammond organ was designed to be a lower-cost alternative to a pipe organ for church music, musicians soon discovered that the Hammond was an excellent instrument for blues and jazz; indeed, an entire genre of music developed built around this instrument, known as the organ trio (typically Hammond organ, drums, and a third instrument, either saxophone or guitar).\nThe first commercially manufactured synthesizer was the Novachord, built by the Hammond Organ Company from 1938 to 1942, which offered 72-note polyphony using 12 oscillators driving monostable-based divide-down circuits, basic envelope control and resonant low-pass filters. The instrument featured 163 vacuum tubes and weighed 500 pounds. The instrument's use of envelope control is significant, since this is perhaps the most significant distinction between the modern synthesizer and other electronic instruments.\nAnalogue synthesis 1950\u20131980.\nThe most commonly used electronic instruments are synthesizers, so-called because they artificially generate sound using a variety of techniques. All early circuit-based synthesis involved the use of analogue circuitry, particularly voltage controlled amplifiers, oscillators and filters. An important technological development was the invention of the Clavivox synthesizer in 1956 by Raymond Scott with subassembly by Robert Moog. French composer and engineer Edgard Var\u00e8se created a variety of compositions using electronic horns, whistles, and tape. Most notably, he wrote \"Po\u00e8me \u00e9lectronique\" for the Phillips pavilion at the Brussels World Fair in 1958.\nModular synthesizers.\nRCA produced experimental devices to synthesize voice and music in the 1950s. The Mark II Music Synthesizer, housed at the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in New York City. Designed by Herbert Belar and Harry Olson at RCA, with contributions from Vladimir Ussachevsky and Peter Mauzey, it was installed at Columbia University in 1957. Consisting of a room-sized array of interconnected sound synthesis components, it was only capable of producing music by programming, using a paper tape sequencer punched with holes to control pitch sources and filters, similar to a mechanical player piano but capable of generating a wide variety of sounds. The vacuum tube system had to be patched to create timbres.\nIn the 1960s synthesizers were still usually confined to studios due to their size. They were usually modular in design, their stand-alone signal sources and processors connected with patch cords or by other means and controlled by a common controlling device. Harald Bode, Don Buchla, Hugh Le Caine, Raymond Scott and Paul Ketoff were among the first to build such instruments, in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Buchla later produced a commercial modular synthesizer, the Buchla Music Easel. Robert Moog, who had been a student of Peter Mauzey and one of the RCA Mark II engineers, created a synthesizer that could reasonably be used by musicians, designing the circuits while he was at Columbia-Princeton. The Moog synthesizer was first displayed at the Audio Engineering Society convention in 1964. It required experience to set up sounds but was smaller and more intuitive than what had come before, less like a machine and more like a musical instrument. Moog established standards for control interfacing, using a logarithmic 1-volt-per-octave for pitch control and a separate triggering signal. This standardization allowed synthesizers from different manufacturers to operate simultaneously. Pitch control was usually performed either with an organ-style keyboard or a music sequencer producing a timed series of control voltages. During the late 1960s hundreds of popular recordings used Moog synthesizers. Other early commercial synthesizer manufacturers included ARP, who also started with modular synthesizers before producing all-in-one instruments, and British firm EMS.\nIntegrated synthesizers.\nIn 1970, Moog designed the Minimoog, a non-modular synthesizer with a built-in keyboard. The analogue circuits were interconnected with switches in a simplified arrangement called \"normalization.\" Though less flexible than a modular design, normalization made the instrument more portable and easier to use. The Minimoog sold 12,000 units. Further standardized the design of subsequent synthesizers with its integrated keyboard, pitch and modulation wheels and VCO-&gt;VCF-&gt;VCA signal flow. It has become celebrated for its \"fat\" sound\u2014and its tuning problems. Miniaturized solid-state components allowed synthesizers to become self-contained, portable instruments that soon appeared in live performance and quickly became widely used in popular music and electronic art music.\nPolyphony.\nMany early analog synthesizers were monophonic, producing only one tone at a time. Popular monophonic synthesizers include the Moog Minimoog. A few, such as the Moog Sonic Six, ARP Odyssey and EML 101, could produce two different pitches at a time when two keys were pressed. Polyphony (multiple simultaneous tones, which enables chords) was only obtainable with electronic organ designs at first. Popular electronic keyboards combining organ circuits with synthesizer processing included the ARP Omni and Moog's Polymoog and Opus 3.\nBy 1976 affordable polyphonic synthesizers began to appear, notably the Yamaha CS-50, CS-60 and CS-80, the Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 and the Oberheim Four-Voice. These remained complex, heavy and relatively costly. The recording of settings in digital memory allowed storage and recall of sounds. The first practical polyphonic synth, and the first to use a microprocessor as a controller, was the Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 introduced in late 1977. For the first time, musicians had a practical polyphonic synthesizer that could save all knob settings in computer memory and recall them at the touch of a button. The Prophet-5's design paradigm became a new standard, slowly pushing out more complex and recondite modular designs.\nTape recording.\nIn 1935, another significant development was made in Germany. Allgemeine Elektricit\u00e4ts Gesellschaft (AEG) demonstrated the first commercially produced magnetic tape recorder, called the \"Magnetophon\". Audio tape, which had the advantage of being fairly light as well as having good audio fidelity, ultimately replaced the bulkier wire recorders.\nThe term \"electronic music\" (which first came into use during the 1930s) came to include the tape recorder as an essential element: \"electronically produced sounds recorded on tape and arranged by the composer to form a musical composition\". It was also indispensable to Musique concr\u00e8te.\nTape also gave rise to the first, analogue, sample-playback keyboards, the Chamberlin and its more famous successor the Mellotron, an electro-mechanical, polyphonic keyboard originally developed and built in Birmingham, England in the early 1960s.\nSound sequencer.\nDuring the 1940s\u20131960s, Raymond Scott, an American composer of electronic music, invented various kind of music sequencers for his electric compositions. Step sequencers played rigid patterns of notes using a grid of (usually) 16 buttons, or steps, each step being 1/16 of a measure. These patterns of notes were then chained together to form longer compositions. Software sequencers were continuously utilized since the 1950s in the context of computer music, including computer-\"played\" music (software sequencer), computer-\"composed\" music (music synthesis), and computer \"sound generation\" (sound synthesis).\nDigital era 1980\u20132000.\nDigital synthesis.\nThe first digital synthesizers were academic experiments in sound synthesis using digital computers. FM synthesis was developed for this purpose; as a way of generating complex sounds digitally with the smallest number of computational operations per sound sample. In 1983 Yamaha introduced the first stand-alone digital synthesizer, the DX-7. It used frequency modulation synthesis (FM synthesis), first developed by John Chowning at Stanford University during the late sixties. Chowning exclusively licensed his FM synthesis patent to Yamaha in 1975. Yamaha subsequently released their first FM synthesizers, the GS-1 and GS-2, which were costly and heavy. There followed a pair of smaller, preset versions, the CE20 and CE25 Combo Ensembles, targeted primarily at the home organ market and featuring four-octave keyboards. Yamaha's third generation of digital synthesizers was a commercial success; it consisted of the DX7 and DX9 (1983). Both models were compact, reasonably priced, and dependent on custom digital integrated circuits to produce FM tonalities. The DX7 was the first mass market all-digital synthesizer. It became indispensable to many music artists of the 1980s, and demand soon exceeded supply. The DX7 sold over 200,000 units within three years.\nThe DX series was not easy to program but offered a detailed, percussive sound that led to the demise of the electro-mechanical Rhodes piano, which was heavier and larger than a DX synth. Following the success of FM synthesis Yamaha signed a contract with Stanford University in 1989 to develop digital waveguide synthesis, leading to the first commercial physical modeling synthesizer, Yamaha's VL-1, in 1994. The DX-7 was affordable enough for amateurs and young bands to buy, unlike the costly synthesizers of previous generations, which were mainly used by top professionals.\nSampling.\nThe Fairlight CMI (Computer Musical Instrument), the first polyphonic digital sampler, was the harbinger of sample-based synthesizers. Designed in 1978 by Peter Vogel and Kim Ryrie and based on a dual microprocessor computer designed by Tony Furse in Sydney, Australia, the Fairlight CMI gave musicians the ability to modify volume, attack, decay, and use special effects like vibrato. Sample waveforms could be displayed on-screen and modified using a light pen. The Synclavier from New England Digital was a similar system. Jon Appleton (with Jones and Alonso) invented the Dartmouth Digital Synthesizer, later to become the New England Digital Corp's Synclavier. The Kurzweil K250, first produced in 1983, was also a successful polyphonic digital music synthesizer, noted for its ability to reproduce several instruments synchronously and having a velocity-sensitive keyboard.\nComputer music.\nAn important new development was the advent of computers for the purpose of composing music, as opposed to manipulating or creating sounds. Iannis Xenakis began what is called \"musique stochastique,\" or \"stochastic music\", which is a method of composing that employs mathematical probability systems. Different probability algorithms were used to create a piece under a set of parameters. Xenakis used graph paper and a ruler to aid in calculating the velocity trajectories of glissando for his orchestral composition \"Metastasis\" (1953\u201354), but later turned to the use of computers to compose pieces like \"ST/4\" for string quartet and \"ST/48\" for orchestra (both 1962).\nThe impact of computers continued in 1956. Lejaren Hiller and Leonard Issacson composed \"Illiac Suite\" for string quartet, the first complete work of computer-assisted composition using algorithmic composition.\nIn 1957, Max Mathews at Bell Lab wrote MUSIC-N series, a first computer program family for generating digital audio waveforms through direct synthesis. Then Barry Vercoe wrote MUSIC 11 based on MUSIC IV-BF, a next-generation music synthesis program (later evolving into csound, which is still widely used).\nIn mid 80s, Miller Puckette at IRCAM developed graphic signal-processing software for 4X called Max (after Max Mathews), and later ported it to Macintosh (with Dave Zicarelli extending it for Opcode) for real-time MIDI control, bringing algorithmic composition availability to most composers with modest computer programming background.\nMIDI.\nIn 1980, a group of musicians and music merchants met to standardize an interface by which new instruments could communicate control instructions with other instruments and the prevalent microcomputer. This standard was dubbed MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface). A paper was authored by Dave Smith of Sequential Circuits and proposed to the Audio Engineering Society in 1981. Then, in August 1983, the MIDI Specification 1.0 was finalized.\nThe advent of MIDI technology allows a single keystroke, control wheel motion, pedal movement, or command from a microcomputer to activate every device in the studio remotely and in synchrony, with each device responding according to conditions predetermined by the composer.\nMIDI instruments and software made powerful control of sophisticated instruments easily affordable by many studios and individuals. Acoustic sounds became reintegrated into studios via sampling and sampled-ROM-based instruments.\nModern electronic musical instruments.\nThe increasing power and decreasing cost of sound-generating electronics (and especially of the personal computer), combined with the standardization of the MIDI and Open Sound Control musical performance description languages, has facilitated the separation of musical instruments into music controllers and music synthesizers.\nBy far the most common musical controller is the musical keyboard. Other controllers include the radiodrum, Akai's EWI and Yamaha's WX wind controllers, the guitar-like SynthAxe, the BodySynth, the Buchla Thunder, the Continuum Fingerboard, the Roland Octapad, various isomorphic keyboards including the Thummer, and Kaossilator Pro, and kits like I-CubeX.\nReactable.\nThe Reactable is a round translucent table with a backlit interactive display. By placing and manipulating blocks called \"tangibles\" on the table surface, while interacting with the visual display via finger gestures, a virtual modular synthesizer is operated, creating music or sound effects.\nPercussa AudioCubes.\nAudioCubes are autonomous wireless cubes powered by an internal computer system and rechargeable battery. They have internal RGB lighting, and are capable of detecting each other's location, orientation and distance. The cubes can also detect distances to the user's hands and fingers. Through interaction with the cubes, a variety of music and sound software can be operated. AudioCubes have applications in sound design, music production, DJing and live performance.\nKaossilator.\nThe Kaossilator and Kaossilator Pro are compact instruments where the position of a finger on the touch pad controls two note-characteristics; usually the pitch is changed with a left-right motion and the tonal property, filter or other parameter changes with an up-down motion. The touch pad can be set to different musical scales and keys. The instrument can record a repeating loop of adjustable length, set to any tempo, and new loops of sound can be layered on top of existing ones. This lends itself to electronic dance-music but is more limited for controlled sequences of notes, as the pad on a regular Kaossilator is featureless.\nEigenharp.\nThe Eigenharp is a large instrument resembling a bassoon, which can be interacted with through big buttons, a drum sequencer and a mouthpiece. The sound processing is done on a separate computer.\nXTH Sense.\nThe XTH Sense is a wearable instrument that uses muscle sounds from the human body (known as mechanomyogram) to make music and sound effects. As a performer moves, the body produces muscle sounds that are captured by a chip microphone worn on arm or legs. The muscle sounds are then live sampled using a dedicated software program and a library of modular audio effects. The performer controls the live sampling parameters by weighing force, speed and articulation of the movement.\nAlphaSphere.\nThe AlphaSphere is a spherical instrument that consists of 48 tactile pads that respond to pressure as well as touch. Custom software allows the pads to be indefinitely programmed individually or by groups in terms of function, note, and pressure parameter among many other settings. The primary concept of the AlphaSphere is to increase the level of expression available to electronic musicians, by allowing for the playing style of a musical instrument.\nChip music.\nChiptune, chipmusic, or chip music is music written in sound formats where many of the sound textures are synthesized or sequenced in real time by a computer or video game console sound chip, sometimes including sample-based synthesis and low bit sample playback. Many chip music devices featured synthesizers in tandem with low rate sample playback.\nDIY culture.\nDuring the late 1970s and early 1980s, DIY (Do it yourself) designs were published in hobby electronics magazines (notably the Formant modular synth, a DIY clone of the Moog system, published by Elektor) and kits were supplied by companies such as Paia in the US, and Maplin Electronics in the UK.\nCircuit bending.\nIn 1966, Reed Ghazala discovered and began to teach math \"circuit bending\"\u2014the application of the creative short circuit, a process of chance short-circuiting, creating experimental electronic instruments, exploring sonic elements mainly of timbre and with less regard to pitch or rhythm, and influenced by John Cage\u2019s aleatoric music concept.\nMuch of this manipulation of circuits directly, especially to the point of destruction, was pioneered by Louis and Bebe Barron in the early 1950s, such as their work with John Cage on the \"Williams Mix\" and especially in the soundtrack to Forbidden Planet.\nModern circuit bending is the creative customization of the circuits within electronic devices such as low voltage, battery-powered guitar effects, children's toys and small digital synthesizers to create new musical or visual instruments and sound generators. Emphasizing spontaneity and randomness, the techniques of circuit bending have been commonly associated with noise music, though many more conventional contemporary musicians and musical groups have been known to experiment with \"bent\" instruments. Circuit bending usually involves dismantling the machine and adding components such as switches and potentiometers that alter the circuit. With the revived interest for analogue synthesizer circuit bending became a cheap solution for many experimental musicians to create their own individual analogue sound generators. Nowadays many schematics can be found to build noise generators such as the Atari Punk Console or the Dub Siren as well as simple modifications for children toys such as the famous Speak &amp; Spell that are often modified by circuit benders.\nModular synthesizers.\nThe modular synthesizer is a type of synthesizer consisting of separate interchangeable modules. These are also available as kits for hobbyist DIY constructors. Many hobbyist designers also make available bare PCB boards and front panels for sale to other hobbyists.\n2010s.\nAccording to a forum post in December 2010, Sixense Entertainment is working on musical control with the Sixense TrueMotion motion controller. Immersive virtual musical instruments, or immersive virtual instruments for music and sound aim to represent musical events and sound parameters in a virtual reality so that they can be perceived not only through auditory feedback but also visually in 3D and possibly through tactile as well as haptic feedback, allowing the development of novel interaction metaphors beyond manipulation such as prehension.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10008", "revid": "285130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10008", "title": "Electrode", "text": "Electrical conductor used to make contact with nonmetallic parts of a circuit\nAn electrode is an electrical conductor used to make contact with a nonmetallic part of a circuit (e.g. a semiconductor, an electrolyte, a vacuum or air). Electrodes are essential parts of batteries that can consist of a variety of materials depending on the type of battery.\nThe electrophore, invented by Johan Wilcke, was an early version of an electrode used to study static electricity.\nAnode and cathode in electrochemical cells.\nElectrodes are an essential part of any battery. The first electrochemical battery made was devised by Alessandro Volta and was aptly named the Voltaic cell. This battery consisted of a stack of copper and zinc electrodes separated by brine-soaked paper disks. Due to fluctuation in the voltage provided by the voltaic cell it wasn't very practical. The first practical battery was invented in 1839 and named the Daniell cell after John Frederic Daniell. It still made use of the zinc\u2013copper electrode combination. Since then many more batteries have been developed using various materials. The basis of all these is still using two electrodes, anodes and cathodes.\nAnode.\n'Anode' was coined by William Whewell at Michael Faraday's request, derived from the Greek words \u1f04\u03bd\u03bf (ano), 'upwards' and \u1f41\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2 (hod\u00f3s), 'a way'. The Anode is the electrode through which the conventional current enters from the electrical circuit of an electrochemical cell (battery) into the non-metallic cell. The electrons then flow to the other side of the battery. Benjamin Franklin surmised that the electrical flow moved from positive to negative. The electrons flow away from the anode and the conventional current towards it. From both can be concluded that the charge of the anode is negative. The electron entering the anode comes from the oxidation reaction that takes place next to it.\nCathode.\nThe cathode is in many ways the opposite of the anode. The name (also coined by Whewell) comes from the Greek words \u03ba\u03ac\u03c4\u03c9 (kato), 'downwards' and \u1f41\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2 (hod\u00f3s), 'a way'. It is the positive electrode, meaning the electrons flow from the electrical circuit through the cathode into the non-metallic part of the electrochemical cell. At the cathode, the reduction reaction takes place with the electrons arriving from the wire connected to the cathode and are absorbed by the oxidizing agent.\nPrimary cell.\nA primary cell is a battery designed to be used once and then discarded. This is due to the electrochemical reactions taking place at the electrodes in the cell not being reversible. An example of a primary cell is the discardable alkaline battery commonly used in flashlights. Consisting of a zinc anode and a manganese oxide cathode in which ZnO is formed.\nThe half-reactions are:\n Zn(s) + 2OH\u2212(aq) \u2192 ZnO(s) + H2O(l) + 2e\u2212 formula_1 [E0oxidation = -1.28 V]\n 2MnO2(s) + H2O(l) + 2e\u2212 \u2192 Mn2O3(s) + 2OH\u2212(aq)formula_2 [E0reduction = +0.15 V]\nOverall reaction:\n Zn(s) + 2MnO2(s) \u21cc ZnO(s) + Mn2O3(s)formula_1 [E0total = +1.43 V]\nThe ZnO is prone to clumping and will give less efficient discharge if recharged again. It is possible to recharge these batteries but is due to safety concerns advised against by the manufacturer. Other primary cells include zinc\u2013carbon, zinc\u2013chloride, and lithium iron disulfide.\nSecondary cell.\nContrary to the primary cell a secondary cell can be recharged. The first was the lead\u2013acid battery, invented in 1859 by French physicist Gaston Plant\u00e9. This type of battery is still the most widely used in among others automobiles. The cathode consists of lead dioxide (PbO2) and the anode of solid lead. Other commonly used rechargeable batteries are nickel\u2013cadmium, nickel\u2013metal hydride, and Lithium-ion. The last of which will be more explained more thoroughly in this article due to its importance.\nMarcus' theory of electron transfer.\nMarcus theory is a theory originally developed by Nobel laureate Rudolph A. Marcus and explains the rate at which an electron can move from one chemical species to another, for this article this can be seen as 'jumping' from the electrode to a species in the solvent or vice versa.\nWe can represent the problem as calculating the transfer rate for the transfer of an electron from donor to an acceptor \n D + A \u2192 D+ + A\u2212\nThe potential energy of the system is a function of the translational, rotational, and vibrational coordinates of the reacting species and the molecules of the surrounding medium, collectively called the reaction coordinates. The abscissa the figure to the right represents these. From the classical electron transfer theory, the expression of the reaction rate constant (probability of reaction) can be calculated, if a non-adiabatic process and parabolic potential energy are assumed, by finding the point of intersection (Qx). One important thing to note, and was noted by Marcus when he came up with the theory, the electron transfer must abide by the law of conservation of energy and the Frank-Condon principle. \nDoing this and then rearranging this leads to the expression of the free energy activation (formula_4) in terms of the overall free energy of the reaction (formula_5).\nformula_6\nIn which the formula_7 is the reorganisation energy.\nFilling this result in the classically derived Arrhenius equation\nformula_8\nleads to\nformula_9\nWith A being the pre-exponential factor which is usually experimentally determined, although a semi classical derivation provides more information as will be explained below.\nThis classically derived result qualitatively reproduced observations of a maximum electron transfer rate under the conditions formula_10. For a more extensive mathematical treatment one could read the paper by Newton. An interpretation of this result and what a closer look at the physical meaning of the formula_11 one can read the paper by Marcus.\nthe situation at hand can be more accurately described by using the displaced harmonic oscillator model, in this model quantum tunneling is allowed. This is needed in order to explain why even at near-zero Kelvin there still are electron transfers, in contradiction to the classical theory.\nWithout going into too much detail on how the derivation is done, it rests on using Fermi's golden rule from time-dependent perturbation theory with the full Hamiltonian of the system. It is possible to look at the overlap in the wavefunctions of both the reactants and the products (the right and the left side of the chemical reaction) and therefore when their energies are the same and allow for electron transfer. As touched on before this must happen because only then conservation of energy is abided by. Skipping over a few mathematical steps the probability of electron transfer can be calculated (albeit quite difficult) using the following formula\nformula_12\nIn this equation \u03bc represents the chemical potential, with \u03bc\u00b0 being its reference value. T stands for the temperature and k the Boltzmann constant. The term \u03b3 inside the logarithm is the activity and x is the ratio of the ion to the total composition of the electrode. The novel term \u03a9 is the partial molar volume of the ion in the host and \u03c3 corresponds to the mean stress felt by the system. The result of this equation is that diffusion, which is dependent on chemical potential, gets impacted by the added stress and, therefore changes the battery\u2019s performance. Furthermore, mechanical stresses may also impact the electrode\u2019s solid-electrolyte-interphase layer. The interface which regulates the ion and charge transfer and can be degraded by stress. Thus, more ions in the solution will be consumed to reform it, diminishing the overall efficiency of the system.\nOther anodes and cathodes.\nIn a vacuum tube or a semiconductor having polarity (diodes, electrolytic capacitors) the anode is the positive (+) electrode and the cathode the negative (\u2212). The electrons enter the device through the cathode and exit the device through the anode. Many devices have other electrodes to control operation, e.g., base, gate, control grid.\nIn a three-electrode cell, a counter electrode, also called an auxiliary electrode, is used only to make a connection to the electrolyte so that a current can be applied to the working electrode. The counter electrode is usually made of an inert material, such as a noble metal or graphite, to keep it from dissolving.\nWelding electrodes.\nIn arc welding, an electrode is used to conduct current through a workpiece to fuse two pieces together. Depending upon the process, the electrode is either consumable, in the case of gas metal arc welding or shielded metal arc welding, or non-consumable, such as in gas tungsten arc welding. For a direct current system, the weld rod or stick may be a cathode for a filling type weld or an anode for other welding processes. For an alternating current arc welder, the welding electrode would not be considered an anode or cathode.\nAlternating current electrodes.\nFor electrical systems which use alternating current, the electrodes are the connections from the circuitry to the object to be acted upon by the electric current but are not designated anode or cathode because the direction of flow of the electrons changes periodically, usually many times per second.\nChemically modified electrodes.\nChemically modified electrodes are electrodes that have their surfaces chemically modified to change the electrode's physical, chemical, electrochemical, optical, electrical, and transportive properties. These electrodes are used for advanced purposes in research and investigation.\nUses.\nElectrodes are used to provide current through nonmetal objects to alter them in numerous ways and to measure conductivity for numerous purposes. Examples include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10009", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10009", "title": "Electroconvulsive Therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "10011", "revid": "36729223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10011", "title": "Epistolary novel", "text": "Novel written as a series of letters\nAn epistolary novel is a novel written as a series of letters. The term is often extended to cover novels that intersperse documents of other kinds with the letters, most commonly diary entries and newspaper clippings, and sometimes considered to include novels composed of documents even if they do not include letters at all. More recently, epistolaries may include electronic documents such as recordings and radio, blog posts, and e-mails. The word \"epistolary\" is derived from Latin from the Greek word , meaning a letter &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. In German, this type of novel is known as a Briefroman.\nThe epistolary form can add greater realism to a story, because it mimics the workings of real life. It is thus able to demonstrate differing points of view without recourse to the device of an omniscient narrator. An important strategic device in the epistolary novel for creating the impression of authenticity of the letters is the fictional editor.\nEarly works.\nThere are two theories on the genesis of the epistolary novel. The first claims that the genre is originated from novels with inserted letters, in which the portion containing the third-person narrative in between the letters was gradually reduced. The other theory claims that the epistolary novel arose from miscellanies of letters and poetry: some of the letters were tied together into a (mostly amorous) plot. Both claims have some validity. The first truly epistolary novel, the Spanish \"Prison of Love\" (\"C\u00e1rcel de amor\") (c. 1485) by Diego de San Pedro, belongs to a tradition of novels in which a large number of inserted letters already dominated the narrative. Other well-known examples of early epistolary novels are closely related to the tradition of letter-books and miscellanies of letters. Within the successive editions of Edm\u00e9 Boursault's \"Letters of Respect, Gratitude and Love\" (\"Lettres de respect, d'obligation et d'amour\") (1669), a group of letters written to a girl named Babet were expanded and became more and more distinct from the other letters, until it formed a small epistolary novel entitled \"Letters to Babet\" (\"Lettres \u00e0 Babet\"). The immensely famous \"Letters of a Portuguese Nun\" (\"Lettres portugaises\") (1669) generally attributed to Gabriel-Joseph de La Vergne, comte de Guilleragues, though a small minority still regard Marianna Alcoforado as the author, is claimed to be intended to be part of a miscellany of Guilleragues prose and poetry. The founder of the epistolary novel in English is said by many to be James Howell (1594\u20131666) with \"Familiar Letters\" (1645\u201350), who writes of prison, foreign adventure, and the love of women.\nPerhaps first work to fully utilize the potential of an epistolary novel was \"Love-Letters Between a Nobleman and His Sister\". This work was published anonymously in three volumes (1684, 1685, and 1687), and has been attributed to Aphra Behn though its authorship remains disputed in the 21st Century. The novel shows the genre's results of changing perspectives: individual points were presented by the individual characters, and the central voice of the author and moral evaluation disappeared (at least in the first volume; further volumes introduced a narrator). The author furthermore explored a realm of intrigue with complex scenarios such as letters that fall into the wrong hands, faked letters, or letters withheld by protagonists.\nThe epistolary novel as a genre became popular in the 18th century in the works of such authors as Samuel Richardson, with his immensely successful novels \"Pamela\" (1740) and \"Clarissa\" (1749). John Cleland's early erotic novel \"Fanny Hill\" (1748) is written as a series of letters from the titular character to an unnamed recipient. In France, there was \"Lettres persanes\" (1721) by Montesquieu, followed by \"Julie, ou la nouvelle H\u00e9lo\u00efse\" (1761) by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Choderlos de Laclos' \"Les Liaisons dangereuses\" (1782), which used the epistolary form to great dramatic effect, because the sequence of events was not always related directly or explicitly. In Germany, there was Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" (\"Die Leiden des jungen Werther\") (1774) and Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin's \"Hyperion\". The first Canadian novel, \"The History of Emily Montague\" (1769) by Frances Brooke, and twenty years later the first American novel, \"The Power of Sympathy\" (1789) by William Hill Brown, were both written in epistolary form.\nStarting in the 18th century, the epistolary form was subject to much ridicule, resulting in a number of savage burlesques. The most notable example of these was Henry Fielding's \"Shamela\" (1741), written as a parody of \"Pamela\". In it, the female narrator can be found wielding a pen and scribbling her diary entries under the most dramatic and unlikely of circumstances. Oliver Goldsmith used the form to satirical effect in \"The Citizen of the World\", subtitled \"Letters from a Chinese Philosopher Residing in London to his Friends in the East\" (1760\u201361). So did the diarist Fanny Burney in a successful comic first novel, \"Evelina\" (1788).\nThe epistolary novel slowly became less popular after 18th century. Although Jane Austen tried the epistolary in juvenile writings and her novella \"Lady Susan\" (1794), she abandoned this structure for her later work. It is thought that her lost novel \"First Impressions\", which was redrafted to become \"Pride and Prejudice\", may have been epistolary: \"Pride and Prejudice\" contains an unusual number of letters quoted in full and some play a critical role in the plot.\nThe epistolary form nonetheless saw continued use, surviving in exceptions or in fragments in nineteenth-century novels. In Honor\u00e9 de Balzac's novel \"Letters of Two Brides\", two women who became friends during their education at a convent correspond over a 17-year period, exchanging letters describing their lives. Mary Shelley employs the epistolary form in her novel \"Frankenstein\" (1818). Shelley uses the letters as one of a variety of framing devices, as the story is presented through the letters of a sea captain and scientific explorer attempting to reach the north pole who encounters Victor Frankenstein and records the dying man's narrative and confessions. Published in 1848, Anne Bront\u00eb's novel \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\" is framed as a retrospective letter from one of the main heroes to his friend and brother-in-law with the diary of the eponymous tenant inside it. In the late 19th century, Bram Stoker released one of the most widely recognized and successful novels in the epistolary form to date, \"Dracula\". Printed in 1897, the novel is compiled entirely of letters, diary entries, newspaper clippings, telegrams, doctor's notes, ship's logs, and the like.\nTypes.\nEpistolary novels can be categorized based on the number of people whose letters are included. This gives three types of epistolary novels: monophonic (giving the letters of only one character, like \"Letters of a Portuguese Nun\" and \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\"), dialogic (giving the letters of two characters, like Mme Marie Jeanne Riccoboni's \"Letters of Fanni Butler\" (1757), and polyphonic (with three or more letter-writing characters, such as in Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\"). A crucial element in polyphonic epistolary novels like \"Clarissa\" and \"Dangerous Liaisons\" is the dramatic device of 'discrepant awareness': the simultaneous but separate correspondences of the heroines and the villains creating dramatic tension. They can also be classified according to their type and quantity of use of non-letter documents, though this has obvious correlations with the number of voices - for example, newspaper clippings are unlikely to feature heavily in a monophonic epistolary and considerably more likely in a polyphonic one.\nNotable works.\nThe epistolary novel form has continued to be used after the eighteenth century.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10013", "revid": "1158849495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10013", "title": "Evidence-based medicine", "text": "Illness diagnosis, treatment and prevention based on data collection and analysis\nEvidence-based medicine (EBM) is \"the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients\". The aim of EBM is to integrate the experience of the clinician, the values of the patient, and the best available scientific information to guide decision-making about clinical management. The term was originally used to describe an approach to teaching the practice of medicine and improving decisions by individual physicians about individual patients.\nBackground, history and definition.\nMedicine has a long history of scientific inquiry about the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of human disease. In the 11th century AD, Avicenna, a Persian physician and philosopher, developed an approach to EBM that was mostly similar to current ideas and practises.\nThe concept of a controlled clinical trial was first described in 1662 by Jan Baptist van Helmont in reference to the practice of bloodletting. Wrote Van Helmont:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let us take out of the Hospitals, out of the Camps, or from elsewhere, 200, or 500 poor People, that have fevers or Pleuritis. Let us divide them in Halfes, let us cast lots, that one halfe of them may fall to my share, and the others to yours; I will cure them without blood-letting and sensible evacuation; but you do, as ye know ... we shall see how many Funerals both of us shall have...\nThe first published report describing the conduct and results of a controlled clinical trial was by James Lind, a Scottish naval surgeon who conducted research on scurvy during his time aboard HMS \"Salisbury\" in the Channel Fleet, while patrolling the Bay of Biscay. Lind divided the sailors participating in his experiment into six groups, so that the effects of various treatments could be fairly compared. Lind found improvement in symptoms and signs of scurvy among the group of men treated with lemons or oranges. He published a treatise describing the results of this experiment in 1753.\nAn early critique of statistical methods in medicine was published in 1835.\nThe term 'evidence-based medicine' was introduced in 1990 by Gordon Guyatt of McMaster University.\nClinical decision-making.\nAlvan Feinstein's publication of \"Clinical Judgment\" in 1967 focused attention on the role of clinical reasoning and identified biases that can affect it. In 1972, Archie Cochrane published \"Effectiveness and Efficiency\", which described the lack of controlled trials supporting many practices that had previously been assumed to be effective. In 1973, John Wennberg began to document wide variations in how physicians practiced. Through the 1980s, David M. Eddy described errors in clinical reasoning and gaps in evidence. In the mid-1980s, Alvin Feinstein, David Sackett and others published textbooks on clinical epidemiology, which translated epidemiological methods to physician decision-making. Toward the end of the 1980s, a group at RAND showed that large proportions of procedures performed by physicians were considered inappropriate even by the standards of their own experts.\nEvidence-based guidelines and policies.\nDavid M. Eddy first began to use the term 'evidence-based' in 1987 in workshops and a manual commissioned by the Council of Medical Specialty Societies to teach formal methods for designing clinical practice guidelines. The manual was eventually published by the American College of Physicians. Eddy first published the term 'evidence-based' in March 1990, in an article in the \"Journal of the American Medical Association\" that laid out the principles of evidence-based guidelines and population-level policies, which Eddy described as \"explicitly describing the available evidence that pertains to a policy and tying the policy to evidence instead of standard-of-care practices or the beliefs of experts. The pertinent evidence must be identified, described, and analyzed. The policymakers must determine whether the policy is justified by the evidence. A rationale must be written.\" He discussed evidence-based policies in several other papers published in \"JAMA\" in the spring of 1990. Those papers were part of a series of 28 published in \"JAMA\" between 1990 and 1997 on formal methods for designing population-level guidelines and policies.\nMedical education.\nThe term 'evidence-based medicine' was introduced slightly later, in the context of medical education. In the autumn of 1990, Gordon Guyatt used it in an unpublished description of a program at McMaster University for prospective or new medical students. Guyatt and others first published the term two years later (1992) to describe a new approach to teaching the practice of medicine.\nIn 1996, David Sackett and colleagues clarified the definition of this tributary of evidence-based medicine as \"the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. ... [It] means integrating individual clinical expertise with the best available external clinical evidence from systematic research.\" This branch of evidence-based medicine aims to make individual decision making more structured and objective by better reflecting the evidence from research. Population-based data are applied to the care of an individual patient, while respecting the fact that practitioners have clinical expertise reflected in effective and efficient diagnosis and thoughtful identification and compassionate use of individual patients' predicaments, rights, and preferences.\nBetween 1993 and 2000, the Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group at McMaster University published the methods to a broad physician audience in a series of 25 \"Users' Guides to the Medical Literature\" in \"JAMA\". In 1995 Rosenberg and Donald defined individual-level, evidence-based medicine as \"the process of finding, appraising, and using contemporaneous research findings as the basis for medical decisions.\" In 2010, Greenhalgh used a definition that emphasized quantitative methods: \"the use of mathematical estimates of the risk of benefit and harm, derived from high-quality research on population samples, to inform clinical decision-making in the diagnosis, investigation or management of individual patients.\"\nThe two original definitions highlight important differences in how evidence-based medicine is applied to populations versus individuals. When designing guidelines applied to large groups of people in settings with relatively little opportunity for modification by individual physicians, evidence-based policymaking emphasizes that good evidence should exist to document a test's or treatment's effectiveness. In the setting of individual decision-making, practitioners can be given greater latitude in how they interpret research and combine it with their clinical judgment. In 2005, Eddy offered an umbrella definition for the two branches of EBM: \"Evidence-based medicine is a set of principles and methods intended to ensure that to the greatest extent possible, medical decisions, guidelines, and other types of policies are based on and consistent with good evidence of effectiveness and benefit.\"\nProgress.\nIn the area of evidence-based guidelines and policies, the explicit insistence on evidence of effectiveness was introduced by the American Cancer Society in 1980. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) began issuing guidelines for preventive interventions based on evidence-based principles in 1984. In 1985, the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association applied strict evidence-based criteria for covering new technologies. Beginning in 1987, specialty societies such as the American College of Physicians, and voluntary health organizations such as the American Heart Association, wrote many evidence-based guidelines. In 1991, Kaiser Permanente, a managed care organization in the US, began an evidence-based guidelines program. In 1991, Richard Smith wrote an editorial in the \"British Medical Journal\" and introduced the ideas of evidence-based policies in the UK. In 1993, the Cochrane Collaboration created a network of 13 countries to produce systematic reviews and guidelines. In 1997, the US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ, then known as the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, or AHCPR) established Evidence-based Practice Centers (EPCs) to produce evidence reports and technology assessments to support the development of guidelines. In the same year, a National Guideline Clearinghouse that followed the principles of evidence-based policies was created by AHRQ, the AMA, and the American Association of Health Plans (now America's Health Insurance Plans). In 1999, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) was created in the UK.\nIn the area of medical education, medical schools in Canada, the US, the UK, Australia, and other countries now offer programs that teach evidence-based medicine. A 2009 study of UK programs found that more than half of UK medical schools offered some training in evidence-based medicine, although the methods and content varied considerably, and EBM teaching was restricted by lack of curriculum time, trained tutors and teaching materials. Many programs have been developed to help individual physicians gain better access to evidence. For example, UpToDate was created in the early 1990s. The Cochrane Collaboration began publishing evidence reviews in 1993. In 1995, BMJ Publishing Group launched Clinical Evidence, a 6-monthly periodical that provided brief summaries of the current state of evidence about important clinical questions for clinicians.\nCurrent practice.\nBy 2000, use of the term \"evidence-based\" had extended to other levels of the health care system. An example is evidence-based health services, which seek to increase the competence of health service decision makers and the practice of evidence-based medicine at the organizational or institutional level.\nThe multiple tributaries of evidence-based medicine share an emphasis on the importance of incorporating evidence from formal research in medical policies and decisions. However, because they differ on the extent to which they require good evidence of effectiveness before promoting a guideline or payment policy, a distinction is sometimes made between evidence-based medicine and science-based medicine, which also takes into account factors such as prior plausibility and compatibility with established science (as when medical organizations promote controversial treatments such as acupuncture). Differences also exist regarding the extent to which it is feasible to incorporate individual-level information in decisions. Thus, evidence-based guidelines and policies may not readily \"hybridise\" with experience-based practices orientated towards ethical clinical judgement, and can lead to contradictions, contest, and unintended crises. The most effective \"knowledge leaders\" (managers and clinical leaders) use a broad range of management knowledge in their decision making, rather than just formal evidence. Evidence-based guidelines may provide the basis for governmentality in health care, and consequently play a central role in the governance of contemporary health care systems.\nMethods.\nSteps.\nThe steps for designing explicit, evidence-based guidelines were described in the late 1980s: formulate the question (population, intervention, comparison intervention, outcomes, time horizon, setting); search the literature to identify studies that inform the question; interpret each study to determine precisely what it says about the question; if several studies address the question, synthesize their results (meta-analysis); summarize the evidence in evidence tables; compare the benefits, harms and costs in a balance sheet; draw a conclusion about the preferred practice; write the guideline; write the rationale for the guideline; have others review each of the previous steps; implement the guideline.\nFor the purposes of medical education and individual-level decision making, five steps of EBM in practice were described in 1992 and the experience of delegates attending the 2003 Conference of Evidence-Based Health Care Teachers and Developers was summarized into five steps and published in 2005. This five-step process can broadly be categorized as follows:\nEvidence reviews.\nSystematic reviews of published research studies are a major part of the evaluation of particular treatments. The Cochrane Collaboration is one of the best-known organisations that conducts systematic reviews. Like other producers of systematic reviews, it requires authors to provide a detailed study protocol as well as a reproducible plan of their literature search and evaluations of the evidence. After the best evidence is assessed, treatment is categorized as (1) likely to be beneficial, (2) likely to be harmful, or (3) without evidence to support either benefit or harm.\nA 2007 analysis of 1,016 systematic reviews from all 50 Cochrane Collaboration Review Groups found that 44% of the reviews concluded that the intervention was likely to be beneficial, 7% concluded that the intervention was likely to be harmful, and 49% concluded that evidence did not support either benefit or harm. 96% recommended further research. In 2017, a study assessed the role of systematic reviews produced by Cochrane Collaboration to inform US private payers' policymaking; it showed that although the medical policy documents of major US private payers were informed by Cochrane systematic reviews, there was still scope to encourage the further use.\nAssessing the quality of evidence.\nEvidence-based medicine categorizes different types of clinical evidence and rates or grades them according to the strength of their freedom from the various biases that beset medical research. For example, the strongest evidence for therapeutic interventions is provided by systematic review of randomized, well-blinded, placebo-controlled trials with allocation concealment and complete follow-up involving a homogeneous patient population and medical condition. In contrast, patient testimonials, case reports, and even expert opinion have little value as proof because of the placebo effect, the biases inherent in observation and reporting of cases, and difficulties in ascertaining who is an expert (however, some critics have argued that expert opinion \"does not belong in the rankings of the quality of empirical evidence because it does not represent a form of empirical evidence\" and continue that \"expert opinion would seem to be a separate, complex type of knowledge that would not fit into hierarchies otherwise limited to empirical evidence alone.\").\nSeveral organizations have developed grading systems for assessing the quality of evidence. For example, in 1989 the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) put forth the following system:\nAnother example are the Oxford CEBM Levels of Evidence published by the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine. First released in September 2000, the Levels of Evidence provide a way to rank evidence for claims about prognosis, diagnosis, treatment benefits, treatment harms, and screening, which most grading schemes do not address. The original CEBM Levels were Evidence-Based On Call to make the process of finding evidence feasible and its results explicit. In 2011, an international team redesigned the Oxford CEBM Levels to make them more understandable and to take into account recent developments in evidence ranking schemes. The Oxford CEBM Levels of Evidence have been used by patients and clinicians, as well as by experts to develop clinical guidelines, such as recommendations for the optimal use of phototherapy and topical therapy in psoriasis and guidelines for the use of the BCLC staging system for diagnosing and monitoring hepatocellular carcinoma in Canada.\nIn 2000, a system was developed by the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group. The GRADE system takes into account more dimensions than just the quality of medical research. It requires users who are performing an assessment of the quality of evidence, usually as part of a systematic review, to consider the impact of different factors on their confidence in the results. Authors of GRADE tables assign one of four levels to evaluate the quality of evidence, on the basis of their confidence that the observed effect (a numeric value) is close to the true effect. The confidence value is based on judgments assigned in five different domains in a structured manner. The GRADE working group defines 'quality of evidence' and 'strength of recommendations' based on the quality as two different concepts that are commonly confused with each other.\nSystematic reviews may include randomized controlled trials that have low risk of bias, or observational studies that have high risk of bias. In the case of randomized controlled trials, the quality of evidence is high but can be downgraded in five different domains.\nIn the case of observational studies per GRADE, the quality of evidence starts off lower and may be upgraded in three domains in addition to being subject to downgrading.\nMeaning of the levels of quality of evidence as per GRADE:\nCategories of recommendations.\nIn guidelines and other publications, recommendation for a clinical service is classified by the balance of risk versus benefit and the level of evidence on which this information is based. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force uses the following system:\nGRADE guideline panelists may make strong or weak recommendations on the basis of further criteria. Some of the important criteria are the balance between desirable and undesirable effects (not considering cost), the quality of the evidence, values and preferences and costs (resource utilization).\nDespite the differences between systems, the purposes are the same: to guide users of clinical research information on which studies are likely to be most valid. However, the individual studies still require careful critical appraisal.\nStatistical measures.\nEvidence-based medicine attempts to express clinical benefits of tests and treatments using mathematical methods. Tools used by practitioners of evidence-based medicine include:\nQuality of clinical trials.\nEvidence-based medicine attempts to objectively evaluate the quality of clinical research by critically assessing techniques reported by researchers in their publications.\nLimitations and criticism.\nThere are a number of limitations and criticisms of evidence-based medicine. Two widely cited categorization schemes for the various published critiques of EBM include the three-fold division of Straus and McAlister (\"limitations universal to the practice of medicine, limitations unique to evidence-based medicine and misperceptions of evidence-based-medicine\") and the five-point categorization of Cohen, Stavri and Hersh (EBM is a poor philosophic basis for medicine, defines evidence too narrowly, is not evidence-based, is limited in usefulness when applied to individual patients, or reduces the autonomy of the doctor/patient relationship).\nIn no particular order, some published objections include:\nA 2018 study, \"Why all randomised controlled trials produce biased results\", assessed the 10 most cited RCTs and argued that trials face a wide range of biases and constraints, from trials only being able to study a small set of questions amenable to randomisation and generally only being able to assess the \"average\" treatment effect of a sample, to limitations in extrapolating results to another context, among many others outlined in the study.\nApplication of evidence in clinical settings.\nDespite the emphasis on evidence-based medicine, unsafe or ineffective medical practices continue to be applied, because of patient demand for tests or treatments, because of failure to access information about the evidence, or because of the rapid pace of change in the scientific evidence. For example, between 2003 and 2017, the evidence shifted on hundreds of medical practices, including whether hormone replacement therapy was safe, whether babies should be given certain vitamins, and whether antidepressant drugs are effective in people with Alzheimer's disease. Even when the evidence unequivocally shows that a treatment is either not safe or not effective, it may take many years for other treatments to be adopted.\nThere are many factors that contribute to lack of uptake or implementation of evidence-based recommendations. These include lack of awareness at the individual clinician or patient (micro) level, lack of institutional support at the organisation level (meso) level or higher at the policy (macro) level. In other cases, significant change can require a generation of physicians to retire or die and be replaced by physicians who were trained with more recent evidence.\nPhysicians may also reject evidence that conflicts with their anecdotal experience or because of cognitive biases \u2013 for example, a vivid memory of a rare but shocking outcome (the availability heuristic), such as a patient dying after refusing treatment. They may overtreat to \"do something\" or to address a patient's emotional needs. They may worry about malpractice charges based on a discrepancy between what the patient expects and what the evidence recommends. They may also overtreat or provide ineffective treatments because the treatment feels biologically plausible.\nIt is the responsibility of those developing clinical guidelines to include an implementation plan to facilitate uptake. The implementation process will include an implementation plan, analysis of the context, identifying barriers and facilitators and designing the strategies to address them.\nEducation.\nTraining in evidence based medicine is offered across the continuum of medical education.\nThe Berlin questionnaire and the Fresno Test are validated instruments for assessing the effectiveness of education in evidence-based medicine. These questionnaires have been used in diverse settings.\nA Campbell systematic review that included 24 trials examined the effectiveness of e-learning in improving evidence-based health care knowledge and practice. It was found that e-learning, compared to no learning, improves evidence-based health care knowledge and skills but not attitudes and behaviour. No difference in outcomes is present when comparing e-learning with face-to-face learning. Combining e-learning and face-to-face learning (blended learning) has a positive impact on evidence-based knowledge, skills, attitude and behaviour. As a form of e-learning, some medical school students engage in editing Wikipedia to increase their EBM skills, and some students construct EBM materials to develop their skills in communicating medical knowledge.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10016", "revid": "6289403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10016", "title": "End zone", "text": "Scoring area on the field in gridiron football\nThe end zone is the scoring area on the field, according to gridiron-based codes of football. It is the area between the end line and goal line bounded by the sidelines. There are two end zones, each being on an opposite side of the field. It is bordered on all sides by a white line indicating its beginning and end points, with orange, square pylons placed at each of the four corners as a visual aid (however, prior to around the early 1970s, flags were used instead to denote the end zone). Canadian rule books use the terms \"goal area\" and \"dead line\" instead of \"end zone\" and \"end line\" respectively, but the latter terms are the more common in colloquial Canadian English. Unlike sports like association football and ice hockey which require the ball/puck to pass completely over the goal line to count as a score, both Canadian and American football merely need any part of the ball to break the vertical plane of the outer edge of the goal line.\nA similar concept exists in both rugby football codes, where it is known as the \"in-goal area\". The difference between rugby and gridiron-based codes is that in rugby, the ball must be touched to the ground in the in-goal area to count as a try (the rugby equivalent of a touchdown), whereas in the gridiron-based games, simply possessing the ball in or over the end zone is sufficient to count as a touchdown.\nUltimate frisbee also uses an end zone scoring area. Scores in this sport are counted when a pass is received in the end zone.\nHistory.\nThe end zones were invented as a result of the legalization of the forward pass in gridiron football. Prior to this, the goal line and end line were the same, and players scored a touchdown by leaving the field of play through that line. Goal posts were placed on the goal line, and any kicks that did not result in field goals but left the field through the end lines were simply recorded as touchbacks (or, in the Canadian game, singles; it was during the pre-end zone era that Hugh Gall set the record for most singles in a game, with eight).\nIn the earliest days of the forward pass, the pass had to be caught in-bounds and could not be thrown across the goal line (as the receiver would be out of bounds). This also made it difficult to pass the ball when very close to one's own goal line, since merely dropping back to pass or kick would result in a safety (rules of the forward pass at the time required the passer to be five yards behind the line of scrimmage, which would make throwing the forward pass when the ball was snapped from behind one's own five-yard line illegal in itself).\nThus, in 1912, the end zone was introduced in American football. In an era when professional football was still in its early years and college football dominated the game, the resulting enlargement of the field was constrained by fact that many college teams were already playing in well-developed stadiums, complete with stands and other structures at the ends of the fields, thereby making any substantial enlargement of the field unfeasible at many schools. Eventually, a compromise was reached: 12 yards of end zone were added to each end of the field, but in return, the playing field was shortened from 110 yards to 100, resulting in the physical size of the field being only slightly longer than before. Goal posts were originally kept on the goal lines, but after they began to interfere with play, they moved back to the end lines in 1927, where they have remained in college football ever since. The National Football League moved the goal posts up to the goal line again in 1933, then back again to the end line in 1974.\nAs with many other aspects of gridiron football, Canadian football adopted the forward pass and end zones much later than American football. The forward pass and end zones were adopted in 1929. In Canada, college football has never reached a level of prominence comparable to U.S. college football, and professional football was still in its infancy in the 1920s. As a result, Canadian football was still being played in rudimentary facilities in the late 1920s. A further consideration was that the Canadian Rugby Union (the governing body of Canadian football at the time, now known as Football Canada) wanted to reduce the prominence of single points (then called \"rouges\") in the game. Therefore, the CRU simply appended 25-yard end zones to the ends of the existing 110-yard field, creating a much larger field of play. Since moving the goal posts back 25 yards would have made the scoring of field goals excessively difficult, and since the CRU did not want to reduce the prominence of field goals, the goal posts were left on the goal line where they remain today. However, the rules governing the scoring of singles were changed: teams were required to either kick the ball out of bounds through the end zone or force the opposition to down a kicked ball in their own end zone in order to be awarded a point. By 1986, at which point CFL stadiums were becoming bigger and comparable in development to their American counterparts in an effort to stay financially competitive, the CFL reduced the depth of the end zone to 20 yards.\nScoring.\nA team scores a touchdown by entering its opponent's end zone while carrying the ball or catching the ball while being within the end zone. If the ball is carried by a player, it is considered a score when any part of the ball is directly above or beyond any part of the goal line between the pylons. In addition, a two-point conversion may be scored after a touchdown by the same means.\nIn Ultimate Frisbee, a goal is scored by completing a pass into the end zone.\nSize.\nThe end zone in American football is 10 yards long by &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;53+1\u20443 yards (160 feet) wide. Each corner is marked with a pylon (four apiece).\nA full-sized end zone in Canadian football is 20 yards long by 65 yards wide. Prior to the 1980s, the Canadian end zone was 25 yards long. The first stadium to use the 20-yard-long end zone was B.C. Place in Vancouver, which was completed in 1983. The floor of B.C. Place was (and is) too short to accommodate a field 160 yards in length. The shorter end zone proved popular enough that the CFL adopted it league-wide in 1986. At BMO Field, home to the Toronto Argonauts, the end zones are only 18 yards. Like their American counterparts, Canadian endzones are marked with four pylons.\nIn Canadian football stadiums that also feature a running track, it is usually necessary to truncate the back corners of the end zones, since a rectangular field 150 yards long and 65 yards wide will not fit completely inside an oval-shaped running track. Such truncations are marked as straight diagonal lines, resulting in an end zone with six corners and six pylons. As of 2019, Montreal's Percival Molson Stadium is the only CFL stadium that has the rounded-off end zones.\nDuring the CFL's American expansion in the mid-1990s, several stadiums, by necessity, used 15-yard end zones (some had end zones that were even shorter than 15 yards); only Baltimore and San Antonio had the endzones at the standard 20 yards.\nUltimate Frisbee uses an end zone 40 yards wide and 20 yards deep (37\u00a0m \u00d7 18\u00a0m).\nThe goal post.\nThe location and dimensions of a goal post differ from league to league, but it is usually within the boundaries of the end zone. In earlier football games (both professional and collegiate), the goal post began at the goal line, and was usually an H-shaped bar. Nowadays, for player safety reasons, almost all goal posts in the professional and collegiate levels of American football are T-shaped (resembling a slingshot), and reside just outside the rear of both end zones; these goalposts were first seen in 1966 and were invented by Jim Trimble and Joel Rottman in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.\nThe goal posts in Canadian football still reside on the goal line instead of the back of the end zones, partly because the number of field goal attempts would dramatically decrease if the posts were moved 20 yards back in that sport, and also because the larger end zone and wider field makes the resulting interference in play by the goal post a less serious problem.\nAt the high school level, it is not uncommon to see multi-purpose goal posts that include football goal posts at the top and a soccer net at the bottom; these are usually seen at smaller schools and in multi-purpose stadiums where facilities are used for multiple sports. When these or H-shaped goal posts are used in football, the lower portions of the posts are covered with several inches of heavy foam padding to protect the safety of the players.\nDecoration.\nMost professional and collegiate teams have their logo, team name, or both painted on the surface of the end zone, with team colors filling the background. Many championship and bowl games at college and professional level are commemorated by the names of the opposing teams each being painted in one of the opposite end zones. In some leagues, along with bowl games, local, national, or bowl game sponsors may also have their logos placed in the end zone. In the CFL, fully painted end zones are nonexistent, though some feature club logos or sponsors. Additionally, the Canadian end zone, being a live-ball part of the field, often features yardage dashes (usually marked every five yards), not unlike the field of play itself.\nIn many places, particularly in smaller high schools and colleges, end zones are undecorated, or have plain white diagonal stripes spaced several yards apart, in lieu of colors and decorations. One notable use of this design in major college football is the Notre Dame Fighting Irish, who have both end zones at Notre Dame Stadium painted with diagonal white lines. In professional football, since 2004, the Pittsburgh Steelers of the NFL have the south end zone at Heinz Field painted with diagonal-lines during most of the regular season. This is done because Heinz Field,which has a natural grass playing surface, is also home to the Pittsburgh Panthers of college football and the markings simplify field conversion between the two teams' respective field markings and logos. After the Panthers' season is over, the Steelers logo is painted in the south end zone.\nOne of the major quirks of the American Football League was its use of unusual patterns such as argyle in its end zones, a tradition revived in 2009 by the Denver Broncos, itself a former AFL team. The original XFL standardized its playing fields so that all eight of its teams had uniform fields with the XFL logo in each end zone and no team identification.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10017", "revid": "44562144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10017", "title": "Ettore Ximenes", "text": "Italian sculptor (1855\u20131926)\nEttore Ximenes (11 April 1855 \u2013 20 December 1926) was an Italian sculptor.\nBiography.\nEttore Ximenes was born 11 April 1855 in Palermo, Italy. Son of Antonio Ximenes and Giulia Tolentino, a Sicilian noble woman, Ettore Ximenes initially embarked on literary studies but then took up sculpture and attended the courses at the Palermo Academy of Fine Arts. After 1872, he continued training at the Naples Academy under Domenico Morelli and Stanislao Lista. He also established a close relationship with Vincenzo Gemito.\nHe returned to Palermo in 1874 and won a competition for a four-year grant, which enabled him to study and open a studio for sculpture in Florence. In 1873 at Vienna, he exhibited \"Work without Genius\". In 1877 at Naples, he exhibited a life-size statue titled \"The Equilibrium\" about a gymnast walking on a sphere. He would make copies of this work in small marble and bronze statuettes.\nHe exhibited a stucco \"Christ and the Adultress\" and \"Il cuore del re (Heart of the King)\", the latter depicting an oft-repeated story of King Vittorio Emanuele during one of his frequent hunts, encountering and offering charity to a peasant child. At the 1878 Paris World Exposition he displayed: \"The Brawl\" and \"il Marmiton\". In Paris, he met with Auguste Rodin and Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux.\nIn 1878, he also completed a life-size stucco of \"il Ciceruacchio\", a statue of the Italian patriot Angelo Brunetti and his thirteen-year-old son, depicting them at the moment of their execution in 1849 by Austrian troops. The Cicervacchio statue, with its tinge of revolutionary zeal, did not find commissions for completing the work in marble.He then completed a nude statue of \"Nan\u00e0\" based on the novel by \u00c9mile Zola; the statue was exhibited at the 1879 Salon di Paris. The next year at the Paris Salon, he displayed \"La Pesca meravigliosa\", where a fisherman rescues a bathing maiden. Returning to Italy, he displayed the bust del minister Giuseppe Zanardelli. At the Mostra of Rome, he displayed \"The assassination of Julius Caesar\"; and at the Exposition of Venice, \"Ragazzi messi in fila\". Ximenes' realism gave way to Symbolist and Neo-Renaissance elements. In addition to sculpture, he also produced illustrations for the works of Edmondo De Amicis published by the Treves publishing house.\nXimenes was involved in many of the major official monumental projects in Italy from the 1880s on and devoted his energies as from 1911 primarily to commissions for important public works in S\u00e3o Paulo, Kyiv, New York and Buenos Aires.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10018", "revid": "545027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10018", "title": "Edsger W. Dijkstra", "text": "Dutch computer scientist (1930\u20132002)\nEdsger Wybe Dijkstra ( ; ] (); 11 May 1930 \u2013 6 August 2002) was a Dutch computer scientist, programmer, software engineer, and science essayist.\nBorn in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, Dijkstra studied mathematics and physics and then theoretical physics at the University of Leiden. Adriaan van Wijngaarden offered him a job as the first computer programmer in the Netherlands at the Mathematical Center in Amsterdam, where he worked from 1952 until 1962. He formulated and solved the shortest path problem in 1956, and in 1960 developed the first compiler for the programming language ALGOL 60 in conjunction with colleague Jaap Zonneveld. In 1962 he moved to Eindhoven, and later to Nuenen, where he became a professor in the Mathematics Department at the Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven. In the late 1960s he built the THE multiprogramming system, which influenced the designs of subsequent systems through its use of software-based paged virtual memory. Dijkstra joined Burroughs Corporation as its sole research fellow in August 1973. The Burroughs years saw him at his most prolific in output of research articles. He wrote nearly 500 documents in the \"EWD\" series, most of them technical reports, for private circulation within a select group.\nDijkstra accepted the Schlumberger Centennial Chair in the Computer Science Department at the University of Texas at Austin in 1984, working in Austin, Texas until his retirement in November 1999. He and his wife returned from Austin to his original house in Nuenen, where he died on 6 August 2002 after a long struggle with cancer.\nHe received the 1972 Turing Award for fundamental contributions to developing structured programming languages. Shortly before his death, he received the ACM PODC Influential Paper Award in distributed computing for his work on self-stabilization of program computation. This annual award was renamed the Dijkstra Prize the following year, in his honor.\nLife and works.\nEarly years.\nEdsger W. Dijkstra was born in Rotterdam. His father was a chemist who was president of the Dutch Chemical Society; he taught chemistry at a secondary school and was later its superintendent. His mother was a mathematician, but never had a formal job.\nDijkstra had considered a career in law and had hoped to represent the Netherlands in the United Nations. However, after graduating from school in 1948, at his parents' suggestion he studied mathematics and physics and then theoretical physics at the University of Leiden.\nIn the early 1950s, electronic computers were a novelty. Dijkstra stumbled on his career by accident, and through his supervisor, Professor Johannes Haantjes, he met Adriaan van Wijngaarden, the director of the Computation Department at the Mathematical Center in Amsterdam, who offered Dijkstra a job; he officially became the Netherlands' first \"programmer\" in March 1952.\nFor some time Dijkstra remained committed to physics, working on it in Leiden three days out of each week. With increasing exposure to computing, however, his focus began to shift. As he recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After having programmed for some three years, I had a discussion with A. van Wijngaarden, who was then my boss at the Mathematical Center in Amsterdam, a discussion for which I shall remain grateful to him as long as I live. The point was that I was supposed to study theoretical physics at the University of Leiden simultaneously, and as I found the two activities harder and harder to combine, I had to make up my mind, either to stop programming and become a real, respectable theoretical physicist, or to carry my study of physics to a formal completion only, with a minimum of effort, and to become..., yes what? A programmer? But was that a respectable profession? For after all, what was programming? Where was the sound body of knowledge that could support it as an intellectually respectable discipline? I remember quite vividly how I envied my hardware colleagues, who, when asked about their professional competence, could at least point out that they knew everything about vacuum tubes, amplifiers and the rest, whereas I felt that, when faced with that question, I would stand empty-handed. Full of misgivings I knocked on Van Wijngaarden's office door, asking him whether I could \"speak to him for a moment\"; when I left his office a number of hours later, I was another person. For after having listened to my problems patiently, he agreed that up till that moment there was not much of a programming discipline, but then he went on to explain quietly that automatic computers were here to stay, that we were just at the beginning and could not I be one of the persons called to make programming a respectable discipline in the years to come? This was a turning point in my life and I completed my study of physics formally as quickly as I could.\nWhen Dijkstra married Maria (Ria) C. Debets in 1957, he was required as a part of the marriage rites to state his profession. He stated that he was a programmer, which was unacceptable to the authorities, there being no such profession then in The Netherlands.\nIn 1959, he received his PhD from the University of Amsterdam for a thesis entitled 'Communication with an Automatic Computer', devoted to a description of the assembly language designed for the first commercial computer developed in the Netherlands, the Electrologica X1. His thesis supervisor was Van Wijngaarden.\nMathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam.\nFrom 1952 until 1962, Dijkstra worked at the Mathematisch Centrum in Amsterdam, where he worked closely with Bram Jan Loopstra and Carel S. Scholten, who had been hired to build a computer. Their mode of interaction was disciplined: They would first decide upon the interface between the hardware and the software, by writing a programming manual. Then the hardware designers would have to be faithful to their part of the contract, while Dijkstra, the programmer, would write software for the nonexistent machine. Two of the lessons he learned from this experience were the importance of clear documentation, and that program debugging can be largely avoided through careful design.\nDijkstra formulated and solved the shortest path problem for a demonstration at the official inauguration of the ARMAC computer in 1956. Because of the absence of journals dedicated to automatic computing, he did not publish the result until 1959.\nAt the Mathematical Center, Dijkstra and his colleague Jaap Zonneveld developed the first compiler for the programming language ALGOL 60 by August 1960, more than a year before a compiler was produced by another group. ALGOL 60 is known as a key advance in the rise of structured programming.\nEindhoven University of Technology.\nIn 1962, Dijkstra moved to Eindhoven, and later to Nuenen, in the south of the Netherlands, where he became a professor in the Mathematics Department at the Eindhoven University of Technology. The university did not have a separate computer science department and the culture of the mathematics department did not particularly suit him. Dijkstra tried to build a group of computer scientists who could collaborate on solving problems. This was an unusual model of research for the Mathematics Department. In the late 1960s he built the THE operating system (named for the university, then known as Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven), which has influenced the designs of subsequent operating systems through its use of software-based paged virtual memory.\nBurroughs Corporation.\nDijkstra joined Burroughs Corporation, a company known then for producing computers based on an innovative hardware architecture, as its research fellow in August 1973. His duties consisted of visiting some of the firm's research centers a few times a year and carrying on his own research, which he did in the smallest Burroughs research facility, namely, his study on the second floor of his house in Nuenen. In fact, Dijkstra was the only research fellow of Burroughs and worked for it from home, occasionally travelling to its branches in the United States. As a result, he reduced his appointment at the university to one day a week. That day, Tuesday, soon became known as the day of the famous 'Tuesday Afternoon Club', a seminar during which he discussed with his colleagues scientific articles, looking at all aspects: notation, organisation, presentation, language, content, etc. Shortly after he moved in 1984 to the University of Texas at Austin (USA), a new 'branch' of the Tuesday Afternoon Club emerged in Austin, Texas.\nThe Burroughs years saw him at his most prolific in output of research articles. He wrote nearly 500 documents in the EWD series (described below), most of them technical reports, for private circulation within a select group.\nThe University of Texas at Austin.\nDijkstra accepted the Schlumberger Centennial Chair in the Computer Science Department at the University of Texas at Austin in 1984.\nLast years.\nDijkstra worked in Austin until his retirement in November 1999. To mark the occasion and to celebrate his forty-plus years of seminal contributions to computing science, the Department of Computer Sciences organized a symposium, which took place on his 70th birthday in May 2000.\nDijkstra and his wife returned from Austin to his original house in Nuenen (Netherlands) where he found that he had only months to live. He said that he wanted to retire in Austin, Texas, but to die in the Netherlands. Dijkstra died on 6 August 2002 after a long struggle with cancer.According to officials at the University of Texas, the cause of death was cancer. He and his wife were survived by their three children: Marcus, Femke, and the computer scientist Rutger M. Dijkstra.\nPersonality.\nCharacter.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You can hardly blame M.I.T. for not taking notice of an obscure computer scientist in a small town in the Netherlands.\nIn the world of computing science, Dijkstra is well known as a \"character\". In the preface of his book \"A Discipline of Programming\" (1976) he stated the following: \"For the absence of a bibliography I offer neither explanation nor apology.\" In fact, most of his articles and books have no references at all. This approach to references was deplored by some researchers. But Dijkstra chose this way of working to preserve his self-reliance.\nAs a university professor for much of his life, Dijkstra saw teaching not just as a required activity but as a serious research endeavour. His approach to teaching was unconventional. His lecturing style has been described as idiosyncratic. When lecturing, the long pauses between sentences have often been attributed to the fact that English is not Dijkstra's first language. However the pauses also served as a way for him to think on his feet and he was regarded as a quick and deep thinker while engaged in the act of lecturing. His courses for students in Austin had little to do with computer science but they dealt with the presentation of mathematical proofs. At the beginning of each semester, he would take a photo of each of his students in order to memorize their names. He never followed a textbook, with the possible exception of his own while it was under preparation. When lecturing, he would write proofs in chalk on a blackboard rather than using overhead foils. He invited the students to suggest ideas, which he then explored, or refused to explore because they violated some of his tenets. He assigned challenging homework problems, and would study his students' solutions thoroughly. He conducted his final examinations orally, over a whole week. Each student was examined in Dijkstra's office or home, and an exam lasted several hours.\nDijkstra was also highly original in his way of assessing people's capacity for a job. When Vladimir Lifschitz came to Austin in 1990 for a job interview, Dijkstra gave him a puzzle. Lifschitz solved it and has been working in Austin since then.\nUse of technology.\nHe eschewed the use of computers in his own work for many decades. Even after he succumbed to his UT colleagues' encouragement and acquired a Macintosh computer, he used it only for e-mail and for browsing the World Wide Web. Dijkstra never wrote his articles using a computer. He preferred to rely on his typewriter and later on his Montblanc pen. Dijkstra's favorite writing instrument was the Montblanc Meisterst\u00fcck fountain pen.\nHe had no use for word processors, believing that one should be able to write a letter or article without rough drafts, rewriting, or any significant editing. He would work it all out in his head before putting pen to paper, and once mentioned that when he was a physics student he would solve his homework problems in his head while walking the streets of Leiden.\nMost of Dijkstra's publications were written by him alone. He never had a secretary and took care of all his correspondence alone. When colleagues prepared a Festschrift for his sixtieth birthday, published by Springer-Verlag, he took the trouble to thank each of the 61 contributors separately, in a hand-written letter.\nIn \"The Humble Programmer\" (1972), Dijkstra wrote: \"We must not forget that it is not our [computing scientists'] business to make programs, it is our business to design classes of computations that will display a desired behaviour.\"\nDijkstra also opposed the inclusion of software engineering under the umbrella of academic computer science. He wrote that, \"As economics is known as \"The Miserable Science\", software engineering should be known as \"The Doomed Discipline\", doomed because it cannot even approach its goal since its goal is self-contradictory.\" And \"software engineering has accepted as its charter 'How to program if you cannot.'\"\nPersonal life.\nDijkstra led a modest lifestyle, to the point of being spartan. His and his wife's house in Nuenen was simple, small and unassuming. He did not own a television, a video player, or a mobile telephone, and did not go to the movies. He played the piano, and, while in Austin, liked to go to concerts. An enthusiastic listener of classical music, Dijkstra's favorite composer was Mozart.\nEssays and other writing.\nThroughout Dijkstra's career, his work was characterized by elegance and economy. A prolific writer (especially as an essayist), Dijkstra authored more than 1,300 papers, many written by hand in his precise script. They were essays and parables; fairy tales and warnings; comprehensive explanation and pedagogical pretext. Most were about mathematics and computer science; others were trip reports that are more revealing about their author than about the people and places visited. It was his habit to copy each paper and circulate it to a small group of colleagues who would copy and forward the papers to another limited group of scientists.\nEWDs.\nDijkstra was well known for his habit of carefully composing manuscripts with his fountain pen. The manuscripts are called EWDs, since Dijkstra numbered them with \"EWD\", his initials, as a prefix. According to Dijkstra himself, the EWDs started when he moved from the Mathematical Centre in Amsterdam to the Eindhoven University of Technology (then Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven). After going to Eindhoven, Dijkstra experienced a writer's block for more than a year. He distributed photocopies of a new EWD among his colleagues. Many recipients photocopied and forwarded their copies, so the EWDs spread throughout the international computer science community. The topics were computer science and mathematics, and included trip reports, letters, and speeches. These short articles span a period of 40 years. Almost all EWDs appearing after 1972 were hand-written. They are rarely longer than 15 pages and are consecutively numbered. The last one, No. 1318, is from 14 April 2002. Within computer science they are known as the EWD reports, or, simply the EWDs. More than 1300 EWDs have been scanned, with a growing number transcribed to facilitate search, and are available online at the Dijkstra archive of the University of Texas.\nWriting style.\nHis interest with simplicity came at an early age and under his mother's guidance. He once said he had asked his mother whether trigonometry was a difficult topic. She replied that he must learn all the formulas and that further, if he required more than five lines to prove something, he was on the wrong track.\nDijkstra was famous for his wit, eloquence, rudeness, abruptness and often cruelty to fellow professionals, and way with words, such as in his remark, \"The question of whether Machines Can Think (\u2026) is about as relevant as the question of whether Submarines Can Swim.\" His advice to a promising researcher, who asked how to select a topic for research, was the phrase: \"Do only what only you can do\". Dijkstra was also known for his vocal criticism and absence of social skills when interacting with colleagues. As an outspoken and critical visionary, he strongly opposed the teaching of BASIC.\nRecurring themes.\nIn many of his more witty essays, Dijkstra described a fictional company of which he served as chairman. The company was called Mathematics, Inc., a company that he imagined having commercialized the production of mathematical theorems in the same way that software companies had commercialized the production of computer programs. He invented a number of activities and challenges of Mathematics Inc. and documented them in several papers in the EWD series. The imaginary company had produced a proof of the Riemann Hypothesis but then had great difficulties collecting royalties from mathematicians who had proved results assuming the Riemann Hypothesis. The proof itself was a trade secret. Many of the company's proofs were rushed out the door and then much of the company's effort had to be spent on maintenance. A more successful effort was the Standard Proof for Pythagoras' Theorem, that replaced the more than 100 incompatible existing proofs. Dijkstra described Mathematics Inc. as \"the most exciting and most miserable business ever conceived\". EWD 443 (1974) describes his fictional company as having over 75 percent of the world's market share.\nLegacy.\nDijkstra won the Turing award in 1972 for his advocacy of structured programming, a programming paradigm that makes use of structured control flow as opposed to unstructured jumps to different sections in a program using Goto statements. His 1968 letter to the editor of \"Communications of ACM, \"Go To statement considered harmful\"\", caused a major debate. Modern programmers generally adhere to the paradigm of structured programming.\nAmong his most famous contributions to computer science is \"shortest path algorithm\", known as \"Dijkstra's algorithm,\" widely taught in modern computer science undergraduate courses. His other contributions included the \"Shunting yard algorithm\"; the THE multiprogramming system, an important early example of structuring a system as a set of layers; the \"Banker's algorithm\"; and the semaphore construct for coordinating multiple processors and programs. Another concept formulated by Dijkstra in the field of distributed computing is that of self-stabilization \u2013 an alternative way to ensure the reliability of the system. Dijkstra's algorithm is used in SPF, Shortest Path First, which is used in the routing protocols OSPF and IS-IS.\nAwards and honors.\nAmong Dijkstra's awards and honors are:\nIn 1969, the British Computer Society (BCS) received approval for an award and fellowship, Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society (DFBCS), to be awarded under bylaw 7 of their royal charter. In 1971, the first election was made, to Dijkstra.\nIn 1990, on occasion of Dijkstra's 60th birthday, the Department of Computer Science (UTCS) at the University of Texas at Austin organized a two-day seminar in his honor. Speakers came from all over the United States and Europe, and a group of computer scientists contributed research articles which were edited into a book.\nIn 2002, the C&amp;C Foundation of Japan recognized Dijkstra \"for his pioneering contributions to the establishment of the scientific basis for computer software through creative research in basic software theory, algorithm theory, structured programming, and semaphores.\" Dijkstra was alive to receive notice of the award, but it was accepted by his family in an award ceremony after his death.\nShortly before his death in 2002, Dijkstra received the ACM PODC Influential-Paper Award in distributed computing for his work on self-stabilization of program computation. This annual award was renamed the Dijkstra Prize (Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing) the following year, in his honor.\nThe Dijkstra Award for Outstanding Academic Achievement in Computer Science (Loyola University Chicago, Department of Computer Science) is named for Edsger W. Dijkstra. Beginning in 2005, this award recognizes the top academic performance by a graduating computer science major. Selection is based on GPA in all major courses and election by department faculty.\nThe Department of Computer Science (UTCS) at the University of Texas at Austin hosted the inaugural Edsger W. Dijkstra Memorial Lecture on 12 October 2010. Tony Hoare, Emeritus Professor at Oxford and Principal Researcher at Microsoft Research, was the speaker for the event. This lecture series was made possible by a generous grant from Schlumberger to honor the memory of Dijkstra.\nSelected publications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10021", "revid": "45898899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10021", "title": "Educational perennialism", "text": "Educational philosophy\nEducational perennialism is a normative educational philosophy. Perennialists believe that one should teach the things that are of everlasting pertinence to all people everywhere, and that the emphasis should be on principles, not facts. Since people are human, one should teach first about humans, rather than machines or techniques, and about liberal, rather than vocational topics.\nAlthough perennialism may appear similar to essentialism, perennialism focuses first on personal development, while essentialism focuses first on essential skills. Essentialist curricula thus tends to be much more vocational and fact-based, and far less liberal and principle-based. Both philosophies are typically considered to be teacher-centered, as opposed to student-centered philosophies of education such as progressivism. Since the teachers associated with perennialism are the authors of the Western masterpieces themselves, they may be open to student criticism through the associated Socratic method, which, if carried out as true dialogue, involves a balance between teacher activity and student activity, with the teacher promoting discussion.\nSecular perennialism.\nThe word \"perennial\" in secular perennialism suggests something that lasts an indefinitely long time, recurs again and again, or is self-renewing. As promoted primarily by Robert Hutchins and Mortimer Adler, a universal curriculum based upon the common and essential nature of all human beings is recommended. This form of perennialism encompasses the humanist and scientific traditions. Hutchins and Adler implemented these ideas with great success at the University of Chicago, where they still strongly influence the curriculum in the form of the undergraduate Common Core. Other notable figures in the movement include Stringfellow Barr and Scott Buchanan (who together initiated the Great Books program at St. John's College in Annapolis, Maryland), Mark Van Doren, Alexander Meiklejohn, and Sir Richard Livingstone, an English classicist with an American following. Inspired by Adler's lectures, Sister Miriam Joseph wrote a textbook on the scholastic trivium and taught it as the Freshman seminar at Saint Mary's College.\nSecular perennialists espouse the idea that education should focus on the historical development of a continually developing common orienting base of human knowledge and art, the timeless value of classic thought on central human issues by landmark thinkers, and revolutionary ideas critical to historical paradigm shifts or changes in world view. A program of studies which is highly general, nonspecialized, and nonvocational is advocated. They firmly believe that exposure of all people to the development of thought by those most responsible for the evolution of the occidental oriented tradition is integral to the survival of the freedoms, human rights and responsibilities inherent to a true Democracy.\nAdler states: \n... our political democracy depends upon the reconstitution of our schools. Our schools are not turning out young people prepared for the high office and the duties of citizenship in a democratic republic. Our political institutions cannot thrive, they may not even survive, if we do not produce a greater number of thinking citizens, from whom some statesmen of the type we had in the 18th century might eventually emerge. We are, indeed, a nation at risk, and nothing but radical reform of our schools can save us from impending disaster... Whatever the price... the price we will pay for not doing it will be much greater.\nHutchins writes in the same vein: \nThe business of saying ... that people are not capable of achieving a good education is too strongly reminiscent of the opposition of every extension of democracy. This opposition has always rested on the allegation that the people were incapable of exercising the power they demanded. Always the historic statement has been verified: you cannot expect the slave to show the virtues of the free man unless you first set him free. When the slave has been set free, he has, in the passage of time, become indistinguishable from those who have always been free ... There appears to be an innate human tendency to underestimate the capacity of those who do not belong to \"our\" group. Those who do not share our background cannot have our ability. Foreigners, people who are in a different economic status, and the young seem invariably to be regarded as intellectually backward ...\nAs with the essentialists, perennialists are educationally conservative in the requirement of a curriculum focused upon fundamental subject areas, but stress that the overall aim should be exposure to history's finest thinkers as models for discovery. The student should be taught such basic subjects as English, languages, history, mathematics, natural science, philosophy, and fine arts. Adler states: \"The three R's, which always signified the formal disciplines, are the essence of liberal or general education.\"\nSecular perennialists agree with progressivists that memorization of vast amounts of factual information and a focus on second-hand information in textbooks and lectures does not develop rational thought. They advocate learning through the development of meaningful conceptual thinking and judgement by means of a directed reading list of the profound, aesthetic, and meaningful great books of the Western canon. These books, secular perennialists argue, are written by the world's finest thinkers, and cumulatively comprise the \"Great Conversation\" of humanity with regard to the central human questions. Their basic argument for the use of original works (abridged translations being acceptable as well) is that these are the products of \"genius\". Hutchins remarks:\nGreat books are great teachers; they are showing us every day what ordinary people are capable of. These books come out of ignorant, inquiring humanity. They are usually the first announcements for success in learning. Most of them were written for, and addressed to, ordinary people.\nIt is important to note that the Great Conversation is not static, which is the impression that one might obtain from some descriptions of perennialism, a confusion with religious perennialism, or even the term perennialism itself. The Great Conversation and the set of related great books changes as the representative thought of man changes or progresses, and is therefore representative of an evolution of thought, but is not based upon the whim or fancy of the latest cultural fads. Hutchins makes this point very clear:\nIn the course of history... new books have been written that have won their place in the list. Books once thought entitled to belong to it have been superseded; and this process of change will continue as long as men can think and write. It is the task of every generation to reassess the tradition in which it lives, to discard what it cannot use, and to bring into context with the distant and intermediate past the most recent contributions to the Great Conversation. ...the West needs to recapture and reemphasize and bring to bear upon its present problems the wisdom that lies in the works of its greatest thinkers and in the name of love\nPerennialism was a solution proposed in response to what was considered by many to be a failing educational system. Again Hutchins writes:\nThe products of American high schools are illiterate; and a degree from a famous college or university is no guarantee that the graduate is in any better case. One of the most remarkable features of American society is that the difference between the \"uneducated\" and the \"educated\" is so slight.\nIn this regard John Dewey and Hutchins were in agreement. Hutchins's book \"The Higher Learning in America\" deplored the \"plight of higher learning\" that had turned away from cultivation of the intellect and toward anti-intellectual practicality due in part, to a lust for money. In a highly negative review of the book, Dewey wrote a series of articles in \"The Social Frontier\" which began by applauding Hutchins' attack on \"the aimlessness of our present educational scheme.\nPerennialists believe that reading is to be supplemented with mutual investigations (between the teacher and the student) and minimally-directed discussions through the Socratic method in order to develop a historically oriented understanding of concepts. They argue that accurate, independent reasoning distinguishes the developed or educated mind and they thus stress the development of this faculty. A skilled teacher would keep discussions on topic and correct errors in reasoning, but it would be the class, not the teacher, who would reach the conclusions. While not directing or leading the class to a conclusion, the teacher may work to accurately formulate problems within the scope of the texts being studied.\nWhile the standard argument for utilizing a modern text supports distillation of information into a form relevant to modern society, perennialists argue that many of the historical debates and the development of ideas presented by the great books are relevant to any society, at any time, and thus that the suitability of the great books for instructional use is unaffected by their age.\nPerennialists freely acknowledge that any particular selection of great books will disagree on many topics; however, they see this as an advantage, rather than a detriment. They believe that the student must learn to recognize such disagreements, which often reflect current debates. The student becomes responsible for thinking about the disagreements and reaching a reasoned, defensible conclusion. This is a major goal of the Socratic discussions. They do not advocate teaching a settled scholarly interpretation of the books, which would cheat the student of the opportunity to learn rational criticism and to know his own mind.\nReligious perennialism.\nPerennialism was originally religious in nature, developed first by Thomas Aquinas in the thirteenth century in his work \"\" (\"On the Teacher\").\nIn the nineteenth century, John Henry Newman presented a defense of religious perennialism in \"The Idea of a University\". Discourse 5 of that work, \"Knowledge Its Own End\", is a recent statement of a Christian educational perennialism.\nThere are several epistemological options, which affect the pedagogical options. The possibilities may be surveyed by considering four extreme positions - idealistic rationalism, idealistic fideism, realistic rationalism and realistic fideism.\nTeaching pupils to think critically and rationally are the main objectives of perennialist educators. A perennialist classroom seeks to be a highly structured and disciplined setting that fosters in pupils a never-ending search for the truth."}
{"id": "10022", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10022", "title": "E.163", "text": ""}
{"id": "10024", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10024", "title": "MDMA", "text": "Psychoactive drug\n3,4-Methyl&lt;wbr /&gt;\u200benedioxy&lt;wbr /&gt;\u200bmethamphetamine (MDMA), commonly known as ecstasy (tablet form); and molly or mandy (crystal form), is a potent empathogen\u2013entactogen with stimulant properties primarily used for recreational purposes. The beneficial pharmacological effects include altered sensations, increased energy, empathy, and pleasure. When taken by mouth, effects begin in 30 to 45 minutes and last three to six hours.\nMDMA was first developed in 1912 by Merck. It was used to enhance psychotherapy beginning in the 1970s and became popular as a street drug in the 1980s. MDMA is commonly associated with dance parties, raves, and electronic dance music. Tablets sold as ecstasy may be mixed with other substances such as ephedrine, amphetamine, and methamphetamine. In 2016, about 21 million people between the ages of 15 and 64 used ecstasy (0.3% of the world population). This was broadly similar to the percentage of people who use cocaine or amphetamines, but lower than for cannabis or opioids. In the United States, as of 2017, about 7% of people have used MDMA at some point in their lives and 0.9% have used it in the last year. The lethal risk from one dose of MDMA is estimated to be from 1 death in 20,000 instances to 1 death in 50,000 instances.\nShort-term adverse effects include grinding of the teeth, blurred vision, sweating and a rapid heartbeat, and extended use can also lead to addiction, memory problems, paranoia and difficulty sleeping. Deaths have been reported due to increased body temperature and dehydration. Following use, people often feel depressed and tired, although this effect does not appear in clinical use, suggesting that it is not a direct result of MDMA administration. MDMA acts primarily by increasing the release of the neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine and noradrenaline in parts of the brain. It belongs to the substituted amphetamine classes of drugs. MDMA is structurally similar to mescaline (a hallucinogen), methamphetamine (a stimulant), as well as endogenous monoamine neurotransmitters such as serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine.\nMDMA is illegal in most countries and has limited approved \nmedical uses in a small number of countries. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration is currently evaluating the drug for clinical use. Canada has allowed limited distribution of MDMA and other psychedelics such as psilocybin upon application to and approval by Health Canada.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEffects.\nIn general, MDMA users report feeling the onset of subjective effects within 30 to 60 minutes of oral consumption and reaching peak effect at 75 to 120 minutes, which then plateaus for about 3.5 hours. The desired short-term psychoactive effects of MDMA have been reported to include:\nThe experience elicited by MDMA depends on the dose, setting, and user. The variability of the induced altered state is lower compared to other psychedelics. For example, MDMA used at parties is associated with high motor activity, reduced sense of identity, and poor awareness of surroundings. Use of MDMA individually or in small groups in a quiet environment and when concentrating, is associated with increased lucidity, concentration, sensitivity to aesthetic aspects of the environment, enhanced awareness of emotions, and improved capability of communication. In psychotherapeutic settings, MDMA effects have been characterized by infantile ideas, mood lability, and memories and moods connected with childhood experiences.\nMDMA has been described as an \"empathogenic\" drug because of its empathy-producing effects. Results of several studies show the effects of increased empathy with others. When testing MDMA for medium and high doses, it showed increased hedonic and arousal continuum. The effect of MDMA increasing sociability is consistent, while its effects on empathy have been more mixed.\nUse.\nRecreational.\nMDMA is often considered the drug of choice within the rave culture and is also used at clubs, festivals, and house parties. In the rave environment, the sensory effects of music and lighting are often highly synergistic with the drug. The psychedelic amphetamine quality of MDMA offers multiple appealing aspects to users in the rave setting. Some users enjoy the feeling of mass communion from the inhibition-reducing effects of the drug, while others use it as party fuel because of the drug's stimulatory effects. MDMA is used less often than other stimulants, typically less than once per week.\nMDMA is sometimes taken in conjunction with other psychoactive drugs such as LSD, psilocybin mushrooms, 2C-B, and ketamine. The combination with LSD is called \"candy-flipping\". MDMA is often co-administered with alcohol, methamphetamine, and prescription drugs such as SSRIs with which MDMA has several drug-drug interactions. Three life-threatening reports of MDMA co-administration with ritonavir have been reported. \nMedical.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], MDMA has no accepted medical indications. Before it was widely banned, it saw limited use in psychotherapy. In 2017 the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved limited research on MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), with some preliminary evidence that MDMA may facilitate psychotherapy efficacy for PTSD.\nOther.\nSmall doses of MDMA are used by some religious practitioners as an entheogen to enhance prayer or meditation. MDMA has been used as an adjunct to New Age spiritual practices.\nForms.\nMDMA has become widely known as ecstasy (shortened \"E\", \"X\", or \"XTC\"), usually referring to its tablet form, although this term may also include the presence of possible adulterants or diluents. The UK term \"mandy\" and the US term \"molly\" colloquially refer to MDMA in a crystalline powder form that is thought to be free of adulterants. MDMA is also sold in the form of the hydrochloride salt, either as loose crystals or in gelcaps. MDMA tablets can sometimes be found in a shaped form that may depict characters from popular culture, likely for deceptive reasons. These are sometimes collectively referred to as \"fun tablets\".\nPartly due to the global supply shortage of sassafras oil\u2014a problem largely assuaged by use of improved or alternative modern methods of synthesis\u2014the purity of substances sold as molly have been found to vary widely. Some of these substances contain methylone, ethylone, MDPV, mephedrone, or any other of the group of compounds commonly known as bath salts, in addition to, or in place of, MDMA. Powdered MDMA ranges from pure MDMA to crushed tablets with 30\u201340% purity. MDMA tablets typically have low purity due to bulking agents that are added to dilute the drug and increase profits (notably lactose) and binding agents. Tablets sold as ecstasy sometimes contain 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), 3,4-methylenedioxyethylamphetamine (MDEA), other amphetamine derivatives, caffeine, opiates, or painkillers. Some tablets contain little or no MDMA. The proportion of seized ecstasy tablets with MDMA-like impurities has varied annually and by country. The average content of MDMA in a preparation is 70 to 120\u00a0mg with the purity having increased since the 1990s.\nMDMA is usually consumed by mouth. It is also sometimes snorted.\nAdverse effects.\nShort-term.\nAcute adverse effects are usually the result of high or multiple doses, although single dose toxicity can occur in susceptible individuals. The most serious short-term physical health risks of MDMA are hyperthermia and dehydration. Cases of life-threatening or fatal hyponatremia (excessively low sodium concentration in the blood) have developed in MDMA users attempting to prevent dehydration by consuming excessive amounts of water without replenishing electrolytes.\nThe immediate adverse effects of MDMA use can include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther adverse effects that may occur or persist for up to a week following cessation of moderate MDMA use include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdministration of MDMA to mice causes DNA damage in their brain, especially when the mice are sleep deprived. Even at the very low doses that are comparable to those self-administered by humans, MDMA causes oxidative stress and both single and double-strand breaks in the DNA of the hippocampus region of the mouse brain.\nLong-term.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], the long-term effects of MDMA on human brain structure and function have not been fully determined. However, there is consistent evidence of structural and functional deficits in MDMA users with high lifetime exposure. There is no evidence of structural or functional changes in MDMA users with only a moderate (&lt;50 doses used and &lt;100 tablets consumed) lifetime exposure. Nonetheless, MDMA in moderate use may still be neurotoxic. Furthermore, it is not clear yet whether \"typical\" users of MDMA (1 to 2 pills of 75 to 125\u00a0mg MDMA or analogue every 1 to 4 weeks) will develop neurotoxic brain lesions. Long-term exposure to MDMA in humans has been shown to produce marked neurodegeneration in striatal, hippocampal, prefrontal, and occipital serotonergic axon terminals. Neurotoxic damage to serotonergic axon terminals has been shown to persist for more than two years. Elevations in brain temperature from MDMA use are positively correlated with MDMA-induced neurotoxicity. However, most studies on MDMA and serotonergic neurotoxicity in humans focus on the heaviest users, those who consume more than seven times the average. It is therefore possible that no serotonergic neurotoxicity is present in most casual users. Adverse neuroplastic changes to brain microvasculature and white matter also occur in humans using low doses of MDMA. Reduced gray matter density in certain brain structures has also been noted in human MDMA users. Global reductions in gray matter volume, thinning of the parietal and orbitofrontal cortices, and decreased hippocampal activity have been observed in long term users. The effects established so far for recreational use of ecstasy lie in the range of moderate to severe effects for serotonin transporter reduction.\nImpairments in multiple aspects of cognition, including attention, learning, memory, visual processing, and sleep, have been found in regular MDMA users. The magnitude of these impairments is correlated with lifetime MDMA usage and are partially reversible with abstinence. Several forms of memory are impaired by chronic ecstasy use; however, the effects for memory impairments in ecstasy users are generally small overall. MDMA use is also associated with increased impulsivity and depression.\nSerotonin depletion following MDMA use can cause depression in subsequent days. In some cases, depressive symptoms persist for longer periods. Some studies indicate repeated recreational use of ecstasy is associated with depression and anxiety, even after quitting the drug. Depression is one of the main reasons for cessation of use.\nAt high doses, MDMA induces a neuroimmune response that, through several mechanisms, increases the permeability of the blood\u2013brain barrier, thereby making the brain more susceptible to environmental toxins and pathogens. In addition, MDMA has immunosuppressive effects in the peripheral nervous system and pro-inflammatory effects in the central nervous system.\nMDMA may increase the risk of cardiac valvulopathy in heavy or long-term users due to activation of serotonin 5-HT2B receptors. MDMA also induces cardiac epigenetic changes in DNA methylation, particularly hypermethylation changes.\nHarm assessment.\nA 2007 UK study ranked MDMA 18th in harmfulness out of 20 recreational drugs. Rankings for each drug were based on the risk for acute physical harm, the propensity for physical and psychological dependency on the drug, and the negative familial and societal impacts of the drug. The authors did not evaluate or rate the negative impact of ecstasy on the cognitive health of ecstasy users (e.g. impaired memory and concentration).\nReinforcement disorders.\nApproximately 60% of MDMA users experience withdrawal symptoms when they stop taking MDMA. Some of these symptoms include fatigue, loss of appetite, depression, and trouble concentrating. Tolerance to some of the desired and adverse effects of MDMA is expected to occur with consistent MDMA use. A 2007 analysis estimated MDMA to have a psychological dependence and physical dependence potential roughly three-fourths to four-fifths that of cannabis.\nMDMA has been shown to induce \u0394FosB in the nucleus accumbens. Because MDMA releases dopamine in the striatum, the mechanisms by which it induces \u0394FosB in the nucleus accumbens are analogous to other dopaminergic psychostimulants. Therefore, chronic use of MDMA at high doses can result in altered brain structure and drug addiction that occur as a consequence of \u0394FosB overexpression in the nucleus accumbens. MDMA is less addictive than other stimulants such as methamphetamine and cocaine. Compared with amphetamine, MDMA and its metabolite MDA are less reinforcing.\nOne study found approximately 15% of chronic MDMA users met the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for substance dependence. However, there is little evidence for a specific diagnosable MDMA dependence syndrome because MDMA is typically used relatively infrequently.\nThere are currently no medications to treat MDMA addiction.\nDuring pregnancy.\nMDMA is a moderately teratogenic drug (i.e., it is toxic to the fetus). In utero exposure to MDMA is associated with a neuro- and cardiotoxicity and impaired motor functioning. Motor delays may be temporary during infancy or long-term. The severity of these developmental delays increases with heavier MDMA use.\nOverdose.\nMDMA overdose symptoms vary widely due to the involvement of multiple organ systems. Some of the more overt overdose symptoms are listed in the table below. The number of instances of fatal MDMA intoxication is low relative to its usage rates. In most fatalities, MDMA was not the only drug involved. Acute toxicity is mainly caused by serotonin syndrome and sympathomimetic effects. Sympathomimetic side effects can be managed with carvedilol. MDMA's toxicity in overdose may be exacerbated by caffeine, with which it is frequently cut in order to increase volume. A scheme for management of acute MDMA toxicity has been published focusing on treatment of hyperthermia, hyponatraemia, serotonin syndrome, and multiple organ failure.\nInteractions.\nA number of drug interactions can occur between MDMA and other drugs, including serotonergic drugs. MDMA also interacts with drugs which inhibit CYP450 enzymes, like ritonavir (Norvir), particularly CYP2D6 inhibitors. Life-threatening reactions and death have occurred in people who took MDMA while on ritonavir. Concurrent use of MDMA high dosages with another serotonergic drug can result in a life-threatening condition called serotonin syndrome. Severe overdose resulting in death has also been reported in people who took MDMA in combination with certain monoamine oxidase inhibitors, such as phenelzine (Nardil), tranylcypromine (Parnate), or moclobemide (Aurorix, Manerix). Serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as citalopram (Celexa), duloxetine (Cymbalta), fluoxetine (Prozac), and paroxetine (Paxil) have been shown to block most of the subjective effects of MDMA. Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as reboxetine (Edronax) have been found to reduce emotional excitation and feelings of stimulation with MDMA but don't appear to influence its entactogenic or mood-elevating effects.\nPharmacology.\nMonoamine transporters.\nIn humans, MDMA increases the amount of serotonin in the synaptic clefts of serotonergic neurons by inhibiting its uptake into neurons and by directly releasing it from the neurons. The released serotonin binds to various serotonin receptors and activates them in excess, which is the primary mechanism through which MDMA causes intoxication. MDMA also induces significant norepinephrine release.\nExtracellular MDMA binds to presynaptic serotonin (SERT), norepinephrine (NET) and dopamine transporters (DAT) as a reuptake inhibitor, so that they uptake less of their namesake monoamine neurotransmitters. The efficacy of MDMA inhibition is highest towards NET and SERT, and is much less towards DAT. As a result, more norepinephrine and serotonin remains in the synaptic cleft.\nThese monoamine transporters (SERT, NET and DAT) reuptake their respective neurotransmitters via ion gradient. Normally there is a high extracellular sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl\u2013) ion concentration, and low potassium (K+) ion concentration in respect to intracellular concentrations. In each reuptake cycle, one monoamine, Na+ and Cl\u2013 are simultaneously taken inside the cell. One intracellular K+ is then transported outside the cell. In experimental situations, high extracellular K+ concentration can cause reverse transport. MDMA can substitute for K+ in this transport. Thus, high extracellular MDMA can reverse the transport. This reversal is most notable with SERT and NET, which results in direct serotonin and norepinephrine release in exchange for cellular uptake of MDMA.\nVMAT2 and other effects.\nIntracellular MDMA binds to VMAT2-proteins on synaptic vesicles as an inhibitor. Each VMAT2 transports cytosolic monoamines into the vesicle by dissipating proton gradient across the vesicular membrane. Thus, VMAT2 inhibition results in more free cytosolic monoamines like serotonin in the case of serotonergic neurons. These monoamines can then be released via monoamine transporters, which have been reversed by MDMA (see below).\nIntracellular MDMA can also bind to monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) as an inhibitor, and thus prevent it from breaking down cytosolic serotonin. However, this effect is not significant in humans.\nCortisol, prolactin, and oxytocin quantities in blood serum are increased by MDMA.\nReceptor binding.\nIn humans, MDMA is an indirect agonist at the following receptors:\nMDMA is a direct agonist at the following receptors:\nMDMA has two enantiomers, \"S\"-MDMA and \"R\"-MDMA. Mixture of the two (racemate) is typically used recreationally. \"S\"-MDMA causes the entactogenic effects of the racemate, because it releases serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine much more efficiently via monoamine transporters. It also has higher affinity towards 5-HT2CR. \"R\"-MDMA has notable agonism towards 5-HT2AR, which supposedly contributes to the mild psychedelic hallucinations induced by high doses of MDMA in humans. MDMA racemate is a partial agonist towards human TAAR1, but this is not physiologically relevant due to low EC50. Relevant EC50 would be below 5 \u00b5M, but for humans it is 35 \u00b5M. However, the agonism is significant towards the TAAR1 of mice and rats (EC50 is 1\u20134 \u00b5M).\nPharmacokinetics.\nThe MDMA concentration in the blood stream starts to rise after about 30 minutes, and reaches its maximal concentration in the blood stream between 1.5 and 3 hours after ingestion. It is then slowly metabolized and excreted, with levels of MDMA and its metabolites decreasing to half their peak concentration over the next several hours. The duration of action of MDMA is usually four to six hours, after which serotonin levels in the brain are depleted. Serotonin levels typically return to normal within 24\u201348 hours.\nMetabolites of MDMA that have been identified in humans include 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxymethamphetamine (HMMA), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyamphetamine (HMA), 3,4-dihydroxyamphetamine (DHA) (also called alpha-methyldopamine (\u03b1-Me-DA)), 3,4-methylenedioxyphenylacetone (MDP2P), and 3,4-Methylenedioxy-N-hydroxyamphetamine (MDOH). The contributions of these metabolites to the psychoactive and toxic effects of MDMA are an area of active research. 80% of MDMA is metabolised in the liver, and about 20% is excreted unchanged in the urine.\nMDMA is known to be metabolized by two main metabolic pathways: (1) \"O\"-demethylenation followed by catechol-\"O\"-methyltransferase (COMT)-catalyzed methylation and/or glucuronide/sulfate conjugation; and (2) \"N\"-dealkylation, deamination, and oxidation to the corresponding benzoic acid derivatives conjugated with glycine. The metabolism may be primarily by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 and COMT. Complex, nonlinear pharmacokinetics arise via autoinhibition of CYP2D6 and CYP2D8, resulting in zeroth order kinetics at higher doses. It is thought that this can result in sustained and higher concentrations of MDMA if the user takes consecutive doses of the drug.\nMDMA and metabolites are primarily excreted as conjugates, such as sulfates and glucuronides. MDMA is a chiral compound and has been almost exclusively administered as a racemate. However, the two enantiomers have been shown to exhibit different kinetics. The disposition of MDMA may also be stereoselective, with the S-enantiomer having a shorter elimination half-life and greater excretion than the R-enantiomer. Evidence suggests that the area under the blood plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) was two to four times higher for the (\"R\")-enantiomer than the (\"S\")-enantiomer after a 40\u00a0mg oral dose in human volunteers. Likewise, the plasma half-life of (\"R\")-MDMA was significantly longer than that of the (\"S\")-enantiomer (5.8\u00a0\u00b1\u00a02.2 hours vs 3.6\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.9 hours). However, because MDMA excretion and metabolism have nonlinear kinetics, the half-lives would be higher at more typical doses (100\u00a0mg is sometimes considered a typical dose).\nChemistry.\nMDMA is in the substituted methylenedioxyphenethylamine and substituted amphetamine classes of chemicals. As a free base, MDMA is a colorless oil insoluble in water. The most common salt of MDMA is the hydrochloride salt; pure MDMA hydrochloride is water-soluble and appears as a white or off-white powder or crystal.\nSynthesis.\nThere are numerous methods available to synthesize MDMA via different intermediates. The original MDMA synthesis described in Merck's patent involves brominating safrole to 1-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2-bromopropane and then reacting this adduct with methylamine. Most illicit MDMA is synthesized using MDP2P (3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl-2-propanone) as a precursor. MDP2P in turn is generally synthesized from piperonal, safrole or isosafrole. One method is to isomerize safrole to isosafrole in the presence of a strong base, and then oxidize isosafrole to MDP2P. Another method uses the Wacker process to oxidize safrole directly to the MDP2P intermediate with a palladium catalyst. Once the MDP2P intermediate has been prepared, a reductive amination leads to racemic MDMA (an equal parts mixture of (\"R\")-MDMA and (\"S\")-MDMA). Relatively small quantities of essential oil are required to make large amounts of MDMA. The essential oil of \"Ocotea cymbarum\", for example, typically contains between 80 and 94% safrole. This allows 500\u00a0ml of the oil to produce between 150 and 340 grams of MDMA.\nDetection in body fluids.\nMDMA and MDA may be quantitated in blood, plasma or urine to monitor for use, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning or assist in the forensic investigation of a traffic or other criminal violation or a sudden death. Some drug abuse screening programs rely on hair, saliva, or sweat as specimens. Most commercial amphetamine immunoassay screening tests cross-react significantly with MDMA or its major metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish and separately measure each of these substances. The concentrations of MDA in the blood or urine of a person who has taken only MDMA are, in general, less than 10% those of the parent drug.\nHistory.\nEarly research and use.\nMDMA was first synthesized in 1912 by Merck chemist Anton K\u00f6llisch. At the time, Merck was interested in developing substances that stopped abnormal bleeding. Merck wanted to avoid an existing patent held by Bayer for one such compound: hydrastinine. K\u00f6llisch developed a preparation of a hydrastinine analogue, methylhydrastinine, at the request of fellow lab members, Walther Beckh and Otto Wolfes. MDMA (called methylsafrylamin, safrylmethylamin or N-Methyl-a-Methylhomopiperonylamin in Merck laboratory reports) was an intermediate compound in the synthesis of methylhydrastinine. Merck was not interested in MDMA itself at the time. On 24 December 1912, Merck filed two patent applications that described the synthesis and some chemical properties of MDMA and its subsequent conversion to methylhydrastinine.\nMerck records indicate its researchers returned to the compound sporadically. A 1920 Merck patent describes a chemical modification to MDMA. In 1927, Max Oberlin studied the pharmacology of MDMA while searching for substances with effects similar to adrenaline or ephedrine, the latter being structurally similar to MDMA. Compared to ephedrine, Oberlin observed that it had similar effects on vascular smooth muscle tissue, stronger effects at the uterus, and no \"local effect at the eye\". MDMA was also found to have effects on blood sugar levels comparable to high doses of ephedrine. Oberlin concluded that the effects of MDMA were not limited to the sympathetic nervous system. Research was stopped \"particularly due to a strong price increase of safrylmethylamine\", which was still used as an intermediate in methylhydrastinine synthesis. Albert van Schoor performed simple toxicological tests with the drug in 1952, most likely while researching new stimulants or circulatory medications. After pharmacological studies, research on MDMA was not continued. In 1959, Wolfgang Fruhstorfer synthesized MDMA for pharmacological testing while researching stimulants. It is unclear if Fruhstorfer investigated the effects of MDMA in humans.\nOutside of Merck, other researchers began to investigate MDMA. In 1953 and 1954, the United States Army commissioned a study of toxicity and behavioral effects in animals injected with mescaline and several analogues, including MDMA. Conducted at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, these investigations were declassified in October 1969 and published in 1973. A 1960 Polish paper by Biniecki and Krajewski describing the synthesis of MDMA as an intermediate was the first published scientific paper on the substance.\nMDMA may have been in non-medical use in the western United States in 1968. An August 1970 report at a meeting of crime laboratory chemists indicates MDMA was being used recreationally in the Chicago area by 1970. MDMA likely emerged as a substitute for its analog methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), a drug at the time popular among users of psychedelics which was made a Schedule 1 substance in the United States in 1970.\nShulgin's research.\nAmerican chemist and psychopharmacologist Alexander Shulgin reported he synthesized MDMA in 1965 while researching methylenedioxy compounds at Dow Chemical Company, but did not test the psychoactivity of the compound at this time. Around 1970, Shulgin sent instructions for N-methylated MDA (MDMA) synthesis to the founder of a Los Angeles chemical company who had requested them. This individual later provided these instructions to a client in the Midwest. Shulgin may have suspected he played a role in the emergence of MDMA in Chicago.\nShulgin first heard of the psychoactive effects of N-methylated MDA around 1975 from a young student who reported \"amphetamine-like content\". Around 30 May 1976, Shulgin again heard about the effects of N-methylated MDA, this time from a graduate student in a medicinal chemistry group he advised at San Francisco State University who directed him to the University of Michigan study. She and two close friends had consumed 100\u00a0mg of MDMA and reported positive emotional experiences. Following the self-trials of a colleague at the University of San Francisco, Shulgin synthesized MDMA and tried it himself in September and October 1976. Shulgin first reported on MDMA in a presentation at a conference in Bethesda, Maryland in December 1976. In 1978, he and David E. Nichols published a report on the drug's psychoactive effect in humans. They described MDMA as inducing \"an easily controlled altered state of consciousness with emotional and sensual overtones\" comparable \"to marijuana, to psilocybin devoid of the hallucinatory component, or to low levels of MDA\".\nWhile not finding his own experiences with MDMA particularly powerful, Shulgin was impressed with the drug's disinhibiting effects and thought it could be useful in therapy. Believing MDMA allowed users to strip away habits and perceive the world clearly, Shulgin called the drug \"window\". Shulgin occasionally used MDMA for relaxation, referring to it as \"my low-calorie martini\", and gave the drug to friends, researchers, and others who he thought could benefit from it. One such person was Leo Zeff, a psychotherapist who had been known to use psychedelic substances in his practice. When he tried the drug in 1977, Zeff was impressed with the effects of MDMA and came out of his semi-retirement to promote its use in therapy. Over the following years, Zeff traveled around the United States and occasionally to Europe, eventually training an estimated four thousand psychotherapists in the therapeutic use of MDMA. Zeff named the drug \"Adam\", believing it put users in a state of primordial innocence.\nPsychotherapists who used MDMA believed the drug eliminated the typical fear response and increased communication. Sessions were usually held in the home of the patient or the therapist. The role of the therapist was minimized in favor of patient self-discovery accompanied by MDMA induced feelings of empathy. Depression, substance use disorders, relationship problems, premenstrual syndrome, and autism were among several psychiatric disorders MDMA assisted therapy was reported to treat. According to psychiatrist George Greer, therapists who used MDMA in their practice were impressed by the results. Anecdotally, MDMA was said to greatly accelerate therapy. According to David Nutt, MDMA was widely used in the western US in couples counseling, and was called \"empathy\". Only later was the term \"ecstasy\" used for it, coinciding with rising opposition to its use.\nRising recreational use.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, \"Adam\" spread through personal networks of psychotherapists, psychiatrists, users of psychedelics, and yuppies. Hoping MDMA could avoid criminalization like LSD and mescaline, psychotherapists and experimenters attempted to limit the spread of MDMA and information about it while conducting informal research. Early MDMA distributors were deterred from large scale operations by the threat of possible legislation. Between the 1970s and the mid-1980s, this network of MDMA users consumed an estimated 500,000 doses.\nA small recreational market for MDMA developed by the late 1970s, consuming perhaps 10,000 doses in 1976. By the early 1980s MDMA was being used in Boston and New York City nightclubs such as Studio 54 and Paradise Garage. Into the early 1980s, as the recreational market slowly expanded, production of MDMA was dominated by a small group of therapeutically minded Boston chemists. Having commenced production in 1976, this \"Boston Group\" did not keep up with growing demand and shortages frequently occurred.\nPerceiving a business opportunity, Michael Clegg, the Southwest distributor for the Boston Group, started his own \"Texas Group\" backed financially by Texas friends. In 1981, Clegg had coined \"Ecstasy\" as a slang term for MDMA to increase its marketability. Starting in 1983, the Texas Group mass-produced MDMA in a Texas lab or imported it from California and marketed tablets using pyramid sales structures and toll-free numbers. MDMA could be purchased via credit card and taxes were paid on sales. Under the brand name \"Sassyfras\", MDMA tablets were sold in brown bottles. The Texas Group advertised \"Ecstasy parties\" at bars and discos, describing MDMA as a \"fun drug\" and \"good to dance to\". MDMA was openly distributed in Austin and Dallas\u2013Fort Worth area bars and nightclubs, becoming popular with yuppies, college students, and gays.\nRecreational use also increased after several cocaine dealers switched to distributing MDMA following experiences with the drug. A California laboratory that analyzed confidentially submitted drug samples first detected MDMA in 1975. Over the following years the number of MDMA samples increased, eventually exceeding the number of MDA samples in the early 1980s. By the mid-1980s, MDMA use had spread to colleges around the United States.\nMedia attention and scheduling.\nUnited States.\nIn an early media report on MDMA published in 1982, a Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) spokesman stated the agency would ban the drug if enough evidence for abuse could be found. By mid-1984, MDMA use was becoming more noticed. Bill Mandel reported on \"Adam\" in a 10 June San Francisco Chronicle article, but misidentified the drug as methyloxymethylenedioxyamphetamine (MMDA). In the next month, the World Health Organization identified MDMA as the only substance out of twenty phenethylamines to be seized a significant number of times.\nAfter a year of planning and data collection, MDMA was proposed for scheduling by the DEA on 27 July 1984 with a request for comments and objections. The DEA was surprised when a number of psychiatrists, psychotherapists, and researchers objected to the proposed scheduling and requested a hearing. In a Newsweek article published the next year, a DEA pharmacologist stated that the agency had been unaware of its use among psychiatrists. An initial hearing was held on 1 February 1985 at the DEA offices in Washington, D.C., with administrative law judge Francis L. Young presiding. It was decided there to hold three more hearings that year: Los Angeles on 10 June, Kansas City, Missouri on 10\u201311 July, and Washington, D.C., on 8\u201311 October.\nSensational media attention was given to the proposed criminalization and the reaction of MDMA proponents, effectively advertising the drug. In response to the proposed scheduling, the Texas Group increased production from 1985 estimates of 30,000 tablets a month to as many as 8,000 per day, potentially making two million ecstasy tablets in the months before MDMA was made illegal. By some estimates the Texas Group distributed 500,000 tablets per month in Dallas alone. According to one participant in an ethnographic study, the Texas Group produced more MDMA in eighteen months than all other distribution networks combined across their entire histories. By May 1985, MDMA use was widespread in California, Texas, southern Florida, and the northeastern United States. According to the DEA there was evidence of use in twenty-eight states and Canada. Urged by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the DEA announced an emergency Schedule I classification of MDMA on 31 May 1985. The agency cited increased distribution in Texas, escalating street use, and new evidence of MDA (an analog of MDMA) neurotoxicity as reasons for the emergency measure. The ban took effect one month later on 1 July 1985 in the midst of Nancy Reagan's \"Just Say No\" campaign.\nAs a result of several expert witnesses testifying that MDMA had an accepted medical usage, the administrative law judge presiding over the hearings recommended that MDMA be classified as a Schedule III substance. Despite this, DEA administrator John C. Lawn overruled and classified the drug as Schedule I. Harvard psychiatrist Lester Grinspoon then sued the DEA, claiming that the DEA had ignored the medical uses of MDMA, and the federal court sided with Grinspoon, calling Lawn's argument \"strained\" and \"unpersuasive\", and vacated MDMA's Schedule I status. Despite this, less than a month later Lawn reviewed the evidence and reclassified MDMA as Schedule I again, claiming that the expert testimony of several psychiatrists claiming over 200 cases where MDMA had been used in a therapeutic context with positive results could be dismissed because they weren't published in medical journals. In 2017, the FDA granted breakthrough therapy designation for its use with psychotherapy for PTSD. However, this designation has been questioned and problematized.\nUnited Nations.\nWhile engaged in scheduling debates in the United States, the DEA also pushed for international scheduling. In 1985 the World Health Organization's Expert Committee on Drug Dependence recommended that MDMA be placed in Schedule I of the 1971 United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances. The committee made this recommendation on the basis of the pharmacological similarity of MDMA to previously scheduled drugs, reports of illicit trafficking in Canada, drug seizures in the United States, and lack of well-defined therapeutic use. While intrigued by reports of psychotherapeutic uses for the drug, the committee viewed the studies as lacking appropriate methodological design and encouraged further research. Committee chairman Paul Grof dissented, believing international control was not warranted at the time and a recommendation should await further therapeutic data. The Commission on Narcotic Drugs added MDMA to Schedule I of the convention on 11 February 1986.\nPost-scheduling.\nThe use of MDMA in Texas clubs declined rapidly after criminalization, although by 1991 the drug remained popular among young middle-class whites and in nightclubs. In 1985, MDMA use became associated with acid house on the Spanish island of Ibiza. Thereafter in the late 1980s, the drug spread alongside rave culture to the UK and then to other European and American cities. Illicit MDMA use became increasingly widespread among young adults in universities and later, in high schools. Since the mid-1990s, MDMA has become the most widely used amphetamine-type drug by college students and teenagers. MDMA became one of the four most widely used illicit drugs in the US, along with cocaine, heroin, and cannabis.\nAccording to some estimates as of 2004, only marijuana attracts more first time users in the US.\nAfter MDMA was criminalized, most medical use stopped, although some therapists continued to prescribe the drug illegally. Later, Charles Grob initiated an ascending-dose safety study in healthy volunteers. Subsequent FDA-approved MDMA studies in humans have taken place in the United States in Detroit (Wayne State University), Chicago (University of Chicago), San Francisco (UCSF and California Pacific Medical Center), Baltimore (NIDA\u2013NIH Intramural Program), and South Carolina. Studies have also been conducted in Switzerland (University Hospital of Psychiatry, Z\u00fcrich), the Netherlands (Maastricht University), and Spain (Universitat Aut\u00f2noma de Barcelona).\n\"Molly\", short for 'molecule', was recognized as a slang term for crystalline or powder MDMA in the 2000s.\nIn 2010, the BBC reported that use of MDMA had decreased in the UK in previous years. This may be due to increased seizures during use and decreased production of the precursor chemicals used to manufacture MDMA. Unwitting substitution with other drugs, such as mephedrone and methamphetamine, as well as legal alternatives to MDMA, such as BZP, MDPV, and methylone, are also thought to have contributed to its decrease in popularity.\nIn 2017 it was found that some pills being sold as MDMA contained pentylone, which can cause very unpleasant agitation and paranoia.\nAccording to David Nutt, when safrole was restricted by the United Nations in order to reduce the supply of MDMA, producers in China began using anethole instead, but this gives para-methoxyamphetamine (PMA, also known as \"Dr Death\"), which is much more toxic than MDMA and can cause overheating, muscle spasms, seizures, unconsciousness, and death. People wanting MDMA are sometimes sold PMA instead.\nSociety and culture.\nLegal status.\nMDMA is legally controlled in most of the world under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances and other international agreements, although exceptions exist for research and limited medical use. In general, the unlicensed use, sale or manufacture of MDMA are all criminal offences.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, MDMA was rescheduled on 1st July 2023 as a schedule 8 substance (available on prescription) when used in the treatment of PTSD, while remaining a schedule 9 substance (prohibited) for all other uses. For the treatment of PTSD, MDMA can only be prescribed by psychiatrists with specific training and authorisation.\nIn 1986, MDMA was declared an illegal substance because of its allegedly harmful effects and potential for misuse.. Any non-authorised sale, use or manufacture is strictly prohibited by law. Permits for research uses on humans must be approved by a recognized ethics committee on human research.\nIn Western Australia under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981 4.0g of MDMA is the amount required determining a court of trial, 2.0g is considered a presumption with intent to sell or supply and 28.0g is considered trafficking under Australian law.\nThe Australian Capital Territory has passed legislation to decriminalise the possession of small amounts of MDMA, due to take effect in October 2023.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, MDMA was made illegal in 1977 by a modification order to the existing Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. Although MDMA was not named explicitly in this legislation, the order extended the definition of Class A drugs to include various ring-substituted phenethylamines. The drug is therefore illegal to sell, buy, or possess without a licence in the UK. Penalties include a maximum of seven years and/or unlimited fine for possession; life and/or unlimited fine for production or trafficking.\nSome researchers such as David Nutt have criticized the current scheduling of MDMA, which he determines to be a relatively harmless drug. An editorial he wrote in the \"Journal of Psychopharmacology\", where he compared the risk of harm for horse riding (1 adverse event in 350) to that of ecstasy (1 in 10,000) resulted in his dismissal as well as the resignation of his colleagues from the ACMD.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, MDMA is currently placed in Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act. In a 2011 federal court hearing, the American Civil Liberties Union successfully argued that the sentencing guideline for MDMA/ecstasy is based on outdated science, leading to excessive prison sentences. Other courts have upheld the sentencing guidelines. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee explained its ruling by noting that \"an individual federal district court judge simply cannot marshal resources akin to those available to the Commission for tackling the manifold issues involved with determining a proper drug equivalency.\"\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the Expert Committee on the List (Expertcommissie Lijstensystematiek Opiumwet) issued a report in June 2011 which discussed the evidence for harm and the legal status of MDMA, arguing in favor of maintaining it on List I.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, MDMA is listed as a Schedule 1 as it is an analogue of amphetamine. The CDSA was updated as a result of the Safe Streets and Communities Act changing amphetamines from Schedule III to Schedule I in March 2012. In 2022 the federal government granted British Columbia a 3-year exemption, legalizing the possession of up to of MDMA in the province from February 2023 until February 2026.\nDemographics.\nIn 2014, 3.5% of 18 to 25 year-olds had used MDMA in the United States. In the European Union as of 2018, 4.1% of adults (15\u201364 years old) have used MDMA at least once in their life, and 0.8% had used it in the last year. Among young adults, 1.8% had used MDMA in the last year.\nIn Europe, an estimated 37% of regular club-goers aged 14 to 35 used MDMA in the past year according to the 2015 European Drug report. The highest one-year prevalence of MDMA use in Germany in 2012 was 1.7% among people aged 25 to 29 compared with a population average of 0.4%. Among adolescent users in the United States between 1999 and 2008, girls were more likely to use MDMA than boys.\nEconomics.\nEurope.\nIn 2008 the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction noted that although there were some reports of tablets being sold for as little as \u20ac1, most countries in Europe then reported typical retail prices in the range of \u20ac3 to \u20ac9 per tablet, typically containing 25\u201365\u00a0mg of MDMA. By 2014 the EMCDDA reported that the range was more usually between \u20ac5 and \u20ac10 per tablet, typically containing 57\u2013102\u00a0mg of MDMA, although MDMA in powder form was becoming more common.\nNorth America.\nThe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime stated in its 2014 World Drug Report that US ecstasy retail prices range from US$1 to $70 per pill, or from $15,000 to $32,000 per kilogram. A new research area named Drug Intelligence aims to automatically monitor distribution networks based on image processing and machine learning techniques, in which an Ecstasy pill picture is analyzed to detect correlations among different production batches. These novel techniques allow police scientists to facilitate the monitoring of illicit distribution networks.\nAs of October 2015[ [update]], most of the MDMA in the United States is produced in British Columbia, Canada and imported by Canada-based Asian transnational criminal organizations. The market for MDMA in the United States is relatively small compared to methamphetamine, cocaine, and heroin. In the United States, about 0.9 million people used ecstasy in 2010.\nAustralia.\nMDMA is particularly expensive in Australia, costing A$15\u2013A$30 per tablet. In terms of purity data for Australian MDMA, the average is around 34%, ranging from less than 1% to about 85%. The majority of tablets contain 70\u201385\u00a0mg of MDMA. Most MDMA enters Australia from the Netherlands, the UK, Asia, and the US.\nCorporate logos on pills.\nA number of ecstasy manufacturers brand their pills with a logo, often being the logo of an unrelated corporation. Some pills depict logos of products or media popular with children, such as Shaun the Sheep.\nResearch.\nIn 2017, doctors in the UK began the first clinical study of MDMA in alcohol use disorder.\nThe potential for MDMA to be used as a rapid-acting antidepressant has been studied in clinical trials, but as of 2017 the evidence on efficacy and safety were insufficient to reach a conclusion. A 2014 review of the safety and efficacy of MDMA as a treatment for various disorders, particularly PTSD, indicated that MDMA has therapeutic efficacy in some patients; however, it emphasized that issues regarding the controlability of MDMA-induced experiences and neurochemical recovery must be addressed. The author noted that oxytocin and D-cycloserine are potentially safer co-drugs in PTSD treatment, albeit with limited evidence of efficacy. This review and a second corroborating review by a different author both concluded that, because of MDMA's demonstrated potential to cause lasting harm in humans (e.g., serotonergic neurotoxicity and persistent memory impairment), \"considerably more research must be performed\" on its efficacy in PTSD treatment to determine if the potential treatment benefits outweigh its potential to harm to a patient.\nMDMA in combination with psychotherapy has been studied as a treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder, and four clinical trials provide moderate evidence in support of this treatment. However, it is important to note that the lack of appropriate blinding of participants likely leads to overestimation of treatments effects due to high levels of response expectancy. In addition, there are no trials comparing MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for PTSD with existent evidence-based psychological treatments for PTSD, which seems to attain similar or better treatment effects compared with that achieved by MDMA-assisted psychotherapy.\nIn 2018 researches identified MDMA as a psychoplastogen which refers to a compound capable of promoting neuroplasticity and received the \u201cbreakthrough therapy\u201d designation by the Food and Drug Administration for treating PTSD.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10025", "revid": "38510424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10025", "title": "Flag of Europe", "text": "Official symbol used by the Council of Europe and the European Union\nThe Flag of Europe or European Flag consists of twelve golden stars forming a circle on a blue field. It was designed and adopted in 1955 by the Council of Europe (CoE) as a symbol for the whole of Europe.\nSince 1985, the flag has also been a symbol of the European Union (EU), whose 27 member states are all also CoE members, although in that year the EU had not yet assumed its present name or constitutional form (which came in steps in 1993 and 2009). Adoption by the EU, or EC as it then was, reflected long-standing CoE desire to see the flag used by other European organisations. Official EU use widened greatly in the 1990s. Nevertheless the flag has to date received \"no status\" in any of the EU's treaties. Its adoption as an official symbol was planned as part of the 2004 European Constitution but this failed to be ratified. Mention of the flag was removed in 2007 from the text of the Treaty of Lisbon, which \"was\" ratified. On the other hand, 16 EU members that year, plus France in 2017, have officially affirmed (by Declaration No. 5224) their attachment to the flag as an EU symbol. \nThe flag is used by other European entities, such as unified sport teams under the rubric Team Europe.\nBlazon.\nThe blazon given by the EU in 1996 describe the design as: \"On an azure field a circle of twelve golden mullets, their points not touching.\"\nSymbolism.\nThe flag used is the Flag of Europe, which consists of a circle of twelve golden stars on a blue background. Originally designed in 1955 for the Council of Europe, the flag was adopted by the European Communities, the predecessors of the present European Union, in 1986. The Council of Europe gave the flag a symbolic description in the following terms, though the official symbolic description adopted by the EU omits the reference to the \"Western world\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Against the blue sky of the Western world, the stars symbolise the peoples of Europe in a form of a circle, a sign of union. Their number is invariably twelve, the figure twelve being the symbol of perfection and entirety.\nOther symbolic interpretations have been offered based on the account of its design by Paul M. Levy. The five-pointed star is used on many national flags and represents aspiration and education. Their golden colour is that of the sun, which is said to symbolise glory and enlightenment.\nTheir arrangement in a circle represents the constellation of Corona Borealis and can be seen as a crown and the stability of government. The blue background resembles the sky and symbolises truth and the intellect. It is also the colour traditionally used to represent the Virgin Mary. In many paintings of the Virgin Mary as Stella Maris she is crowned with a circle of twelve stars.\nMarian interpretation.\nIn 1987, following the adoption of the flag by the EC, Ars\u00e8ne Heitz (1908\u20131989), one of the designers who had submitted proposals for the flag's design, suggested a religious inspiration for it. He claimed that the circle of stars was based on the iconographic tradition of showing the Blessed Virgin Mary as the Woman of the Apocalypse, wearing a \"crown of twelve stars\".\nHeitz also made a connection to the date of the flag's adoption, 8 December 1955, coinciding with the Catholic Feast of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary.\nPaul M. G. L\u00e9vy, then Director of Information at the Council of Europe responsible for designing the flag, in a 1989 statement maintained that he had not been aware of any religious connotations.\nIn an interview given 26 February 1998, L\u00e9vy denied not only awareness of the \"Marian\" connection, but also denied that the final design of a circle of twelve stars was Heitz's. To the question \"Who really designed the flag?\" L\u00e9vy replied:\nI did, and I calculated the proportions to be used for the geometric design. Ars\u00e8ne Heitz, who was an employee in the mail service, put in all sorts of proposals, including the 15-star design. But he submitted too many designs. He wanted to do the European currencies with 15 stars in the corner. He wanted to do national flags incorporating the Council of Europe flag.\nCarlo Curti Gialdino (2005) has reconstructed the design process to the effect that Heitz's proposal contained varying numbers of stars, from which the version with twelve stars was chosen by the Committee of Ministers meeting at Deputy level in January 1955 as one out of two remaining candidate designs.\nL\u00e9vy's 1998 interview apparently gave rise to a new variant of the \"Marian\" anecdote. An article published in \"\" in August 1998 alleged that it was L\u00e9vy himself who was inspired to introduce a \"Marian\" element as he walked past a statue of the Blessed Virgin Mary.\nAn article posted in \"La Raison\" in February 2000 further connected the donation of a stained glass window for Strasbourg Cathedral by the Council of Europe on 21 October 1956. This window, a work by Parisian master Max Ingrand, shows a blessing Madonna underneath a circle of 12 stars on dark blue ground. The overall design of the Madonna is inspired by the banner of the cathedral's \"Congr\u00e9gation Mariale des Hommes\", and the twelve stars are found on the statue venerated by this congregation inside the cathedral (twelve is also the number of members of the congregation's council). The Regional Office for Cultural Affairs describe this stained glass window called \"Le vitrail de l'Europe de Max Ingrand\" (The Glass Window of Europe of Max Ingrand).\nSpecifications.\nAccording to graphical specifications published online by the Council of Europe in 2004, the flag is rectangular with 2:3 proportions: its fly (width) is one and a half times the length of its hoist (height). Twelve yellow stars are centred in a circle (the radius of which is a third of the length of the hoist) upon a blue background. All the stars are upright (one point straight up), have five points and are spaced equally, like the hour positions on the face of a clock. The diameter of each star is equal to one-ninth of the height of the hoist.\nThe colours are regulated in the 1996 guide by the EC, and equivalently in the 2004 guide by the Council of Europe. The base colour of the flag is defined as Pantone \"Reflex Blue\", while the golden stars are portrayed in Pantone \"Yellow\":\nThe 2013 logo of the Council of Europe has the colours:\nAdoption and usage.\nThe twelve-star \"flag of Europe\" was designed in 1950 and officially adopted by the Council of Europe in 1955. The same flag was adopted by the European Parliament in 1983. The European Council adopted it as an \"emblem\" for the European Communities in 1985. Its status in the European Communities was inherited by the European Union upon its formation in 1993. The proposal to adopt it as official flag of the European Union failed with the ratification of the European Constitution in 2005, and mention of all emblems suggesting statehood was removed from the Treaty of Lisbon of 2007, although sixteen member states signed a declaration supporting the continued use of the flag. In 2007, the European Parliament officially adopted the flag for its own use.\n1950\u2013present: Council of Europe.\nThe Council of Europe in 1950 appointed a committee to study the question of adopting a symbol.\nNumerous proposals were looked into.\nAmong the unsuccessful proposals was the flag of Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi's International Paneuropean Union, which he had himself recently adopted for the European Parliamentary Union.\nThe design was a blue field with a red cross inside an orange circle at the centre. \nKalergi was very committed to defending the cross as \"the great symbol of Europe's moral unity\", the Red Cross in particular being \"recognized by the whole world, by Christian and non-Christian nations[,] as a symbol of international charity and of the brotherhood of man\", but the proposal was rejected by Turkey (a member of the Council of Europe since 1949) on grounds of its religious associations in spite of Kalergi's suggestion of adding a crescent alongside the cross to overcome the Muslim objections.\nOther proposals included the flag was the European Movement, which had a large green E on a white background,\na design was based on the Olympic rings, eight silver rings on a blue background, rejected due to the rings' similarity with \"dial\", \"chain\" and \"zeros\", or a large yellow star on a blue background, rejected due to its equality with the flag of the Belgian Congo.\nThe Consultative Assembly narrowed their choice to two designs. One was by Salvador de Madariaga, the founder of the College of Europe, who suggested a constellation of stars on a blue background (positioned according to capital cities, with a large star for Strasbourg, the seat of the council). He had circulated his flag round many European capitals and the concept had found favour. \nThe second was a variant by Ars\u00e8ne Heitz, who worked for the council's postal service and had submitted dozens of designs, one of which was accepted by the Assembly. The design was similar to Salvador de Madariaga's, but rather than a constellation, the stars were arranged in a circle. Ars\u00e8ne Heitz was one of several people who proposed a circle of gold stars on a blue background. None of his proposals perfectly match the design that was adopted. Paul Levy claims that he was the one who designed the template for the flag, not Ars\u00e8ne Heitz.\nIn 1987, Heitz would claim that his inspiration had been the crown of twelve stars of the Woman of the Apocalypse, often found in Marian iconography (see below).\nOn 25 September 1953, the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe recommended that a blue flag with fifteen gold stars be adopted as an emblem for the organisation, the number fifteen reflecting the number of states of the Council of Europe. West Germany objected to the fifteen-star design, as one of the members was Saar Protectorate, and to have its own star would imply sovereignty for the region. The Committee of Ministers (the council's main decision making body) agreed with the Assembly that the flag should be a circle of stars, but opted for a fixed number of twelve stars, \"representing perfection and entirety\". The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 25 October 1955 agreed to this. Paul M. G. L\u00e9vy drew up the exact design of the new flag. Officially adopted on 8 December 1955, the flag was unveiled at the Ch\u00e2teau de la Muette in Paris on 13 December 1955.\nFor the flag of the Council of Europe, many stylistic proposals were made in regards to colours and symbolism. These first proposals were made 19 January 1950 by Paul Levy in a letter to the Secretary-General. He proposed that the flag should contain a cross for several reasons. Firstly, the cross symbolizes roads crossing, and also represents the east, the west, the north, and the south with its arms. Furthermore, the cross appears in most of the European Council members' flags, and it is the oldest and most noble symbol in Europe. Moreover, the cross depicted Christianity. As far as the colours are concerned, he proposed them to be white and green, colours of the European Movement, which was of great significance since 1947. Green also depicted hope, and the green cross over a white background was a design that had not been used yet. Finally, Levy proposed that the arms of Strasbourg was an important element to be added as it represented where the council would be, and being located in the heart of the cross meant that the council was the point where the European roads met.\nShortly after this design considerations by Paul Levy, on 27 July 1950, Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi, president of the Pan-European movement wrote a memorandum which contained some rules that a flag for such union should follow. The rules he stated where:\nAfter these statements, Coudenhove-Kalergi proposed that the Pan-European movement flag would be the perfect one to fit these criteria\n15 July 1951, the consultative assembly put forward a final memorandum on the European flag. The symbols proposed where the following\nFurthermore, several colours were also proposed:\nIn the end, the flag of Europe was chosen to have 12 five-pointed golden stars in a circle over a blue background, probably inspired by the Pan-European flag and other designs such as Salvador de Madariaga's and Ars\u00e8ne Heitz's proposals.\n1983\u2013present: From European Communities to European Union.\nFollowing Expo 58 in Brussels, the flag caught on and the Council of Europe lobbied for other European organisations to adopt the flag as a sign of European unity. \nThe European Parliament took the initiative in seeking a flag to be adopted by the European Communities. Shortly after the first direct elections in 1979 a draft resolution was put forward on the issue. The resolution proposed that the Communities' flag should be that of the Council of Europe and it was adopted by the Parliament on 11 April 1983.\nThe June 1984 European Council (the Communities' leaders) summit in Fontainebleau stressed the importance of promoting a European image and identity to citizens and the world. The European Council appointed an \"ad hoc\" committee, named \"Committee for 'a People's Europe'\" (Adonnino Committee).\nThis committee submitted a substantial report, including wide-ranging suggestions, from organising a \"European lottery\" to campaigning for the introduction of local voting rights for foreign nationals throughout Europe. Under the header of \"strengthening of the Community's image and identity\", the Committee suggested the introduction of \"a flag and an emblem\", recommending a design based on the Council of Europe flag, but with the addition of \"a gold letter E\" in the center of the circle of stars. The European Council held in Milan on 28/29 June 1985 largely followed the recommendations of the Adonnino Committee. But as the adoption of a flag was strongly reminiscent of a national flag representing statehood and was extremely controversial with some member states (in particular the United Kingdom, as the proposed flag closely resembled the Queen's personal standard), the Council of Europe's \"flag of Europe\" design was adopted, without the letter E, only with the official status of a \"logo\". This compromise was widely disregarded from the beginning, and the \"European logo\", in spite of the explicit language of giving it the status of a \"logo\", was referred to as the \"Community flag\" or even \"European flag\" from the outset.\nThe Communities began to use the \"emblem\" as its \"de facto\" flag from 1986, raising it outside the Berlaymont building (the seat of the European Commission) for the first time on 29 May 1986.\nThe European Union, which was established by the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 to replace the European Communities and encompass its functions, has retained \"de facto\" use of the \"Community logo\" of the EC. Technically and officially, the \"European flag\" as used by the European Union remains not a \"flag\" but \"a Community 'logo' \u2014 or 'emblem' \u2014 [...] eligible to be reproduced on rectangular pieces of fabric\".\nIn 1997, the \"Central and Eastern Eurobarometer\" poll included a section intending to \"discover the level of public awareness of the European Union\" in what were then candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe. Interviewees were shown \"a sticker of the European flag\" and asked to identify it. Responses considered correct were: the European Union, the European Community, the Common Market, and \"Europe in general\". 52% of those interviewed gave one of the correct answers, 15% gave a wrong answer (naming another institution, such as NATO or the United Nations), and 35% could or would not identify it.\nIn 2002, Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas designed a symbol, dubbed the \"barcode\", which displayed the colours of the national flags of the EU member states in vertical stripes. It was reported as a replacement for the European flag, which was not the intention. It was not adopted by the EU or any other organisation at the time, but an updated version was used in the visual identity of the Austrian EU Presidency in 2006.\nThe official status of the emblem as the flag of the European Union was to be formalised as part of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe. However, as the proposed treaty failed ratification, the mention of all state-like emblems, including the flag, were not included in the replacement Treaty of Lisbon, which entered into force in 2009.\nInstead, a separate declaration by sixteen Member States was included in the final act of the Treaty of Lisbon stating that the flag, the anthem, the motto and the currency and Europe Day \"will for them continue as symbols to express the sense of community of the people in the European Union and their allegiance to it.\"\nIn reaction to the removal of the flag from the treaty, the European Parliament, which had supported the inclusion of such symbols, backed a proposal to use these symbols \"more often\" on behalf of the Parliament itself; Jo Leinen, MEP for Germany, suggested that the Parliament should take \"an \"avant-garde\" role\" in their use.\nIn September 2008, the Parliament's Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposed a formal change in the institution's rules of procedure to make \"better use of the symbols\". Specifically, the flag would be present in all meeting rooms (not just the hemicycle) and at all official events. The proposal was passed on 8 October 2008 by 503 votes to 96 (15 abstentions).\nIn 2015, a set of commemorative Euro coins was issued on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the adoption of the emblem by the European Communities.\nIn April 2004, the European flag was flown on behalf of the European Space Agency, by Dutch astronaut Andr\u00e9 Kuipers while on board the International Space Station, in reference to the Framework Agreement establishing the legal basis for co-operation between the European Space Agency and the European Union.\nFollowing the 2004 Summer Olympics, President Romano Prodi expressed his hope \"to see the EU Member State teams in Beijing [viz., the 2008 games] carry the flag of the European Union alongside their own national flag as a symbol of our unity\".\nUse of the flag has also been reported as representing the European team at the Ryder Cup golf competition in the early 2000s, although most European participants preferred to use their own national flags.\nThe flag has been widely used by advocates of European integration since the late 1990s or early 2000s. It is often displayed in the context of Europe Day, on 9 May. \nOutside the EU, it was used in the context of several of the \"colour revolutions\" during the 2000s. In Belarus, it was used on protest marches alongside the white-red-white flag and other flags of opposition movements, such as \"Zubr\", during the protests of 2004\u20132006. The flag was used widely in a 2007 pro-EU march in Minsk. Similar uses were reported from Moldova in 2009.\nIn Georgia, the flag has been on most government buildings since the coming to power of Mikheil Saakashvili (2007), who used it during his inauguration, stating: \"[the European] flag is Georgia's flag as well, as far as it embodies our civilisation, our culture, the essence of our history and perspective, and our vision for the future of Georgia.\"\nIt was used in 2008 by pro-western Serbian voters ahead of an election.\nThe flag became a symbol of European integration of Ukraine in the 2010s, particularly after Euromaidan. Ukraine is not a part of the EU but is a member of the Council of Europe. The flag is used by the Cabinet of Ukraine, Prime Minister of Ukraine, and MFA UA during official meetings. It was flown during the 2013 Euromaidan protests in Ukraine,\nand in 2016 by the pro-EU faction in the EU membership referendum campaigns in the United Kingdom.\nThe flag has also been adopted as a symbol for EU policies and expansionism by EU-sceptics. \nIn an early instance, Macedonian protesters burned \"the flag of the EU\" in the context of EU involvement in the 2001 insurgency in the Republic of Macedonia.\nIn the 2005 Islamic protests \nagainst the \"Jyllands-Posten Muhammad\" cartoons, the Danish flag was most frequently burned, but (as the cartoons were reprinted in many European countries), some protesters opted for burning \"the EU flag\" instead.\nProtesters during the Greek government-debt crisis of 2012 \"burned the EU flag and shouted 'EU out' \".\nBurning of the EU flag has been reported from other anti-EU rallies since.\nBy the 2010s, the association of the emblem with the EU had become so strong that the Council of Europe saw it necessary to design a new logo, to \"avoid confusion\", officially adopted in 2013.\nThe EU emblem (\"EU flag\") is depicted on the euro banknotes. Euro coins also display a circle of twelve stars on both the national and common sides.\nIt is also depicted on many driving licences and vehicle registration plates issued in the Union. Diplomatic missions of EU member states fly the EU flag alongside their national flag. In October 2000, the then-new British Embassy in Berlin sparked controversy between the UK and Germany and the EU when the embassy did not have a second external flagpole for the EU flag. After diplomatic negotiations, it was agreed that the outside flagpole would have the diplomatic Union Flag while inside the embassy, the EU flag would accompany the UK flag. Some member states' national airlines such as Lufthansa have the EU flag alongside their national flags on aircraft as part of their aircraft registration codes, but this is not an EU-mandated directive.\nA number of logos used by EU institutions, bodies and agencies are derived from the design and colours of the EU emblem.\nOther emblems make reference to the European flag, such as the EU organic food label that uses the twelve stars but reorders them into the shape of a leaf on a green background. The original logo of the European Broadcasting Union used the twelve stars on a blue background adding ray beams to connect the countries.\nThere was a proposal in 2003 to deface national civil ensigns with the EU emblem. The proposal was rejected by Parliament in 2004.\nThe flag is usually flown by the government of the country holding the rotating presidency Council of Ministers.\nIn 2009, Czech President V\u00e1clav Klaus, a eurosceptic, refused to fly the flag from his castle. In response, Greenpeace projected an image of the flag onto the castle and attempted to fly the flag from the building themselves.\nExtraordinary flying of the flag is common on Europe Day, celebrated annually on 9 May. On Europe Day 2008, the flag was flown for the first time above the German Reichstag.\nThe flag has also been displayed in the context of EU military operations (EUFOR Althea).\nSixteen out of twenty-seven member states in 2007 signed the declaration recognising \"the flag with a circle of twelve golden stars on a blue background\" as representing \"the sense of community of the people in the European Union and their allegiance to it.\"\nIn 2017, president of France Emmanuel Macron signed a declaration endorsing the 2007 statement,\nso that, as of 2018, 17 out of 27 member states have recognised the emblem as a flag representing \"allegiance to the EU\":\nAustria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain.\nItaly has incorporated the EU flag into its flag code. According to an Italian law passed in 2000, it is mandatory for most public offices and buildings to hoist the European Flag alongside the Italian national flag (Law 22/1998 and Presidential Decree 121/2000). Outside official use, the flag may not be used for \"aims incompatible with European values\".\nThe 2000 Italian flag code expressly replaces the Italian flag with the European flag in precedence when dignitaries from other EU countries visit \u2013 for example the EU flag would be in the middle of a group of three flags rather than the Italian flag. In Germany, the federal flag code of 1996 is only concerned with the German flag, but some of the states have legislated additional provisions for the European flag, such as Bavaria in its flag regulation of 2001, which mandates that the European flag take the third order of precedence, after the federal and state flags, except on Europe Day, where it is to take the first order of precedence.\nIn Ireland \non occasions of \"European Union Events\" (for example, at a European Council meeting), where the European flag is flown alongside all national flags of member states, the national flags are placed in alphabetical order (according to their name in the main language of that state) with the European flag either at the head, or the far-right, of the order of flags.\nIn most member states, use of the EU flag is only \"de facto\" and not regulated by legislation, and as such subject to \"ad hoc\" revision. In national usage, national protocol usually demands the national flag takes precedence over the European flag (which is usually displayed to the right of the national flag from the observer's perspective). In November 2014, the speaker of the Hungarian Parliament L\u00e1szl\u00f3 K\u00f6v\u00e9r ordered the removal of the EU flag from the parliament building, following an incident in which a member of parliament had \"defenestrated\" two EU flags from a fourth story window. In November 2015, the newly elected Polish government under Beata Szyd\u0142o removed the EU flag from government press conferences.\nDerivative designs.\nThe design of the European flag has been used in a variation, such as that of the Council of Europe mentioned above, and also to a greater extent such as the flag of the Western European Union (WEU; now defunct), which uses the same colours and the stars but has a number of stars based on membership and in a semicircle rather than a circle. It is also defaced with the initials of the former Western European Union in two languages.\nThe European Parliament used its own flag from 1973, but never formally adopted it. It fell out of use with the adoption of the twelve-star flag by the Parliament in 1983. The flag followed the yellow and blue colour scheme however instead of twelve stars there were the letters EP and PE (initials of the European Parliament in the six community languages at the time) surrounded by a wreath. Sometime later, the Parliament chose to use a logo consisting of a stylised hemicycle and the EU flag at the bottom right.\nThe flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina, imposed by High Representative Carlos Westendorp, after the country's parliament failed to agree on a design, is reminiscent of the symbolism of the EU flag, using the same blue and yellow colours, and the stars, although of a different number and colour, are a direct reference to those of the European flag.\nLikewise, Kosovo uses blue, yellow and stars in its flag, which has been mocked as a \"none too subtle nod to the flag of the European Union, which is about to become Kosovo's new best friend as it takes over protector status from the United Nations\".\nThe flag of the Brussels-Capital Region (introduced in 2016) consists of a yellow iris with a white outline upon a blue background. Its colours are based on the colours of the Flag of Europe, because Brussels is considered the unofficial capital of the EU.\nHeraldry.\nThe coat of arms of the Chairman of the European Union Military Committee (CEUMC), the highest-ranking officer within the EU's Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), depicts the European emblem as a coat of arms, i.e. emblazoned on an escutcheon. In heraldic terms, this makes the European flag is the banner of arms, i.e. the flag form of this coat of arms. In English blazon, the arms is \"On an azure field a circle of 12 golden mullets, their points not touching\".\nSeveral EU publications related to the CSDP generally, and its prospective development as a defence arm, have also displayed the European emblem in this manner, albeit as a graphical design element rather than an official symbol.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10026", "revid": "45567425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10026", "title": "Anthem of Europe", "text": "Official anthem of the European Union and the Council of Europe\n\"Anthem of Europe\" or \"European Anthem\" is an extract from the prelude of \"Ode to Joy\", the final movement of Beethoven's 9th Symphony composed in 1823. In 1972, the Council of Europe adopted it as an anthem to represent Europe, and later in 1985 it was also adopted by the European Union. \nIts purpose is to honour shared European values. The EU describes it as expressing the ideals of freedom, peace and solidarity. The anthem is played on official occasions such as political or civil events. \nHistory.\nFriedrich Schiller wrote the poem \"An die Freude\" (\"To Joy\") in 1785 as a \"celebration of the brotherhood of man\". In later life, the poet was contemptuous of this popularity and dismissed the poem as typical of \"the bad taste of the age\" in which it had been written. After Schiller's death, the poem provided the words for the choral movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's 9th Symphony.\nIn 1971 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe decided to propose adopting the prelude to the \"Ode to Joy\" from Beethoven's 9th Symphony as the anthem, taking up a suggestion made by Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi in 1955. Beethoven was generally seen as the natural choice for a European anthem. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe officially announced the European Anthem on 19 January 1972 at Strasbourg: the prelude to \"Ode to Joy\", 4th movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's 9th symphony. \nConductor Herbert von Karajan was asked to write three instrumental arrangements\u00a0\u2013 for solo piano, for wind instruments and for symphony orchestra and he conducted the performance used to make the official recording. He wrote his decisions on the score, notably those concerning the tempo. Karajan decided on minim (half note) = 80 whereas Beethoven had written crotchet (quarter note) = 120.\nThe anthem was launched via a major information campaign on Europe Day in 1972. In 1985, it was adopted by EU heads of state and government as the official anthem of the then European Community\u00a0\u2013 since 1993 the European Union. It is not intended to replace the national anthems of the member states but rather to celebrate the values they all share and their unity in diversity. It expresses the ideals of a united Europe: freedom, peace, and solidarity.\nIt was to have been included in the European Constitution along with the other European symbols; however, the treaty failed ratification and was replaced by the Treaty of Lisbon, which does not include any symbols. A declaration was attached to the treaty, in which sixteen member states formally recognised the proposed symbols. In response, the European Parliament decided that it would make greater use of the anthem, for example at official occasions. In October 2008, the Parliament changed its rules of procedure to have the anthem played at the opening of Parliament after elections and at formal sittings.\nUsage.\n\"Ode to Joy\" is the anthem of the Council of Europe (CoE) and the European Union (EU). In the context of the CoE, the anthem is used to represent all of Europe. In the context of the EU, the anthem is used to represent the union and its people. It is used on occasions such as Europe Day and formal events such as the signing of treaties. The European Parliament seeks to make greater use of the music; then-Parliament President Hans-Gert P\u00f6ttering stated he was moved when the anthem was played for him on his visit to Israel and ought to be used in Europe more often.\nThe German public radio station Deutschlandfunk has broadcast the anthem together with the Deutschlandlied shortly before midnight since New Year's Eve 2006. The two anthems were specially recorded by the Berlin Radio Symphony Orchestra in versions characterized by \"modesty and intensity\".\nAt the 2007 signing ceremony for the Treaty of Lisbon, the plenipotentiaries of the European Union's twenty-seven member states stood in attendance while the \"Ode to Joy\" was played and a choir of 26 Portuguese children sang the original German lyrics.\nIn 2008 it was used by Kosovo as its national anthem until it adopted its own, and it was played at its declaration of independence, as a nod to the EU's role in its independence from Serbia.\n\"Ode to Joy\", automatically orchestrated in seven different styles, was used on 18 June 2015 during the ceremony celebrating the 5000th ERC grantee as anthem of the European Research Council to represent achievements of European research.\n\"Ode to Joy\" is used as the theme song to the 2016 UEFA Euro qualifying and the European qualifying of the 2018 FIFA World Cup football competition at the introduction of every match.\nIn 2017, members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from the Scottish National Party first whistled and then sang \"Ode to Joy\" during a vote at the House of Commons to protest against Brexit.\nIn 2018, the anthem of Japan and the anthem of the EU were performed in Tokyo during the official signing of the EU-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement. The European anthem is often played at the signing of official economic or political agreements with foreign governments.\nIn 2023, it was played after the anthem of Ukraine during President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskyy's visit to the EU parliament.\nUnofficial lyrics.\nWhile the anthem has no official lyrics, unofficial Latin lyrics have been written.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10027", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10027", "title": "Eugene Paul Wigner", "text": ""}
{"id": "10029", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10029", "title": "Timeline of the evolutionary history of life", "text": "Major events during the development of life\nThe timeline of the evolutionary history of life represents the current scientific theory outlining the major events during the development of life on planet Earth. Dates in this article are consensus estimates based on scientific evidence, mainly fossils.\nIn biology, evolution is any change across successive generations in the heritable characteristics of biological populations. Evolutionary processes give rise to diversity at every level of biological organization, from kingdoms to species, and individual organisms and molecules, such as DNA and proteins. The similarities between all present day organisms imply a common ancestor from which all known species, living and extinct, have diverged. More than 99 percent of all species that ever lived (over five billion) are estimated to be extinct. Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 10 million to 14 million, with about 1.2 million or 14% documented, the rest not yet described. However, a 2016 report estimates an additional 1 trillion microbial species, with only 0.001% described.\nThere has been controversy between more traditional views of steadily increasing biodiversity, and a newer view of cycles of annihilation and diversification, so that certain past times, such as the Cambrian explosion, experienced maximums of diversity followed by sharp winnowing.\nExtinction.\nSpecies go extinct constantly as environments change, as organisms compete for environmental niches, and as genetic mutation leads to the rise of new species from older ones. At long irregular intervals, Earth's biosphere suffers a catastrophic die-off, a mass extinction, often comprising an accumulation of smaller extinction events over a relatively brief period.\nThe first known mass extinction was the Great Oxidation Event 2.4 billion years ago, which killed most of the planet's obligate anaerobes. Researchers have identified five other major extinction events in Earth's history, with estimated losses below:\nSmaller extinction events have occurred in the periods between, with some dividing geologic time periods and epochs. The Holocene extinction event is currently under way.\nFactors in mass extinctions include continental drift, changes in atmospheric and marine chemistry, volcanism and other aspects of mountain formation, changes in glaciation, changes in sea level, and impact events.\nDetailed timeline.\nIn this timeline, Ma (for \"megaannum\") means \"million years ago,\" ka (for \"kiloannum\") means \"thousand years ago,\" and ya means \"years ago.\"\nHadean Eon.\n4540 Ma \u2013 4000 Ma\nArchean Eon.\n4000 Ma \u2013 2500 Ma\nProterozoic Eon.\n2500 Ma \u2013 539 Ma. Contains the Palaeoproterozoic, Mesoproterozoic and Neoproterozoic eras.\nPhanerozoic Eon.\n539 Ma \u2013 present\nThe Phanerozoic Eon (Greek: period of well-displayed life) marks the appearance in the fossil record of abundant, shell-forming and/or trace-making organisms. It is subdivided into three eras, the Paleozoic, Mesozoic and Cenozoic, with major mass extinctions at division points.\nPalaeozoic Era.\n538.8 Ma \u2013 251.9 Ma and contains the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous and Permian periods.\nMesozoic Era.\nFrom 251.9 Ma to 66 Ma and containing the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods.\nCenozoic Era.\n66 Ma \u2013 present\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10030", "revid": "1159541082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10030", "title": "Edmund Burke", "text": "Irish-born British statesman and political theorist (1729\u20131797)\nEdmund Burke (; 12 January [NS] 1729 \u2013 9 July 1797) was an Anglo-Irish statesman, economist, and philosopher. Born in Dublin, Burke served as a member of Parliament (MP) between 1766 and 1794 in the House of Commons of Great Britain with the Whig Party.\nBurke was a proponent of underpinning virtues with manners in society and of the importance of religious institutions for the moral stability and good of the state. These views were expressed in his \"A Vindication of Natural Society\". He criticised the actions of the British government towards the American colonies, including its taxation policies. Burke also supported the rights of the colonists to resist metropolitan authority, although he opposed the attempt to achieve independence. He is remembered for his support for Catholic emancipation, the impeachment of Warren Hastings from the East India Company, and his staunch opposition to the French Revolution.\nIn his \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\", Burke asserted that the revolution was destroying the fabric of good society and traditional institutions of state and society and condemned the persecution of the Catholic Church that resulted from it. This led to his becoming the leading figure within the conservative faction of the Whig Party which he dubbed the Old Whigs as opposed to the pro\u2013French Revolution New Whigs led by Charles James Fox.\nIn the 19th century, Burke was praised by both conservatives and liberals. Subsequently, in the 20th century, he became widely regarded, especially in the United States, as the philosophical founder of conservatism.\nEarly life.\nBurke was born in Dublin, Ireland. His mother Mary, \"n\u00e9e\" Nagle (c.\u20091702\u20131770), was a Roman Catholic who hailed from a County Cork family and a cousin of the Catholic educator Nano Nagle whereas his father Richard (died 1761), a successful solicitor, was a member of the Church of Ireland. It remains unclear whether this is the same Richard Burke who converted from Catholicism. The Burgh (Burke) dynasty descends from the Anglo-Norman knight, William de Burgh (d.1205/6), who arrived in Ireland in 1185 following Henry II of England's 1171 invasion of Ireland and is among the \"chief Gall or Old English families that assimilated into Gaelic society\" (the surname de Burgh (Latinised as \"de Burgo\") was gaelicised in Irish as \"de B\u00farca\" or \"B\u00farc\" which over the centuries became Burke).\nBurke adhered to his father's faith and remained a practising Anglican throughout his life, unlike his sister Juliana who was brought up as and remained a Roman Catholic. Later, his political enemies repeatedly accused him of having been educated at the Jesuit College of St. Omer, near Calais, France; and of harbouring secret Catholic sympathies at a time when membership of the Catholic Church would disqualify him from public office per Penal Laws in Ireland. As Burke told Frances Crewe:\nMr. Burke's Enemies often endeavoured to convince the World that he had been bred up in the Catholic Faith, &amp; that his Family were of it, &amp; that he himself had been educated at St. Omer\u2014but this was false, as his father was a regular practitioner of the Law at Dublin, which he could not be unless of the Established Church: &amp; it so happened that though Mr. B\u2014was twice at Paris, he never happened to go through the Town of St. Omer.\nAfter being elected to the House of Commons, Burke took the required oath of allegiance and abjuration, the oath of supremacy and the declaration against transubstantiation.\nAs a child, Burke sometimes spent time away from the unhealthy air of Dublin with his mother's family near Killavullen in the Blackwater Valley in County Cork. He received his early education at a Quaker school in Ballitore, County Kildare, some from Dublin; and possibly like his cousin Nano Nagle at a Hedge school near Killavullen. He remained in correspondence with his schoolmate from there, Mary Leadbeater, the daughter of the school's owner, throughout his life.\nIn 1744, Burke started at Trinity College Dublin, a Protestant establishment which up until 1793 did not permit Catholics to take degrees. In 1747, he set up a debating society Edmund Burke's Club which in 1770 merged with TCD's Historical Club to form the College Historical Society, the oldest undergraduate society in the world. The minutes of the meetings of Burke's Club remain in the collection of the Historical Society. Burke graduated from Trinity in 1748. Burke's father wanted him to read Law and with this in mind he went to London in 1750, where he entered the Middle Temple, before soon giving up legal study to travel in Continental Europe. After eschewing the Law, he pursued a livelihood through writing.\nEarly writing.\nThe late Lord Bolingbroke's \"Letters on the Study and Use of History\" was published in 1752 and his collected works appeared in 1754. This provoked Burke into writing his first published work, \"A Vindication of Natural Society: A View of the Miseries and Evils Arising to Mankind\", appearing in Spring 1756. Burke imitated Bolingbroke's style and ideas in a \"reductio ad absurdum\" of his arguments for deistic rationalism in order to demonstrate their absurdity.\nBurke claimed that Bolingbroke's arguments against revealed religion could apply to all social and civil institutions as well. Lord Chesterfield and Bishop Warburton as well as others initially thought that the work was genuinely by Bolingbroke rather than a satire. All the reviews of the work were positive, with critics especially appreciative of Burke's quality of writing. Some reviewers failed to notice the ironic nature of the book which led to Burke stating in the preface to the second edition (1757) that it was a satire.\nRichard Hurd believed that Burke's imitation was near-perfect and that this defeated his purpose, arguing that an ironist \"should take care by a constant exaggeration to make the \"ridicule\" shine through the Imitation. Whereas this \"Vindication\" is everywhere enforc'd, not only in the language, and on the principles of L. Bol., but with so apparent, or rather so real an earnestness, that half his purpose is sacrificed to the other\". A minority of scholars have taken the position that in fact Burke did write the \"Vindication\" in earnest, later disowning it only for political reasons.\nIn 1757, Burke published a treatise on aesthetics titled \"A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful\" that attracted the attention of prominent Continental thinkers such as Denis Diderot and Immanuel Kant. It was his only purely philosophical work, completed in 1753. When asked by Sir Joshua Reynolds and French Laurence to expand it thirty years later, Burke replied that he was no longer fit for abstract speculation.\nOn 25 February 1757, Burke signed a contract with Robert Dodsley to write a \"history of England from the time of Julius Caesar to the end of the reign of Queen Anne\", its length being eighty quarto sheets (640 pages), nearly 400,000 words. It was to be submitted for publication by Christmas 1758. Burke completed the work to the year 1216 and stopped; it was not published until after Burke's death, in an 1812 collection of his works, \"An Essay Towards an Abridgement of the English History\". G. M. Young did not value Burke's history and claimed that it was \"demonstrably a translation from the French\". On commenting on the story that Burke stopped his history because David Hume published his, Lord Acton said \"it is ever to be regretted that the reverse did not occur\".\nDuring the year following that contract, Burke founded with Dodsley the influential \"Annual Register\", a publication in which various authors evaluated the international political events of the previous year. The extent to which Burke contributed to the \"Annual Register\" is unclear. In his biography of Burke, Robert Murray quotes the \"Register\" as evidence of Burke's opinions, yet Philip Magnus in his biography does not cite it directly as a reference. Burke remained the chief editor of the publication until at least 1789 and there is no evidence that any other writer contributed to it before 1766.\nOn 12 March 1757, Burke married Jane Mary Nugent (1734\u20131812), daughter of Dr. Christopher Nugent, a Catholic physician who had provided him with medical treatment at Bath. Their son Richard was born on 9 February 1758 while an elder son, Christopher, died in infancy. Burke also helped raise a ward, Edmund Nagle (later Admiral Sir Edmund Nagle), the son of a maternal cousin orphaned in 1763.\nAt about this same time, Burke was introduced to William Gerard Hamilton (known as \"Single-speech Hamilton\"). When Hamilton was appointed Chief Secretary for Ireland, Burke accompanied him to Dublin as his private secretary, a position he held for three years. In 1765, Burke became private secretary to the liberal Whig politician Charles, Marquess of Rockingham, then Prime Minister of Great Britain, who remained Burke's close friend and associate until his untimely death in 1782.\nMember of Parliament.\nIn December 1765, Burke entered the House of Commons of the British Parliament as Member for Wendover in Buckinghamshire, a pocket borough in the gift of Lord Fermanagh, later 2nd Earl Verney and a close political ally of Rockingham. After Burke delivered his maiden speech, William Pitt the Elder said he had \"spoken in such a manner as to stop the mouths of all Europe\" and that the Commons should congratulate itself on acquiring such a Member.\nThe first great subject Burke addressed was the controversy with the American colonies which soon developed into war and ultimate separation. In reply to the 1769 Grenvillite pamphlet \"The Present State of the Nation\", he published his own pamphlet titled \"Observations on a Late State of the Nation\". Surveying the finances of France, Burke predicts \"some extraordinary convulsion in that whole system\".\nDuring the same year, with mostly borrowed money, Burke purchased \"Gregories\", a estate near Beaconsfield. Although the estate included saleable assets such as art works by Titian, \"Gregories\" proved a heavy financial burden in the following decades and Burke was never able to repay its purchase price in full. His speeches and writings, having made him famous, led to the suggestion that he was the author of the \"Letters of Junius\".\nAt about this time, Burke joined the circle of leading intellectuals and artists in London of whom Samuel Johnson was the central luminary. This circle also included David Garrick, Oliver Goldsmith and Joshua Reynolds. Edward Gibbon described Burke as \"the most eloquent and rational madman that I ever knew\". Although Johnson admired Burke's brilliance, he found him a dishonest politician.\nBurke took a leading role in the debate regarding the constitutional limits to the executive authority of the King. He argued strongly against unrestrained royal power and for the role of political parties in maintaining a principled opposition capable of preventing abuses, either by the monarch, or by specific factions within the government. His most important publication in this regard was his \"Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents\" of 23 April 1770. Burke identified the \"discontents\" as stemming from the \"secret influence\" of a neo-Tory group he labelled as the \"king's friends\", whose system \"comprehending the exterior and interior administrations, is commonly called, in the technical language of the Court, \"Double Cabinet\"\". Britain needed a party with \"an unshaken adherence to principle, and attachment to connexion, against every allurement of interest\". Party divisions, \"whether operating for good or evil, are things inseparable from free government\".\nDuring 1771, Burke wrote a bill that would have given juries the right to determine what was libel, if passed. Burke spoke in favour of the bill, but it was opposed by some, including Charles James Fox, not becoming law. When introducing his own bill in 1791 in opposition, Fox repeated almost verbatim the text of Burke's bill without acknowledgement. Burke was prominent in securing the right to publish debates held in Parliament.\nSpeaking in a Parliamentary debate on the prohibition on the export of grain on 16 November 1770, Burke argued in favour of a free market in corn: \"There are no such things as a high, &amp; a low price that is encouraging, &amp; discouraging; there is nothing but a natural price, which grain brings at an universal market\". In 1772, Burke was instrumental in the passing of the Repeal of Certain Laws Act 1772 which repealed various old laws against dealers and forestallers in corn.\nIn the \"Annual Register\" for 1772 (published in July 1773), Burke condemned the partition of Poland. He saw it as \"the first very great breach in the modern political system of Europe\" and as upsetting the balance of power in Europe.\nOn 3 November 1774, Burke was elected Member for Bristol, at the time \"England's second city\" and a large constituency with a genuine electoral contest. At the conclusion of the poll, he made his \"Speech to the Electors of Bristol at the Conclusion of the Poll\", a remarkable disclaimer of the constituent-imperative form of democracy, for which he substituted his statement of the \"representative mandate\" form. He failed to win re-election for that seat in the subsequent 1780 general election.\nIn May 1778, Burke supported a Parliamentary motion revising restrictions on Irish trade. His constituents, citizens of the great trading city of Bristol, urged Burke to oppose free trade with Ireland. Burke resisted their protestations and said: \"If, from this conduct, I shall forfeit their suffrages at an ensuing election, it will stand on record an example to future representatives of the Commons of England, that one man at least had dared to resist the desires of his constituents when his judgment assured him they were wrong\".\nBurke published \"Two Letters to Gentlemen of Bristol on the Bills relative to the Trade of Ireland\" in which he espoused \"some of the chief principles of commerce; such as the advantage of free intercourse between all parts of the same kingdom...the evils attending restriction and monopoly...and that the gain of others is not necessarily our loss, but on the contrary an advantage by causing a greater demand for such wares as we have for sale\".\nBurke also supported the attempts of Sir George Savile to repeal some of the penal laws against Catholics. Burke also called capital punishment \"the Butchery which we call justice\" in 1776 and in 1780 condemned the use of the pillory for two men convicted for attempting to practice sodomy.\nThis support for unpopular causes, notably free trade with Ireland and Catholic emancipation, led to Burke losing his seat in 1780. For the remainder of his Parliamentary career, Burke represented Malton, another pocket borough under the Marquess of Rockingham's patronage.\nAmerican War of Independence.\nBurke expressed his support for the grievances of the American Thirteen Colonies under the government of King George III and his appointed representatives. On 19 April 1774, Burke made a speech, \"On American Taxation\" (published in January 1775), on a motion to repeal the tea duty:\nAgain and again, revert to your old principles\u2014seek peace and ensue it; leave America, if she has taxable matter in her, to tax herself. I am not here going into the distinctions of rights, nor attempting to mark their boundaries. I do not enter into these metaphysical distinctions; I hate the very sound of them. Leave the Americans as they anciently stood, and these distinctions, born of our unhappy contest, will die along with it...Be content to bind America by laws of trade; you have always done it...Do not burthen them with taxes...But if intemperately, unwisely, fatally, you sophisticate and poison the very source of government by urging subtle deductions, and consequences odious to those you govern, from the unlimited and illimitable nature of supreme sovereignty, you will teach them by these means to call that sovereignty itself in question...If that sovereignty and their freedom cannot be reconciled, which will they take? They will cast your sovereignty in your face. No body of men will be argued into slavery.\nOn 22 March 1775, Burke delivered in the House of Commons a speech (published during May 1775) on reconciliation with America. Burke appealed for peace as preferable to civil war and reminded the House of Commons of America's growing population, its industry and its wealth. He warned against the notion that the Americans would back down in the face of force since most Americans were of British descent:\n[T]he people of the colonies are descendants of Englishmen...They are therefore not only devoted to liberty, but to liberty according to English ideas and on English principles. The people are Protestants...a persuasion not only favourable to liberty, but built upon it...My hold of the colonies is in the close affection which grows from common names, from kindred blood, from similar privileges, and equal protection. These are ties which, though light as air, are as strong as links of iron. Let the colonies always keep the idea of their civil rights associated with your government\u2014they will cling and grapple to you, and no force under heaven will be of power to tear them from their allegiance. But let it be once understood that your government may be one thing and their privileges another, that these two things may exist without any mutual relation\u2014the cement is gone, the cohesion is loosened, and everything hastens to decay and dissolution. As long as you have the wisdom to keep the sovereign authority of this country as the sanctuary of liberty, the sacred temple consecrated to our common faith, wherever the chosen race and sons of England worship freedom, they will turn their faces towards you. The more they multiply, the more friends you will have; the more ardently they love liberty, the more perfect will be their obedience. Slavery they can have anywhere. It is a weed that grows in every soil. They may have it from Spain, they may have it from Prussia. But, until you become lost to all feeling of your true interest and your natural dignity, freedom they can have from none but you.\nBurke prized peace with America above all else, pleading with the House of Commons to remember that the interest by way of money received from the American colonies was far more attractive than any sense of putting the colonists in their place:\nThe proposition is peace. Not peace through the medium of war, not peace to be hunted through the labyrinth of intricate and endless negotiations, not peace to arise out of universal discord...[I]t is simple peace, sought in its natural course and in its ordinary haunts. It is peace sought in the spirit of peace, and laid in principles purely pacific.\nBurke was not merely presenting a peace agreement to Parliament, but rather he stepped forward with four reasons against using force, carefully reasoned. He laid out his objections in an orderly manner, focusing on one before moving to the next. His first concern was that the use of force would have to be temporary and that the uprisings and objections to British governance in Colonial America would not be. Second, Burke worried about the uncertainty surrounding whether Britain would win a conflict in America. \"An armament\", Burke said, \"is not a victory\". Third, Burke brought up the issue of impairment, stating that it would do the British government no good to engage in a scorched earth war and have the object they desired (America) become damaged or even useless. The American colonists could always retreat into the mountains, but the land they left behind would most likely be unusable, whether by accident or design. The fourth and final reason to avoid the use of force was experience as the British had never attempted to rein in an unruly colony by force and they did not know if it could be done, let alone accomplished thousands of miles away from home. Not only were all of these concerns reasonable, but some turned out to be prophetic\u2014the American colonists did not surrender, even when things looked extremely bleak and the British were ultimately unsuccessful in their attempts to win a war fought on American soil.\nIt was not temporary force, uncertainty, impairment, or even experience that Burke cited as the primary reason for avoiding war with the American colonies. Rather, it was the character of the American people themselves: \"In this character of Americans, a love of freedom is the predominating feature which marks and distinguishes the whole...[T]his fierce spirit of liberty is stronger in the English colonies, probably, than in any other people of the earth...[The] men [are] acute, inquisitive, dextrous, prompt in attack, ready in defence, full of resources\". Burke concludes with another plea for peace and a prayer that Britain might avoid actions which in Burke's words \"may bring on the destruction of this Empire\".\nBurke proposed six resolutions to settle the American conflict peacefully:\nHad they been passed, the effect of these resolutions can never be known. Unfortunately, Burke delivered this speech just less than a month before the explosive conflict at Concord and Lexington. As these resolutions were not enacted, little was done that would help to dissuade conflict.\nAmong the reasons this speech was so greatly admired was its passage on Lord Bathurst (1684\u20131775) in which Burke describes an angel in 1704 prophesying to Bathurst the future greatness of England and also of America: \"Young man, There is America\u2014which at this day serves little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men, and uncouth manners; yet shall, before you taste of death, shew itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world\". Samuel Johnson was so irritated at hearing it continually praised that he made a parody of it, where the devil appears to a young Whig and predicts that in short time Whiggism will poison even the paradise of America.\nThe administration of Lord North (1770\u20131782) tried to defeat the colonist rebellion by military force. British and American forces clashed in 1775 and in 1776 came the American Declaration of Independence. Burke was appalled by celebrations in Britain of the defeat of the Americans at New York and Pennsylvania. He claimed the English national character was being changed by this authoritarianism. Burke wrote: \"As to the good people of England, they seem to partake every day more and more of the Character of that administration which they have been induced to tolerate. I am satisfied, that within a few years there has been a great Change in the National Character. We seem no longer that eager, inquisitive, jealous, fiery people, which we have been formerly\".\nIn Burke's view, the British government was fighting \"the American English\" (\"our English Brethren in the Colonies\"), with a Germanic king employing \"the hireling sword of German boors and vassals\" to destroy the English liberties of the colonists. On American independence, Burke wrote: \"I do not know how to wish success to those whose Victory is to separate from us a large and noble part of our Empire. Still less do I wish success to injustice, oppression and absurdity\".\nDuring the Gordon Riots in 1780, Burke became a target of hostility and his home was placed under armed guard by the military.\nPaymaster of the Forces.\nThe fall of North led to Rockingham being recalled to power in March 1782. Burke was appointed Paymaster of the Forces and a Privy Counsellor, but without a seat in Cabinet. Rockingham's unexpected death in July 1782 and replacement with Shelburne as Prime Minister put an end to his administration after only a few months, but Burke did manage to introduce two Acts.\nThe Paymaster General Act 1782 ended the post as a lucrative sinecure. Previously, Paymasters had been able to draw on money from HM Treasury at their discretion. Instead, now they were required to put the money they had requested to withdraw from the Treasury into the Bank of England, from where it was to be withdrawn for specific purposes. The Treasury would receive monthly statements of the Paymaster's balance at the Bank. This Act was repealed by Shelburne's administration, but the Act that replaced it repeated verbatim almost the whole text of the Burke Act.\nThe Civil List and Secret Service Money Act 1782 was a watered-down version of Burke's original intentions as outlined in his famous \"Speech on Economical Reform\" of 11 February 1780. However, he managed to abolish 134 offices in the royal household and civil administration. The third Secretary of State and the Board of Trade were abolished and pensions were limited and regulated. The Act was anticipated to save \u00a372,368 a year.\nIn February 1783, Burke resumed the post of Paymaster of the Forces when Shelburne's government fell and was replaced by a coalition headed by North that included Charles James Fox. That coalition fell in 1783 and was succeeded by the long Tory administration of William Pitt the Younger which lasted until 1801. Accordingly, having supported Fox and North, Burke was in opposition for the remainder of his political life.\nRepresentative democracy.\nIn 1774, Burke's \"Speech to the Electors at Bristol at the Conclusion of the Poll\" was noted for its defence of the principles of representative government against the notion that those elected to assemblies like Parliament are, or should be, merely delegates:\nCertainly, Gentlemen, it ought to be the happiness and glory of a Representative, to live in the strictest union, the closest correspondence, and the most unreserved communication with his constituents. Their wishes ought to have great weight with him; their opinion, high respect; their business, unremitted attention. It is his duty to sacrifice his repose, his pleasures, his satisfactions, to theirs; and above all, ever, and in all cases, to prefer their interest to his own. But his unbiassed opinion, his mature judgment, his enlightened conscience, he ought not to sacrifice to you, to any man, or to any sett of men living. These he does not derive from your pleasure; no, nor from the Law and the Constitution. They are a trust from Providence, for the abuse of which he is deeply answerable. Your Representative owes you, not his industry only, but his judgment; and he betrays, instead of serving you, if he sacrifices it to your opinion.My worthy Colleague says, his Will ought to be subservient to yours. If that be all, the thing is innocent. If Government were a matter of Will upon any side, yours, without question, ought to be superior. But Government and Legislation are matters of reason and judgement, and not of inclination; and, what sort of reason is that, in which the determination precedes the discussion; in which one sett of men deliberate, and another decide; and where those who form the conclusion are perhaps three hundred miles distant from those who hear the arguments?To deliver an opinion is the right of all men; that of constituents is a weighty and respectable opinion which a Representative ought always to rejoice to hear; and which he ought always most seriously to consider. But \"authoritative\" instructions; \"mandates\" issued, which the member is bound blindly and implicitly to obey, to vote, and to argue for, though contrary to the clearest conviction of his judgment and conscience; these are things utterly unknown to the laws of this land, and which arise from a fundamental mistake of the whole order and tenour of our constitution.Parliament is not a \"congress\" of ambassadors from different and hostile interests; which interests each must maintain, as an agent and advocate, against other agents and advocates; but Parliament is a \"deliberative\" assembly of \"one\" nation, with \"one\" interest, that of the whole; where, not local purposes, not local prejudices ought to guide, but the general good, resulting from the general reason of the whole. You choose a member, indeed; but when you have chosen him, he is not a member of Bristol, but he is a member of \"Parliament\".\nIt is often forgotten in this connection that Burke, as detailed below, was an opponent of slavery, and therefore his conscience was refusing to support a trade in which many of his Bristol electors were lucratively involved.\nPolitical scientist Hanna Pitkin points out that Burke linked the interest of the district with the proper behaviour of its elected official, explaining: \"Burke conceives of broad, relatively fixed interest, few in number and clearly defined, of which any group or locality has just one. These interests are largely economic or associated with particular localities whose livelihood they characterize, in his over-all prosperity they involve\".\nBurke was a leading sceptic with respect to democracy. While admitting that theoretically in some cases it might be desirable, he insisted a democratic government in Britain in his day would not only be inept, but also oppressive. He opposed democracy for three basic reasons. First, government required a degree of intelligence and breadth of knowledge of the sort that occurred rarely among the common people. Second, he thought that if they had the vote, common people had dangerous and angry passions that could be aroused easily by demagogues, fearing that the authoritarian impulses that could be empowered by these passions would undermine cherished traditions and established religion, leading to violence and confiscation of property. Third, Burke warned that democracy would create a tyranny over unpopular minorities, who needed the protection of the upper classes.\nOpposition to the slave trade.\nBurke proposed a bill to ban slaveholders from being able to sit in the House of Commons, claiming they were a danger incompatible with traditional notions of British liberty. While Burke did believe that Africans were \"barbaric\" and needed to be \"civilised\" by Christianity, Gregory Collins argues that this was not an unusual attitude amongst abolitionists at the time. Furthermore, Burke seemed to believe that Christianity would provide a civilising benefit to any group of people, as he believed Christianity had \"tamed\" European civilisation and regarded Southern European peoples as equally savage and barbarous. Collins also suggests that Burke viewed the \"uncivilised\" behaviour of African slaves as being partially caused by slavery itself, as he believed that making someone a slave stripped them of any virtues and rendered them mentally deficient, regardless of race. Burke proposed a gradual program of emancipation called Sketch of a Negro Code, which Collins argues was quite detailed for the time. Collins concludes that Burke's \"gradualist\" position on the emancipation of slaves, while perhaps seeming ridiculous to some modern-day readers, was nonetheless sincere.\nIndia and the impeachment of Warren Hastings.\nFor years, Burke pursued impeachment efforts against Warren Hastings, formerly Governor-General of Bengal, that resulted in the trial during 1786. His interaction with the British dominion of India began well before Hastings' impeachment trial. For two decades prior to the impeachment, Parliament had dealt with the Indian issue. This trial was the pinnacle of years of unrest and deliberation. In 1781, Burke was first able to delve into the issues surrounding the East India Company when he was appointed Chairman of the Commons Select Committee on East Indian Affairs\u2014from that point until the end of the trial, India was Burke's primary concern. This committee was charged \"to investigate alleged injustices in Bengal, the war with Hyder Ali, and other Indian difficulties\". While Burke and the committee focused their attention on these matters, a second secret committee was formed to assess the same issues. Both committee reports were written by Burke. Among other purposes, the reports conveyed to the Indian princes that Britain would not wage war on them, along with demanding that the East India Company should recall Hastings. This was Burke's first call for substantive change regarding imperial practices. When addressing the whole House of Commons regarding the committee report, Burke described the Indian issue as one that \"began 'in commerce' but 'ended in empire'\".\nOn 28 February 1785, Burke delivered a now-famous speech, \"The Nabob of Arcot's Debts\", wherein he condemned the damage to India by the East India Company. In the province of the Carnatic, the Indians had constructed a system of reservoirs to make the soil fertile in a naturally dry region, and centred their society on the husbandry of water:\nThese are the monuments of real kings, who were the fathers of their people; testators to a posterity which they embraced as their own. These are the grand sepulchres built by ambition; but by the ambition of an insatiable benevolence, which, not contented with reigning in the dispensation of happiness during the contracted term of human life, had strained, with all the reachings and graspings of a vivacious mind, to extend the dominion of their bounty beyond the limits of nature, and to perpetuate themselves through generations of generations, the guardians, the protectors, the nourishers of mankind.\nBurke claimed that the advent of East India Company domination in India had eroded much that was good in these traditions and that as a consequence of this and the lack of new customs to replace them the Indian populace under Company rule was needlessly suffering. He set about establishing a set of imperial expectations, whose moral foundation would in his opinion warrant an overseas empire.\nOn 4 April 1786, Burke presented the House of Commons with the \"Article of Charge of High Crimes and Misdemeanors\" against Hastings. The impeachment in Westminster Hall which did not begin until 14 February 1788 would be the \"first major public discursive event of its kind in England\", bringing the morality of imperialism to the forefront of public perception. Burke was already known for his eloquent rhetorical skills and his involvement in the trial only enhanced its popularity and significance. Burke's indictment, fuelled by emotional indignation, branded Hastings a \"captain-general of iniquity\" who never dined without \"creating a famine\", whose heart was \"gangrened to the core\" and who resembled both a \"spider of Hell\" and a \"ravenous vulture devouring the carcasses of the dead\". The House of Commons eventually impeached Hastings, but subsequently the House of Lords acquitted him of all charges.\nFrench Revolution: 1688 versus 1789.\nInitially, Burke did not condemn the French Revolution. In a letter of 9 August 1789, he wrote: \"England gazing with astonishment at a French struggle for Liberty and not knowing whether to blame or to applaud! The thing indeed, though I thought I saw something like it in progress for several years, has still something in it paradoxical and Mysterious. The spirit it is impossible not to admire; but the old Parisian ferocity has broken out in a shocking manner\". The events of 5\u20136 October 1789, when a crowd of Parisian women marched on Versailles to compel King Louis XVI to return to Paris, turned Burke against it. In a letter to his son Richard Burke dated 10 October, he said: \"This day I heard from Laurence who has sent me papers confirming the portentous state of France\u2014where the Elements which compose Human Society seem all to be dissolved, and a world of Monsters to be produced in the place of it\u2014where Mirabeau presides as the Grand Anarch; and the late Grand Monarch makes a figure as ridiculous as pitiable\". On 4 November, Charles-Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Depont wrote to Burke, requesting that he endorse the Revolution. Burke replied that any critical language of it by him should be taken \"as no more than the expression of doubt\", but he added: \"You may have subverted Monarchy, but not recover'd freedom\". In the same month, he described France as \"a country undone\". Burke's first public condemnation of the Revolution occurred on the debate in Parliament on the army estimates on 9 February 1790 provoked by praise of the Revolution by Pitt and Fox:\nSince the House had been prorogued in the summer much work was done in France. The French had shewn themselves the ablest architects of ruin that had hitherto existed in the world. In that very short space of time they had completely pulled down to the ground, their monarchy; their church; their nobility; their law; their revenue; their army; their navy; their commerce; their arts; and their manufactures...[There was a danger of] an imitation of the excesses of an irrational, unprincipled, proscribing, confiscating, plundering, ferocious, bloody and tyrannical democracy...[In religion] the danger of their example is no longer from intolerance, but from Atheism; a foul, unnatural vice, foe to all the dignity and consolation of mankind; which seems in France, for a long time, to have been embodied into a faction, accredited, and almost avowed.\nIn January 1790, Burke read Richard Price's sermon of 4 November 1789 entitled \"A Discourse on the Love of Our Country\" to the Revolution Society. That society had been founded to commemorate the Glorious Revolution of 1688. In this sermon, Price espoused the philosophy of universal \"Rights of Men\". Price argued that love of our country \"does not imply any conviction of the superior value of it to other countries, or any particular preference of its laws and constitution of government\". Instead, Price asserted that Englishmen should see themselves \"more as citizens of the world than as members of any particular community\".\nA debate between Price and Burke ensued that was \"the classic moment at which two fundamentally different conceptions of national identity were presented to the English public\". Price claimed that the principles of the Glorious Revolution included \"the right to choose our own governors, to cashier them for misconduct, and to frame a government for ourselves\".\nImmediately after reading Price's sermon, Burke wrote a draft of what eventually became \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\". On 13 February 1790, a notice in the press said that shortly Burke would publish a pamphlet on the Revolution and its British supporters, but he spent the year revising and expanding it. On 1 November, he finally published the \"Reflections\" and it was an immediate best-seller. Priced at five shillings, it was more expensive than most political pamphlets, but by the end of 1790 it had gone through ten printings and sold approximately 17,500 copies. A French translation appeared on 29 November and on 30 November the translator Pierre-Ga\u00ebton Dupont wrote to Burke saying 2,500 copies had already been sold. The French translation ran to ten printings by June 1791.\nWhat the Glorious Revolution had meant was as important to Burke and his contemporaries as it had been for the last one hundred years in British politics. In the \"Reflections\", Burke argued against Price's interpretation of the Glorious Revolution and instead, gave a classic Whig defence of it. Burke argued against the idea of abstract, metaphysical rights of humans and instead advocated national tradition:\nThe Revolution was made to preserve our \"antient\" indisputable laws and liberties, and that \"antient\" constitution of government which is our only security for law and liberty...The very idea of the fabrication of a new government, is enough to fill us with disgust and horror. We wished at the period of the Revolution, and do now wish, to derive all we possess as \"an inheritance from our forefathers\". Upon that body and stock of inheritance we have taken care not to inoculate any cyon [scion] alien to the nature of the original plant...Our oldest reformation is that of Magna Charta. You will see that Sir Edward Coke, that great oracle of our law, and indeed all the great men who follow him, to Blackstone, are industrious to prove the pedigree of our liberties. They endeavour to prove that the ancient charter...were nothing more than a re-affirmance of the still more ancient standing law of the kingdom...In the famous law...called the \"Petition of Right\", the parliament says to the king, \"Your subjects have \"inherited\" this freedom\", claiming their franchises not on abstract principles \"as the rights of men\", but as the rights of Englishmen, and as a patrimony derived from their forefathers.\nBurke said: \"We fear God, we look up with awe to kings; with affection to Parliaments; with duty to magistrates; with reverence to priests; and with respect to nobility. Why? Because when such ideas are brought before our minds, it is \"natural\" to be so affected\". Burke defended this prejudice on the grounds that it is \"the general bank and capital of nations, and of ages\" and superior to individual reason, which is small in comparison. \"Prejudice\", Burke claimed, \"is of ready application in the emergency; it previously engages the mind in a steady course of wisdom and virtue, and does not leave the man hesitating in the moment of decision, sceptical, puzzled, and unresolved. Prejudice renders a man's virtue his habit\". Burke criticised social contract theory by claiming that society is indeed a contract, although it is \"a partnership not only between those who are living, but between those who are living, those who are dead, and those who are to be born\".\nThe most famous passage in Burke's \"Reflections\" was his description of the events of 5\u20136 October 1789 and the part of Marie-Antoinette in them. Burke's account differs little from modern historians who have used primary sources. His use of flowery language to describe it provoked both praise and criticism. Philip Francis wrote to Burke saying that what he wrote of Marie-Antoinette was \"pure foppery\". Edward Gibbon reacted differently: \"I adore his chivalry\". Burke was informed by an Englishman who had talked with the Duchesse de Biron that when Marie-Antoinette was reading the passage she burst into tears and took considerable time to finish reading it. Price had rejoiced that the French king had been \"led in triumph\" during the October Days, but to Burke this symbolised the opposing revolutionary sentiment of the Jacobins and the natural sentiments of those who shared his own view with horror\u2014that the ungallant assault on Marie-Antoinette was a cowardly attack on a defenceless woman.\nLouis XVI translated the \"Reflections\" \"from end to end\" into French. Fellow Whig MPs Richard Sheridan and Charles James Fox disagreed with Burke and split with him. Fox thought the \"Reflections\" to be \"in very bad taste\" and \"favouring Tory principles\". Other Whigs such as the Duke of Portland and Earl Fitzwilliam privately agreed with Burke, but they did not wish for a public breach with their Whig colleagues. Burke wrote on 29 November 1790: \"I have received from the Duke of Portland, Lord Fitzwilliam, the Duke of Devonshire, Lord John Cavendish, Montagu (Frederick Montagu MP), and a long et cetera of the old Stamina of the Whiggs a most full approbation of the principles of that work and a kind indulgence to the execution\". The Duke of Portland said in 1791 that when anyone criticised the \"Reflections\" to him, he informed them that he had recommended the book to his sons as containing the true Whig creed.\nIn the opinion of Paul Langford, Burke crossed something of a Rubicon when he attended a levee on 3 February 1791 to meet the King, later described by Jane Burke as follows:\nOn his coming to Town for the Winter, as he generally does, he went to the Levee with the Duke of \"Portland\", who went with Lord William to kiss hands on his going into the Guards\u2014while Lord William was kissing hands, The King was talking to The Duke, but his Eyes were fixed on [Burke] who was standing in the Crowd, and when He said His say to The Duke, without waiting for [Burke]'s coming up in his turn, The King went up to him, and, after the usual questions of how long have you been in Town and the weather, He said you have been very much employed of late, and very much confined. [Burke] said, no, Sir, not more than usual\u2014You have and very well employed too, but there are none so deaf as those that w'ont hear, and none so blind as those that w'ont see\u2014[Burke] made a low bow, Sir, I certainly now understand you, but was afraid my vanity or presumption might have led me to imagine what Your Majesty has said referred to what I have done\u2014You cannot be vain\u2014You have been of \"use to us all\", it is a general opinion, is it not so Lord Stair? who was standing near. It is said Lord Stair;\u2014Your Majesty's adopting it, Sir, will make the opinion general, said [Burke]\u2014I know it is the general opinion, and I know that there is no Man who calls himself a Gentleman that must not think himself obliged to you, for you have supported the cause of the Gentlemen\u2014You know the tone at Court is a whisper, but The King said all this loud, so as to be heard by every one at Court.\nBurke's \"Reflections\" sparked a pamphlet war. Mary Wollstonecraft was one of the first into print, publishing \"A Vindication of the Rights of Men\" a few weeks after Burke. Thomas Paine followed with the \"Rights of Man\" in 1791. James Mackintosh, who wrote \"Vindiciae Gallicae\", was the first to see the \"Reflections\" as \"the manifesto of a Counter Revolution\". Mackintosh later agreed with Burke's views, remarking in December 1796 after meeting him that Burke was \"minutely and accurately informed, to a wonderful exactness, with respect to every fact relating to the French Revolution\". Mackintosh later said: \"Burke was one of the first thinkers as well as one of the greatest orators of his time. He is without parallel in any age, excepting perhaps Lord Bacon and Cicero; and his works contain an ampler store of political and moral wisdom than can be found in any other writer whatever\".\nIn November 1790, Fran\u00e7ois-Louis-Thibault de Menonville, a member of the National Assembly of France, wrote to Burke, praising \"Reflections\" and requesting more \"very refreshing mental food\" that he could publish. This Burke did in April 1791 when he published \"A Letter to a Member of the National Assembly\". Burke called for external forces to reverse the Revolution and included an attack on the late French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau as being the subject of a personality cult that had developed in revolutionary France. Although Burke conceded that Rousseau sometimes showed \"a considerable insight into human nature\", he mostly was critical. Although he did not meet Rousseau on his visit to Britain in 1766\u20131767, Burke was a friend of David Hume, with whom Rousseau had stayed. Burke said Rousseau \"entertained no principle either to influence of his heart, or to guide his understanding\u2014but \"vanity\"\"\u2014which he \"was possessed to a degree little short of madness\". He also cited Rousseau's \"Confessions\" as evidence that Rousseau had a life of \"obscure and vulgar vices\" that was not \"chequered, or spotted here and there, with virtues, or even distinguished by a single good action\". Burke contrasted Rousseau's theory of universal benevolence and his having sent his children to a foundling hospital, stating that he was \"a lover of his kind, but a hater of his kindred\".\nThese events and the disagreements that arose from them within the Whig Party led to its break-up and to the rupture of Burke's friendship with Fox. In debate in Parliament on Britain's relations with Russia, Fox praised the principles of the Revolution, although Burke was not able to reply at this time as he was \"overpowered by continued cries of question from his own side of the House\". When Parliament was debating the Quebec Bill for a constitution for Canada, Fox praised the Revolution and criticised some of Burke's arguments such as hereditary power. On 6 May 1791, Burke used the opportunity to answer Fox during another debate in Parliament on the Quebec Bill and condemn the new French Constitution and \"the horrible consequences flowing from the French idea of the Rights of Man\". Burke asserted that those ideas were the antithesis of both the British and the American constitutions. Burke was interrupted and Fox intervened, saying that Burke should be allowed to carry on with his speech. However, a vote of censure was moved against Burke for noticing the affairs of France which was moved by Lord Sheffield and seconded by Fox. Pitt made a speech praising Burke and Fox made a speech\u2014both rebuking and complimenting Burke. He questioned the sincerity of Burke, who seemed to have forgotten the lessons he had learned from him, quoting from Burke's own speeches of fourteen and fifteen years before. Burke's response was as follows:\nIt certainly was indiscreet at any period, but especially at his time of life, to parade enemies, or give his friends occasion to desert him; yet if his firm and steady adherence to the British constitution placed him in such a dilemma, he would risk all, and, as public duty and public experience taught him, with his last words exclaim, \"Fly from the French Constitution\".\nAt this point, Fox whispered that there was \"no loss of friendship\". \"I regret to say there is\", Burke replied, \"I have indeed made a great sacrifice; I have done my duty though I have lost my friend. There is something in the detested French constitution that envenoms every thing it touches\". This provoked a reply from Fox, yet he was unable to give his speech for some time since he was overcome with tears and emotion. Fox appealed to Burke to remember their inalienable friendship, but he also repeated his criticisms of Burke and uttered \"unusually bitter sarcasms\". This only aggravated the rupture between the two men. Burke demonstrated his separation from the party on 5 June 1791 by writing to Fitzwilliam, declining money from him.\nBurke was dismayed that some Whigs, instead of reaffirming the principles of the Whig Party he laid out in the \"Reflections\", had rejected them in favour of \"French principles\" and that they criticised Burke for abandoning Whig principles. Burke wanted to demonstrate his fidelity to Whig principles and feared that acquiescence to Fox and his followers would allow the Whig Party to become a vehicle for Jacobinism.\nBurke knew that many members of the Whig Party did not share Fox's views and he wanted to provoke them into condemning the French Revolution. Burke wrote that he wanted to represent the whole Whig Party \"as tolerating, and by a toleration, countenancing those proceedings\" so that he could \"stimulate them to a public declaration of what every one of their acquaintance privately knows to be...their sentiments\". On 3 August 1791, Burke published his \"Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs\" in which he renewed his criticism of the radical revolutionary programmes inspired by the French Revolution and attacked the Whigs who supported them as holding principles contrary to those traditionally held by the Whig Party.\nBurke owned two copies of what has been called \"that practical compendium of Whig political theory\", namely \"The Tryal of Dr. Henry Sacheverell\" (1710). Burke wrote of the trial: \"It rarely happens to a party to have the opportunity of a clear, authentic, recorded, declaration of their political tenets upon the subject of a great constitutional event like that of the [Glorious] Revolution\". Writing in the third person, Burke asserted in his \"Appeal\":\n[The] foundations laid down by the Commons, on the trial of Doctor Sacheverel, for justifying the revolution of 1688, are the very same laid down in Mr. Burke's Reflections; that is to say,\u2014a breach of the \"original contract\", implied and expressed in the constitution of this country, as a scheme of government fundamentally and inviolably fixed in King, Lords and Commons.\u2014That the fundamental subversion of this antient constitution, by one of its parts, having been attempted, and in effect accomplished, justified the Revolution. That it was justified \"only\" upon the \"necessity\" of the case; as the \"only\" means left for the recovery of that \"antient\" constitution, formed by the \"original contract\" of the British state; as well as for the future preservation of the \"same\" government. These are the points to be proved.\nBurke then provided quotations from Paine's \"Rights of Man\" to demonstrate what the New Whigs believed. Burke's belief that Foxite principles corresponded to Paine's was genuine. Finally, Burke denied that a majority of \"the people\" had, or ought to have, the final say in politics and alter society at their pleasure. People had rights, but also duties and these duties were not voluntary. According to Burke, the people could not overthrow morality derived from God.\nAlthough Whig grandees such as Portland and Fitzwilliam privately agreed with Burke's \"Appeal\", they wished he had used more moderate language. Fitzwilliam saw the \"Appeal\" as containing \"the doctrines I have sworn by, long and long since\". Francis Basset, a backbench Whig MP, wrote to Burke that \"though for reasons which I will not now detail I did not then deliver my sentiments, I most perfectly differ from Mr. Fox &amp; from the great Body of opposition on the French Revolution\". Burke sent a copy of the \"Appeal\" to the King and the King requested a friend to communicate to Burke that he had read it \"with great Satisfaction\". Burke wrote of its reception: \"Not one word from one of our party. They are secretly galled. They agree with me to a title; but they dare not speak out for fear of hurting Fox...They leave me to myself; they see that I can do myself justice\". Charles Burney viewed it as \"a most admirable book\u2014the best &amp; most useful on political subjects that I have ever seen\", but he believed the differences in the Whig Party between Burke and Fox should not be aired publicly.\nEventually, most of the Whigs sided with Burke and gave their support to William Pitt the Younger's Tory government which in response to France's declaration of war against Britain declared war on France's Revolutionary Government in 1793.\nIn December 1791, Burke sent government ministers his \"Thoughts on French Affairs\" where he put forward three main points, namely that no counter-revolution in France would come about by purely domestic causes; that the longer the Revolutionary Government exists, the stronger it becomes; and that the Revolutionary Government's interest and aim is to disturb all of the other governments of Europe.\nAs a Whig, Burke did not wish to see an absolute monarchy again in France after the extirpation of Jacobinism. Writing to an \"\u00e9migr\u00e9\" in 1791, Burke expressed his views against a restoration of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\":\nWhen such a complete convulsion has shaken the State, and hardly left any thing whatsoever, either in civil arrangements, or in the Characters and disposition of men's minds, exactly where it was, whatever shall be settled although in the former persons and upon old forms, will be in some measure a new thing and will labour under something of the weakness as well as other inconveniences of a Change. My poor opinion is that you mean to establish what you call 'L'ancien R\u00e9gime,' If any one means that system of Court Intrigue miscalled a Government as it stood, at Versailles before the present confusions as the thing to be established, that I believe will be found absolutely impossible; and if you consider the Nature, as well of persons, as of affairs, I flatter myself you must be of my opinion. That was tho' not so violent a State of Anarchy as well as the present. If it were even possible to lay things down exactly as they stood, before the series of experimental politicks began, I am quite sure that they could not long continue in that situation. In one Sense of L'Ancien R\u00e9gime I am clear that nothing else can reasonably be done.\nBurke delivered a speech on the debate of the Aliens Bill on 28 December 1792. He supported the Bill as it would exclude \"murderous atheists, who would pull down Church and state; religion and God; morality and happiness\". The peroration included a reference to a French order for 3,000 daggers. Burke revealed a dagger he had concealed in his coat and threw it to the floor: \"This is what you are to gain by an alliance with France\". Burke picked up the dagger and continued:\nWhen they smile, I see blood trickling down their faces; I see their insidious purposes; I see that the object of all their cajoling is\u2014blood! I now warn my countrymen to beware of these execrable philosophers, whose only object it is to destroy every thing that is good here, and to establish immorality and murder by precept and example\u2014'Hic niger est hunc tu Romane caveto' ['Such a man is evil; beware of him, Roman'. Horace, \"Satires\" I. 4. 85.].\nBurke supported the war against Revolutionary France, seeing Britain as fighting on the side of the royalists and \"\u00e9migres\" in a civil war, rather than fighting against the whole nation of France. Burke also supported the royalist uprising in La Vend\u00e9e, describing it on 4 November 1793 in a letter to William Windham as \"the sole affair I have much heart in\". Burke wrote to Henry Dundas on 7 October urging him to send reinforcements there as he viewed it as the only theatre in the war that might lead to a march on Paris, but Dundas did not follow Burke's advice.\nBurke believed the British government was not taking the uprising seriously enough, a view reinforced by a letter he had received from the Prince Charles of France (\"S.A.R. le comte d'Artois\"), dated 23 October, requesting that he intercede on behalf of the royalists to the government. Burke was forced to reply on 6 November: \"I am not in His Majesty's Service; or at all consulted in his Affairs\". Burke published his \"Remarks on the Policy of the Allies with Respect to France\", begun in October, where he said: \"I am sure every thing has shewn us that in this war with France, one Frenchman is worth twenty foreigners. La Vend\u00e9e is a proof of this\".\nOn 20 June 1794, Burke received a vote of thanks from the House of Commons for his services in the Hastings Trial and he immediately resigned his seat, being replaced by his son Richard. A tragic blow fell upon Burke with the loss of Richard in August 1794, to whom he was tenderly attached and in whom he saw signs of promise which were not patent to others and which in fact appear to have been non-existent, although this view may have rather reflected the fact that his son Richard had worked successfully in the early battle for Catholic emancipation. King George III, whose favour he had gained by his attitude on the French Revolution, wished to create him Earl of Beaconsfield, but the death of his son deprived the opportunity of such an honour and all its attractions, so the only award he would accept was a pension of \u00a32,500. Even this modest reward was attacked by the Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Lauderdale, to whom Burke replied in his \"Letter to a Noble Lord\" (1796): \"It cannot at this time be too often repeated; line upon line; precept upon precept; until it comes into the currency of a proverb, \"To innovate is not to reform\"\". He argued that he was rewarded on merit, but the Duke of Bedford received his rewards from inheritance alone, his ancestor being the original pensioner: \"Mine was from a mild and benevolent sovereign; his from Henry the Eighth\". Burke also hinted at what would happen to such people if their revolutionary ideas were implemented and included a description of the British Constitution:\nBut as to \"our\" country and \"our\" race, as long as the well compacted structure of our church and state, the sanctuary, the holy of holies of that ancient law, defended by reverence, defended by power, a fortress at once and a temple, shall stand inviolate on the brow of the British Sion\u2014as long as the British Monarchy, not more limited than fenced by the orders of the State, shall, like the proud Keep of Windsor, rising in the majesty of proportion, and girt with the double belt of its kindred and coeval towers, as long as this awful structure shall oversee and guard the subjected land\u2014so long as the mounds and dykes of the low, fat, Bedford level will have nothing to fear from all the pickaxes of all the levellers of France.\nBurke's last publications were the \"Letters on a Regicide Peace\" (October 1796), called forth by negotiations for peace with France by the Pitt government. Burke regarded this as appeasement, injurious to national dignity and honour. In his \"Second Letter\", Burke wrote of the French Revolutionary government: \"Individuality is left out of their scheme of government. The State is all in all. Everything is referred to the production of force; afterwards, everything is trusted to the use of it. It is military in its principle, in its maxims, in its spirit, and in all its movements. The State has dominion and conquest for its sole objects\u2014dominion over minds by proselytism, over bodies by arms\".\nThis is held to be the first explanation of the modern concept of totalitarian state. Burke regarded the war with France as ideological, against an \"armed doctrine\". He wished that France would not be partitioned due to the effect this would have on the balance of power in Europe and that the war was not against France, but against the revolutionaries governing her. Burke said: \"It is not France extending a foreign empire over other nations: it is a sect aiming at universal empire, and beginning with the conquest of France\".\nLater life.\nIn November 1795, there was a debate in Parliament on the high price of corn and Burke wrote a memorandum to Pitt on the subject. In December, Samuel Whitbread MP introduced a bill giving magistrates the power to fix minimum wages and Fox said he would vote for it. This debate probably led Burke to editing his memorandum as there appeared a notice that Burke would soon publish a letter on the subject to the Secretary of the Board of Agriculture Arthur Young, but he failed to complete it. These fragments were inserted into the memorandum after his death and published posthumously in 1800 as \"Thoughts and Details on Scarcity\". In it, Burke expounded \"some of the doctrines of political economists bearing upon agriculture as a trade\". Burke criticised policies such as maximum prices and state regulation of wages and set out what the limits of government should be:\nThat the State ought to confine itself to what regards the State, or the creatures of the State, namely, the exterior establishment of its religion; its magistracy; its revenue; its military force by sea and land; the corporations that owe their existence to its fiat; in a word, to every thing that is \"truly and properly\" public, to the public peace, to the public safety, to the public order, to the public prosperity.\nThe economist Adam Smith remarked that Burke was \"the only man I ever knew who thinks on economic subjects exactly as I do, without any previous communications having passed between us\".\nWriting to a friend in May 1795, Burke surveyed the causes of discontent: \"I think I can hardly overrate the malignity of the principles of Protestant ascendency, as they affect Ireland; or of Indianism [i.e. corporate tyranny, as practiced by the British East Indies Company], as they affect these countries, and as they affect Asia; or of Jacobinism, as they affect all Europe, and the state of human society itself. The last is the greatest evil\". By March 1796, Burke had changed his mind: \"Our Government and our Laws are beset by two different Enemies, which are sapping its foundations, Indianism, and Jacobinism. In some Cases they act separately, in some they act in conjunction: But of this I am sure; that the first is the worst by far, and the hardest to deal with; and for this amongst other reasons, that it weakens discredits, and ruins that force, which ought to be employed with the greatest Credit and Energy against the other; and that it furnishes Jacobinism with its strongest arms against all \"formal\" Government\".\nFor more than a year prior to his death, Burke knew that his stomach was \"irrecoverably ruind\". After hearing that Burke was nearing death, Fox wrote to Mrs. Burke enquiring after him. Fox received the reply the next day:\nMrs. Burke presents her compliments to Mr. Fox, and thanks him for his obliging inquiries. Mrs. Burke communicated his letter to Mr. Burke, and by his desire has to inform Mr. Fox that it has cost Mr. Burke the most heart-felt pain to obey the stern voice of his duty in rending asunder a long friendship, but that he deemed this sacrifice necessary; that his principles continue the same; and that in whatever of life may yet remain to him, he conceives that he must live for others and not for himself. Mr. Burke is convinced that the principles which he has endeavoured to maintain are necessary to the welfare and dignity of his country, and that these principles can be enforced only by the general persuasion of his sincerity.\nBurke died in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, on 9 July 1797 and was buried there alongside his son and brother.\nLegacy.\nBurke is regarded by most political historians in the English-speaking world as a liberal conservative and the father of modern British conservatism. Burke was utilitarian and empirical in his arguments while Joseph de Maistre, a fellow conservative from the Continent, was more providentialist and sociological and deployed a more confrontational tone in his arguments.\nBurke believed that property was essential to human life. Because of his conviction that people desire to be ruled and controlled, the division of property formed the basis for social structure, helping develop control within a property-based hierarchy. He viewed the social changes brought on by property as the natural order of events which should be taking place as the human race progressed. With the division of property and the class system, he also believed that it kept the monarch in check to the needs of the classes beneath the monarch. Since property largely aligned or defined divisions of social class, class too was seen as natural\u2014part of a social agreement that the setting of persons into different classes, is the mutual benefit of all subjects. Concern for property is not Burke's only influence. Christopher Hitchens summarises as follows: \"If modern conservatism can be held to derive from Burke, it is not just because he appealed to property owners in behalf of stability but also because he appealed to an everyday interest in the preservation of the ancestral and the immemorial\".\nBurke's support for the causes of the \"oppressed majorities\", such as Irish Catholics and Indians, led him to be at the receiving end of hostile criticism from Tories; while his opposition to the spread of the French Republic (and its radical ideals) across Europe led to similar charges from Whigs. As a consequence, Burke often became isolated in Parliament.\nIn the 19th century, Burke was praised by both liberals and conservatives. Burke's friend Philip Francis wrote that Burke \"was a man who truly &amp; prophetically foresaw all the consequences which would rise from the adoption of the French principles\", but because Burke wrote with so much passion, people were doubtful of his arguments. William Windham spoke from the same bench in the House of Commons as Burke had when he had separated from Fox and an observer said Windham spoke \"like the ghost of Burke\" when he made a speech against peace with France in 1801. William Hazlitt, a political opponent of Burke, regarded him as amongst his three favourite writers (the others being Junius and Rousseau) and made it \"a test of the sense and candour of any one belonging to the opposite party, whether he allowed Burke to be a great man\". William Wordsworth was originally a supporter of the French Revolution and attacked Burke in \"A Letter to the Bishop of Llandaff\" (1793), but by the early 19th century he had changed his mind and came to admire Burke. In his \"Two Addresses to the Freeholders of Westmorland\", Wordsworth called Burke \"the most sagacious Politician of his age\", whose predictions \"time has verified\". He later revised his poem \"The Prelude\" to include praise of Burke (\"Genius of Burke! forgive the pen seduced/By specious wonders\") and portrayed him as an old oak. Samuel Taylor Coleridge came to have a similar conversion as he had criticised Burke in \"The Watchman\", but in his \"Friend\" (1809\u20131810) had defended Burke from charges of inconsistency. Later in his \"Biographia Literaria\" (1817), Coleridge hails Burke as a prophet and praises Burke for referring \"habitually to \"principles\". He was a \"scientific\" statesman; and therefore a \"seer\"\". Henry Brougham wrote of Burke that \"all his predictions, save one momentary expression, had been more than fulfilled: anarchy and bloodshed had borne sway in France; conquest and convulsion had desolated Europe...[T]he providence of mortals is not often able to penetrate so far as this into futurity\". George Canning believed that Burke's \"Reflections\" \"has been justified by the course of subsequent events; and almost every prophecy has been strictly fulfilled\". In 1823, Canning wrote that he took Burke's \"last works and words [as] the manual of my politics\". The Conservative Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli \"was deeply penetrated with the spirit and sentiment of Burke's later writings\".\nThe 19th-century Liberal Prime Minister William Gladstone considered Burke \"a magazine of wisdom on Ireland and America\" and in his diary recorded: \"Made many extracts from Burke\u2014\"sometimes almost divine\"\". The Radical MP and anti-Corn Law activist Richard Cobden often praised Burke's \"Thoughts and Details on Scarcity\". The Liberal historian Lord Acton considered Burke one of the three greatest Liberals, along with Gladstone and Thomas Babington Macaulay. Lord Macaulay recorded in his diary: \"I have now finished reading again most of Burke's works. Admirable! The greatest man since Milton\". The Gladstonian Liberal MP John Morley published two books on Burke (including a biography) and was influenced by Burke, including his views on prejudice. The Cobdenite Radical Francis Hirst thought Burke deserved \"a place among English libertarians, even though of all lovers of liberty and of all reformers he was the most conservative, the least abstract, always anxious to preserve and renovate rather than to innovate. In politics he resembled the modern architect who would restore an old house instead of pulling it down to construct a new one on the site\". Burke's \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" was controversial at the time of its publication, but after his death it was to become his best known and most influential work and a manifesto for Conservative thinking.\nTwo contrasting assessments of Burke also were offered long after his death by Karl Marx and Winston Churchill. In a footnote to Volume One of \"Das Kapital\", Marx wrote:\nThe sycophant\u2014who in the pay of the English oligarchy played the romantic \"laudator temporis acti\" against the French Revolution just as, in the pay of the North American colonies at the beginning of the American troubles, he had played the liberal against the English oligarchy\u2014was an out-and-out vulgar bourgeois. \"The laws of commerce are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws of God.\" (E. Burke, l.c., pp. 31, 32) No wonder that, true to the laws of God and Nature, he always sold himself in the best market.\nIn \"Consistency in Politics\", Churchill wrote:\nOn the one hand [Burke] is revealed as a foremost apostle of Liberty, on the other as the redoubtable champion of Authority. But a charge of political inconsistency applied to this life appears a mean and petty thing. History easily discerns the reasons and forces which actuated him, and the immense changes in the problems he was facing which evoked from the same profound mind and sincere spirit these entirely contrary manifestations. His soul revolted against tyranny, whether it appeared in the aspect of a domineering Monarch and a corrupt Court and Parliamentary system, or whether, mouthing the watch-words of a non-existent liberty, it towered up against him in the dictation of a brutal mob and wicked sect. No one can read the Burke of Liberty and the Burke of Authority without feeling that here was the same man pursuing the same ends, seeking the same ideals of society and Government, and defending them from assaults, now from one extreme, now from the other.\nThe historian Piers Brendon asserts that Burke laid the moral foundations for the British Empire, epitomised in the trial of Warren Hastings, that was ultimately to be its undoing. When Burke stated that \"[t]he British Empire must be governed on a plan of freedom, for it will be governed by no other\", this was \"an ideological bacillus that would prove fatal. This was Edmund Burke's paternalistic doctrine that colonial government was a trust. It was to be so exercised for the benefit of subject people that they would eventually attain their birthright\u2014freedom\". As a consequence of these opinions, Burke objected to the opium trade which he called a \"smuggling adventure\" and condemned \"the great Disgrace of the British character in India\". According to political scientist Jennifer Pitts, Burke \"was arguably the first political thinker to undertake a comprehensive critique of British imperial practice in the name of justice for those who suffered from its moral and political exclusions.\"\nA Royal Society of Arts blue plaque commemorates Burke at 37 Gerrard Street now in London's Chinatown.\nStatues of Burke are in Bristol, England, Trinity College Dublin and Washington, D.C. Burke is also the namesake of a private college preparatory school in Washington, Edmund Burke School.\nBurke Avenue, in The Bronx, New York, is named for him.\nCriticism.\nOne of Burke's largest and most developed critics was the American political theorist Leo Strauss. In his book \"Natural Right and History\", Strauss makes a series of points in which he somewhat harshly evaluates Burke's writings.\nOne of the topics that he first addresses is the fact that Burke creates a definitive separation between happiness and virtue and explains that \"Burke, therefore, seeks the foundation of government 'in a conformity to our duties' and not in 'imaginary rights of man\". Strauss views Burke as believing that government should focus solely on the duties that a man should have in society as opposed to trying to address any additional needs or desires. Government is simply a practicality to Burke and not necessarily meant to function as a tool to help individuals to live as well as possible. Strauss also argues that in a sense Burke's theory could be seen as opposing the very idea of forming such philosophies. Burke expresses the view that theory cannot adequately predict future occurrences and therefore men need to have instincts that cannot be practised or derived from ideology.\nThis leads to an overarching criticism that Strauss holds regarding Burke which is his rejection of the use of logic. Burke dismisses a widely held view amongst theorists that reason should be the primary tool in the forming of a constitution or contract. Burke instead believes that constitutions should be made based on natural processes as opposed to rational planning for the future. However, Strauss points out that criticising rationality actually works against Burke's original stance of returning to traditional ways because some amount of human reason is inherent and therefore is in part grounded in tradition. In regards to this formation of legitimate social order, Strauss does not necessarily support Burke's opinion\u2014that order cannot be established by individual wise people, but exclusively by a culmination of individuals with historical knowledge of past functions to use as a foundation. Strauss notes that Burke would oppose more newly formed republics due to this thought, although Lenzner adds the fact that he did seem to believe that America's constitution could be justified given the specific circumstances. On the other hand, France's constitution was much too radical as it relied too heavily on enlightened reasoning as opposed to traditional methods and values.\nReligious thought.\nBurke's religious writing comprises published works and commentary on the subject of religion. Burke's religious thought was grounded in the belief that religion is the foundation of civil society. He sharply criticised deism and atheism and emphasised Christianity as a vehicle of social progress. Born in Ireland to a Catholic mother and a Protestant father, Burke vigorously defended the Anglican Church, but he also demonstrated sensitivity to Catholic concerns. He linked the conservation of a state-established religion with the preservation of citizens' constitutional liberties and highlighted Christianity's benefit not only to the believer's soul, but also to political arrangements.\nFalse quotations.\n\"When good men do nothing\".\nThe statement that \"The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing\" is often attributed to Burke despite the debated origin of this quote. In 1770, it is known that Burke wrote in \"Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[W]hen bad men combine, the good must associate; else they will fall, one by one, an unpitied sacrifice in a contemptible struggle.\nIn 1867, John Stuart Mill made a similar statement in an inaugural address delivered before the University of St. Andrews:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn popular media.\nActor T. P. McKenna was cast as Edmund Burke in the TV series \"Longitude\" in 2000.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMain sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10033", "revid": "34452882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10033", "title": "Early music", "text": "Musical period\nEarly music generally comprises Medieval music (500\u20131400) and Renaissance music (1400\u20131600), but can also include Baroque music (1600\u20131750). Originating in Europe, early music is a broad musical era for the beginning of Western classical music.\nTerminology.\nInterpretations of historical scope of \"early music\" vary. The original Academy of Ancient Music formed in 1726 defined \"Ancient\" music as works written by composers who lived before the end of the 16th century. Johannes Brahms and his contemporaries would have understood Early music to range from the High Renaissance and Baroque, while some scholars consider that Early music should include the music of ancient Greece or Rome before 500 AD (a period that is generally covered by the term Ancient music). Music critic Michael Kennedy excludes Baroque, defining Early music as \"musical compositions from [the] earliest times up to and including music of [the] Renaissance period\".\nMusicologist Thomas Forrest Kelly considers that the essence of Early music is the revival of \"forgotten\" musical repertoire and that the term is intertwined with the rediscovery of old performance practice. According to the UK's National Centre for Early Music, the term \"early music\" refers to both a repertory (European music written between 1250 and 1750 embracing Medieval, Renaissance and the Baroque) \u2013 and a historically informed approach to the performance of that music. \nToday, the understanding of \"Early music\" has come to include \"any music for which a historically appropriate style of performance must be reconstructed on the basis of surviving scores, treatises, instruments and other contemporary evidence.\"\nRevival.\nIn the later 20th century there was a resurgence of interest in the performance of music from the Medieval and Renaissance eras, and a number of instrumental consorts and choral ensembles specialising in Early music repertoire were formed. Groups such as the Tallis Scholars, the Early Music Consort and the Taverner Consort and Players have been influential in bringing Early music to modern audiences through performances and popular recordings.\nPerformance practice.\nThe revival of interest in Early music has given rise to a scholarly approach to the performance of music. Through academic musicological research of music treatises, urtext editions of musical scores and other historical evidence, performers attempt to be faithful to the performance style of the musical era in which a work was originally conceived. Additionally, there has been a rise in the use of original or reproduction period instruments as part of the performance of Early music, such as the revival of the harpsichord or the viol.\nThe practice of \"historically informed performance\" is nevertheless dependent on stylistic inference. According to Margaret Bent, Renaissance notation is not as prescriptive as modern scoring, and there is much that was left to the performer's interpretation: \"Renaissance notation is under-prescriptive by our standards; when translated into modern form it acquires a prescriptive weight that overspecifies and distorts its original openness. Accidentals \u2026 may or may not have been notated, but what modern notation requires would then have been perfectly apparent without notation to a singer versed in counterpoint\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10035", "revid": "1148070936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10035", "title": "Elfenland", "text": "Elfenland is a German-style board game designed by Alan R. Moon and published by Amigo Spiele in German and Rio Grande Games in English in 1998. \"Elfenland\" won the Spiel des Jahres award in 1998. \nBackground.\nThe game was originally based on his earlier game \"Elfenroads\" (published by White Wind), but since \"Elfenroads\" took about four hours for a game, the play was simplified to reduce the time closer to an hour, making it appeal more as a family game.\nGameplay.\nThe game is played by 2\u20136 players, with 4\u20135 making for the best game. \nEach player tries to reach as many cities as possible and then return to his \"home city.\" \nHome cities are drawn at the beginning of the game from a pack of city cards and they remain hidden throughout the game.\nThe game is thus reminiscent of the traveling salesman problem.\nPlayers move using transportation cards. \nElves can travel on a wide variety of vehicles including troll wagons, elf cycles, rafts, giant pigs, unicorns, dragons and magic clouds. \nDifferent types of transportation will travel better over different terrain, and some methods of transport cannot cross certain terrains at all. \nThere is only one problem: you cannot travel over a route (except water) unless there is a tile on that road, and only the type of transport shown on the tile can be used to move along that road. Before anyone can move, tiles are drawn and laid out across the board. This part is the one that calls for the most strategy, as players try to line up their tiles to set up a nice route for themselves and a difficult one for their opponents at the same time.\nAs well as normal tiles, each player receives one trouble tile for use during the game.\nThese hinder other players by forcing them to use an extra transportation card at that point. \nAlso, any player can simply use any three cards to pass over any route that has a tile already there, allowing the type of transport shown on the tile to be ignored.\nThe game has subtle strategies to make others navigate through the cities. \nWhen a player puts a transportation type you don't want in your path then you have to find a way around it. \nAll of the aspects of the game make for a very exciting race to visit the most cities while never quite being sure who is winning until the last round.\nExpansion.\nThere was an expansion for \"Elfenland\" published, called \"Elfengold\".\nNote that this is different from the original \"Elfengold\" published by White Wind.\nReception.\nBernhard Fischer from \"Spieltest\" praised the game's mechanisms, and accessibility, but was mixed on the luck elements. It also won the 1998 Spiel des Jahres award, and placed third place in the 1998 Deutscher Spiele Preis award.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10037", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10037", "title": "Euroscepticism", "text": "Body of criticism of the European Union\nEuroscepticism, also spelled as Euroskepticism or EU-scepticism, is a political position involving criticism of the European Union (EU) and European integration. It ranges from those who oppose some EU institutions and policies, and seek reform (\"Eurorealism\", \"Eurocritical\", or \"soft Euroscepticism\"), to those who oppose EU membership and see the EU as unreformable (\"anti-European Unionism\", \"anti-EUism\", or \"hard Euroscepticism\"). The opposite of Euroscepticism is known as \"pro-Europeanism\", or \"European Unionism\".\nThe main drivers of Euroscepticism have been beliefs that integration undermines national sovereignty and the nation state, that the EU is elitist and lacks democratic legitimacy and transparency, that it is too bureaucratic and wasteful, that it encourages high levels of immigration, or perceptions that it is a neoliberal organisation serving the big business elite at the expense of the working class, that it is responsible for austerity, and drives privatization.\nEuroscepticism is found in groups across the political spectrum, both left-wing and right-wing, and is often found in populist parties. Although they criticise the EU for many of the same reasons, Eurosceptic left-wing populists focus more on economic issues, such as the European debt crisis and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, while Eurosceptic right-wing populists focus more on nationalism and immigration, such as the European migrant crisis. The rise in radical-right parties since the 2000s is strongly linked to a rise in Euroscepticism.\nEurobarometer surveys of EU citizens show that trust in the EU and its institutions declined strongly from 2007 to 2015. In that period, it was consistently below 50%. A 2009 survey showed that support for EU membership was lowest in the United Kingdom (UK), Latvia, and Hungary. By 2016, the countries viewing the EU most unfavourably were the UK, Greece, France, and Spain. The 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum resulted in a 51.9% vote in favour of leaving the EU (Brexit), a decision that came into effect on 31 January 2020.\nSince 2015, trust in the EU has risen in most EU countries as a result of falling unemployment rates and the end of the migrant crisis. A post-2019 election Eurobarometer survey showed that 68% of citizens support the EU, the highest level since 1983; however, sentiment that things are not going in the right direction in the EU had increased to 50%.\nTrust in the EU had increased significantly at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic with levels varying across member states.\nReasoning.\nThe main reasons for Euroscepticism include beliefs that:\nTerminology.\nThere can be considered to be several different types of Eurosceptic thought, which differ in the extent to which adherents reject integration between member states of the EU and in their reasons for doing so. Aleks Szczerbiak and Paul Taggart described two of these as hard and soft Euroscepticism. At the same time, some scholars have said that there is no clear line between the presumed hard and soft Euroscepticism. Cas Mudde and Petr Kopecky have said that if the demarcation line is the number of and which policies a party opposes, then the question arises of how many must a party oppose and which ones should a party oppose that makes them hard Eurosceptic instead of soft.\nHard Euroscepticism.\nAccording to Taggart and Szczerbiak, hard Euroscepticism or anti-EU-ism is \"a principled opposition to the EU and European integration and therefore can be seen in parties who think that their countries should withdraw from membership, or whose policies towards the EU are tantamount to being opposed to the whole project of European integration as it is currently conceived.\" The Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy group in the European Parliament (2014\u20132019) displayed hard Euroscepticism, but following the 2019 EU elections the group was disbanded due to too few members, as its largest member, the British Brexit Party, withdrew ahead of the United Kingdom's formal exit from the EU.\nSome hard Eurosceptics regard their position as pragmatic rather than in principle. Additionally, Tony Benn, a left-wing Labour Party MP who fought against European integration in 1975 by opposing membership of the European Communities in that year's referendum on the issue, emphasised his opposition to xenophobia and his support of democracy, saying: \"My view about the European Union has always been not that I am hostile to foreigners, but that I am in favour of democracy. ... I think they're building an empire there, they want us to be a part of their empire and I don't want that.\"\nThe Czech president V\u00e1clav Klaus rejected the term \"Euroscepticism\" for its purported negative undertones, saying at a meeting in April 2012 that the expressions for a Eurosceptic and their opponent should be \"a Euro-realist\" and someone who is \"Euro-na\u00efve\", respectively. Fran\u00e7ois Asselineau of the French Popular Republican Union has criticised the use of the term 'sceptic' to describe hard Eurosceptics, and would rather advocate the use of the term \"Euro opponent\". He believes the use of the term 'sceptic' for soft Eurosceptics to be correct, since other Eurosceptic parties in France are \"merely criticising\" the EU without taking into account the fact that the Treaty of Rome can only be modified with a unanimous agreement of all the EU member states, something he considers impossible to achieve.\nSoft Euroscepticism.\nSoft Euroscepticism reflects a support for the existence of, and membership of, a form of EU but with opposition to specific EU policies, or in Taggart's and Szczerbiak's words, \"where there is NOT a principled objection to European integration or EU membership but where concerns on one (or a number) of policy areas lead to the expression of qualified opposition to the EU, or where there is a sense that 'national interest' is currently at odds with the EU's trajectory.\"\nBoth the European Conservatives and Reformists group, dominated by the right-wing Polish party Law and Justice, and the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left, which is an alliance of the left-wing parties in the European Parliament, display soft Euroscepticism. The European Conservatives and Reformist Group does not itself use the descriptions Euroscepticism or soft Euroscepticism and instead describes its position as one of Eurorealism, a distinction described by Leruth as being one that is \"quite subtle but should not be ignored\" given the association of the term Euroscepticism with \"European disintegration\". Leruth describes Eurorealism as \"a pragmatic, anti-federalist, and flexible vision of European integration where the principle of subsidiarity prevails, aiming to reform the current institutional framework to extend the role of national parliaments in the decision-making process.\" Steven states that \"Eurorealism is a form of conservativism, first and foremost, rather than a form or Euroscepticism, even if it obviously very much also has the 'soft' Eurosceptic tendencies which are present in a number of ECR member parties.\"\nAnti-Europeanism.\nWhile having some overlaps, Euroscepticism and anti-Europeanism are different. Euroscepticism is criticism of the European Union (EU) and European integration. Anti-Europeanism is sentiment or policies in opposition to Europe. For example, American exceptionalism in the United States has long led to criticism of European domestic policy, such as the size of the welfare state in European countries, and foreign policy, such as European countries that did not support the US-led 2003 invasion of Iraq.\nOther terms.\nSome scholars consider the gradual difference in terminology between hard and soft Euroscepticism inadequate to accommodate the large differences in terms of political agenda; \"hard Euroscepticism\" has also been referred to as \"Europhobia\" as opposed to mere \"Euroscepticism\". Other alternative names for hard and soft Euroscepticism include \"withdrawalist\" and \"reformist\", respectively.\nEurobarometer surveys.\nA survey in November 2015[ [update]], conducted by TNS Opinion and Social on behalf of the European Commission, showed that, across the EU as a whole, those with a positive image of the EU were down from a high of 52% in 2007 to 37% in autumn 2015; this compares with 23% with a negative image of the EU, and 38% with a neutral image. About 43% of Europeans thought things were \"going in the wrong direction\" in the EU, compared with 23% who thought things were going \"in the right direction\" (11% \"don't know\"). About 32% of EU citizens tend to trust the EU as an institution, and about 55% do not tend to trust it (13% \"don't know\"). Distrust of the EU was highest in Greece (81%), Cyprus (72%), Austria (65%), France (65%), the United Kingdom (UK) and the Czech Republic (both 63%). Overall, more respondents distrusted their own government (66%) than they distrusted the EU (55%). Distrust of national government was highest in Greece (82%), Slovenia (80%), Portugal (79%), Cyprus (76%), and France (76%).\nA Eurobarometer survey carried out four days prior to and six days after the 2016 United States presidential election revealed that the surprise victory of Donald Trump caused an increase in the popularity of the EU in Europe. The increase was strongest among the political right and among respondents who perceived their country as economically struggling.\nA survey carried out in April 2018 for the European Parliament by Kantar Public consulting found that support for the EU was \"the highest score ever measured since 1983\". Support for the EU was up in 26 out of 28 EU countries, the exceptions being Germany and the UK, where support had dropped by about 2% since the previous survey. Almost half (48%) of the 27,601 EU citizens surveyed agreed that their voice counted in the EU, up from 37% in 2016, whereas 46% disagreed with this statement. Two-thirds (67%) of respondents felt that their country had benefited from EU membership and 60% said that being part of the bloc was a good thing, as opposed to 12% who felt the opposite. At the height of the EU's financial and economic crises in 2011, just 47% had been of the view that EU membership was a good thing. Support for EU membership was greatest in Malta (93%), Ireland (91%), Lithuania (90%), Poland (88%), Luxembourg (88%), Estonia (86%), and Denmark (84%), and lowest in Greece (57%), Bulgaria (57%), Cyprus (56%), Austria (54%), the United Kingdom (53%), and Italy (44%).\nWhen asked which issues should be a priority for the European Parliament, survey respondents picked terrorism as the most pressing topic of discussion, ahead of youth unemployment and immigration. Not all countries shared the same priorities. Immigration topped the list in Italy (66% of citizens surveyed considered it a priority issue), Malta (65%), and Hungary (62%) but fighting youth unemployment and support for economic growth were top concerns in Spain, Greece, Portugal, Cyprus, and Croatia. Social protection of citizens was the top concern for Dutch, Swedish, and Danish respondents.\nThe April 2019 Eurobarometer showed that despite the challenges of the past years, and in cases such as the ongoing debate surrounding Brexit, possibly even because of it, the European sense of togetherness had not weakened, with 68% of respondents across the EU27 believing that their countries have benefited from being part of the EU, a historically high level since 1983. On the other hand, more Europeans (27%) were uncertain and saw the EU as \"neither a good thing nor a bad thing\", an increase in 19 countries. Despite the overall positive attitude towards the EU but in line with the uncertainty expressed by a growing number of Europeans, the feeling that things were not going in the right direction in both the EU and in their own countries had increased to 50% on EU average since September 2018.\nHistory in the European Parliament.\n1999\u20132004.\nA study analysed voting records of the Fifth European Parliament and ranked groups, concluding: \"Towards the top of the figure are the more pro-European parties (PES, EPP-ED, and ALDE), whereas towards the bottom of the figure are the more anti-European parties (EUL/NGL, G/EFA, UEN and EDD).\"\n2004\u20132009.\nIn 2004, 37 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) from the UK, Poland, Denmark and Sweden founded a new European Parliament group called \"Independence and Democracy\" from the old Europe of Democracies and Diversities (EDD) group.\nThe main goal of the ID group was to reject the proposed Treaty establishing a constitution for Europe. Some delegations within the group, notably that from UKIP, also advocated the complete withdrawal of their country from the EU, while others only wished to limit further European integration.\n2009 elections.\nThe elections of 2009 saw a significant fall in support in some areas for Eurosceptic parties, with all such MEPs from Poland, Denmark and Sweden losing their seats. In the UK, the Eurosceptic UKIP achieved second place in the election, finishing ahead of the governing Labour Party, and the British National Party (BNP) won its first-ever two MEPs. Although new members joined the ID group from Greece and the Netherlands, it was unclear whether the group would reform in the new parliament.\nThe ID group did reform, as the Europe of Freedom and Democracy (EFD) and is represented by 32 MEPs from nine countries.\n2014 elections.\nThe elections of 2014 saw a big anti-establishment vote in favour of Eurosceptic parties, which took around a quarter of the seats available. Those that came first their national elections included: UKIP in the UK (the first time since 1906 that a party other than Labour or the Conservatives had won a national vote), the National Front in France, the People's Party in Denmark and Syriza in Greece. Second places were taken by Sinn F\u00e9in in Ireland and the Five Star Movement in Italy. Herman Van Rompuy, the President of the European Council, agreed following the election to re-evaluate the economic area's agenda and to launch consultations on future policy areas with the 28 member states.\n2019 elections.\nThe elections of 2019 saw the centre-left and centre-right parties suffer significant losses including losing their overall majority, while green, pro-EU liberal, and some Eurosceptic right wing parties saw significant gains. Those that came first in their national elections included: the Brexit Party in the UK (which was only launched on 12 April 2019 by former UKIP leader Nigel Farage), the National Rally of France (formerly the National Front party until June 2018), Fidesz in Hungary, Lega in Italy, and Law and Justice in Poland. There were also notable falls in support for the Danish People's Party (previously topped the 2014 European election). Whilst Vox got elected with 3 seats, Spain's first Eurosceptic party and Belgium's Vlaams Belang rallied to gain second place after its poor 2014 result.\nIn EU member states.\nAustria.\nThe Freedom Party of Austria (FP\u00d6), established in 1956, is a right-wing populist party that mainly attracts support from young people and workers. In 1989, it changed its stance over the EU to Euroscepticism. It opposed Austria joining the EU in 1994, and opposed the introduction of the euro in 1998. The party would like to leave the EU if it threatens to develop into a country, or if Turkey joins. The FP\u00d6 received 20\u201327% of the national vote in the 1990s, and more recently received 18% in 2008. Following the 2017 Austrian legislative election, it has 51/183 National Council seats, 16/62 Federal Council seats, and 4/19 European Parliament seats.\nThe B\u00fcndnis Zukunft \u00d6sterreich (BZ\u00d6), established in 2005, is a socially conservative party that has always held Eurosceptic elements. In 2011 the party openly supported leaving the eurozone, and in 2012 it announced that it supported a full withdrawal from the European Union. The party has also called upon a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. In polls it generally received around 10\u201315%, although in one state it did receive 45% of the vote in 2009. Since the 2017 election, it has 0/183 National Council seats, 0/62 Federal Council seats, and 0/19 European Parliament seats.\nTeam Stronach, established in 2012, has campaigned to reform the European Union, as well as to replace the euro with an Austrian Euro. In 2012, it regularly received 8\u201310% support in national polls. Politicians from many different parties (including the Social Democratic Party and the BZ\u00d6) as well as previous independents switched their allegiances to the new party upon creation. In two local elections in March 2013, it won 11% of the vote in Carinthia, and 10% of the vote in Lower Austria. It dissolved in 2017.\nEwald Stadler, a former member of FP\u00d6 (and later of BZ\u00d6) was very Eurosceptic, but in 2011 became a member of the European Parliament due to the Lisbon Treaty. Before Stadler accepted the seat, this led to heavy critics by J\u00f6rg Leichtfried (SP\u00d6) \"Stadler wants to just rescue his political career\" because Stadler before mentioned he would never accept a seat as MEP if this was only due to the Lisbon Treaty. On 23 December 2013 he founded a conservative and Eurosceptic party called The Reform Conservatives, although it has been inactive since June 2016.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election, the FP\u00d6 increased its vote to 19.7% (up 7.0%), gaining 2 new MEPs, making a total of 4; the party came third, behind the \u00d6VP and the SP\u00d6. EU-STOP (the electoral alliance of the EU Withdrawal Party and the Neutral Free Austria Federation) polled 2.8%, gaining no seats, and the Reform Conservatives 1.2%, with Team Stronach putting up no candidates.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the FP\u00d6 came 3rd with 17.2% of the vote which was only slightly down on 2014 despite a scandal allegedly promising public contracts to a woman posing as a Russian backer. This precipitated the collapse of the ruling coalition and a new election being called.\nBelgium.\nAccording to Eurostat, in the fall of 2018, 44% of Belgium people stated that they did not trust the European Union. The main Eurosceptic party in Belgium is Vlaams Belang which is active in the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium. In the 2014 European Parliament election, Belgium's Vlaams Belang lost over half of its previous vote share, polling 4.3% (down 5.5%) and losing 1 of its 2 members of the European Parliament. Despite the presence of Eurosceptic parties in Belgium, their weight is relatively low, as Belgium is predominantly Europeanist.\nIn 2019, Vlaams Belang stated in its program for the 2019 European Parliament election that it opposes the creation of a European state, would like to change the Economic and Monetary Union of the EU, and to end the Schengen Area, and refuses the accession of Turkey to the EU. More widely, the euro-sceptic arguments of the Vlaams Belang are based on four pillars:\nThe New Flemish Alliance (N-VA) is a soft Eurosceptic party in the Dutch-speaking region of Belgium. Before 2010, the N-VA was pro-European and supported the idea of a democratic European confederation, but has since altered this policy to a more sceptical stance on further European integration and now calls for more democratic transparency within the EU, changes to the EU's common asylum policy and economic reforms to the Eurozone. The N-VA has obtained 26.8% of the votes or 4 seats of the Dutch-language college out of 12 (21 MEPs for Belgium) in the 2014 European Parliament election. In April 2019, it stood in European Conservatives and Reformists of the European Parliament, and can be considered a moderate Eurosceptic party.\nIn the French-speaking part of Belgium (Walloons), there are four Eurosceptic parties. The first one is Nation Movement, a far-right party which was a member of the Alliance for Peace and Freedom in the European Parliament. The second one is National Front, also a far right party which criticizes the European bureaucracy, intends to guarantee and preserve national independence and freedom in a liberated Europe; it also reaffirms the Christian roots of Europe. The third one is the People's Party, classified as right or extreme right. In its program for the European election of 2019 the People's Party proposes to abolish the European Commission, reduce the number of European parliamentarians and fight against the worker-posted directive. For this party, the EU must be led by a president elected by universal suffrage with clear but limited competences. It also wants to renegotiate the European Union treaties, restrict the judicial activism of the European Court of Human Rights. It declares itself against the Global Compact for Migration. The last one is the . In early 2019, the party aims to reduce the powers of the European Commission, to abolish the Common Agricultural Policy, to abandon common defense projects, to simplify the exit procedure of the European Union, to reject federalism and to forbid the European Union to direct economic, fiscal or social policy, Finally, the Workers' Party of Belgium is an electoral and unitary party. It also intends to revise the European treaties considered too liberal. One of the Party's currencies is \"The left that stings, against the Europe of money\".\nBulgaria.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are NFSB, Attack, and VMRO \u2013 BND, which is a member of the Eurosceptic European Conservatives and Reformists).\nBulgaria's Minister of Finance, Simeon Djankov, stated in 2011 that ERM II membership to enter the Euro zone would be postponed until after the Eurozone crisis had stabilised.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election Bulgaria remained overwhelmingly pro-EU, with the Eurosceptic Attack party receiving 3% of the vote, down 9%, with the splinter group National Front for the Salvation of Bulgaria taking 3; neither party secured any MEPs. A coalition between VMRO \u2013 BND and Bulgaria Without Censorship secured an MEP position for Angel Dzhambazki from IMRO, who is a soft Eurosceptic.\nFollowers of Eurosceptic Attack tore down and trampled the European flag on 3 March 2016 at a meeting of the party in the Bulgarian capital Sofia, dedicated to the commemoration of the 138th anniversary of the liberation of Bulgaria from the Ottoman Empire.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Bulgaria remained overwhelmingly pro-EU with the ruling centre-right Gerb party winning with 31%, against 26% for the socialist BSP.\nSince the 2021\u20132023 Bulgarian political crisis, the far-right hard Eurosceptic party Revival has outplaced Attack, with it getting 14% on the most recent 2023 Bulgarian parliamentary election.\nCroatia.\nParties with Eurosceptic views are mainly small right-wing parties like Croatian Party of Rights, Croatian Party of Rights dr. Ante Star\u010devi\u0107, Croatian Pure Party of Rights, Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights, Croatian Christian Democratic Party and Only Croatia \u2013 Movement for Croatia.\nThe only parliamentary party that is vocally Eurosceptic is the Human Shield that won 5 out of 151 seats at the 2016 parliamentary election. Their position is generally considered to waver between hard and soft Euroscepticism; it requests thorough reform of the EU so that all member states would be perfectly equal.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Human Shield gained its first seat in the European Parliament with 6% of the vote putting it in 5th place.\nCyprus.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views in Cyprus are the Progressive Party of Working People and ELAM.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, there was little change politically \u2013 the conservatives won narrowly, the ruling DISY taking two seats with 29%, followed by socialist AKEL (27.5%, two seats) with no seats taken by Eurosceptic parties.\nCzechia.\nIn May 2010, the Czech president V\u00e1clav Klaus said that they \"needn't hurry to enter the Eurozone\".\nPetr Mach, an economist, a close associate of president V\u00e1clav Klaus and a member of the Civic Democratic Party between 1997 and 2007, founded the Free Citizens Party in 2009. The party aims to mainly attract dissatisfied Civic Democratic Party voters. At the time of the Lisbon Treaty ratification, they were actively campaigning against it, supported by the president Vaclav Klaus, who demanded opt-outs such as were granted to the United Kingdom and Poland, unlike the governing Civic Democratic Party, who endorsed it in the Chamber of Deputies. After the treaty has been ratified, Mach's party is in favour of withdrawing from the European Union completely. In the 2014 European Parliament election, the Free Citizens Party won one mandate and allied with UKIP in the Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy (EFD).\nThe 2017 Czech legislative election brought into Parliament one soft eurosceptic party, the centre-right Civic Democratic Party (ODS) (11%), and two hard eurosceptic parties, the far-right Freedom and Direct Democracy (SPD) (11%) and the left-wing to far-left Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia (KS\u010cM) (8%).\nAn April 2016 survey by the CVVM Institute indicated that 25% of Czechs were satisfied with EU membership, down from 32% the previous year.\nDividends worth CZK 270 billion were paid to the foreign owners of Czech companies in 2017, which has become a political issue in the Czech Republic.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Civic Democratic Party saw its vote share rise to 15% and its seats doubled from 2 to 4. The Freedom and Direct Democracy party took 2 seats with 9% of the vote. KS\u010cM dropped 2 seats leaving it with only one and a vote share of 7%\nDenmark.\nThe People's Movement against the EU only takes part in European Parliament elections and has one member in the European Parliament. The soft Eurosceptic June Movement, originally a split-off from the People's Movement against the EU, existed from 1992 to 2009.\nIn the Danish Parliament, the Red-Green Alliance previously advocated withdrawal from the EU, but in March 2019, the party announced it would no longer campaign for a referendum to leave the EU, pointing to Brexit illustrating the need for clarity before withdrawal can be considered. The Danish People's Party also advocates withdrawal, but says it supports some EU structures such as the internal market, and supported the EU-positive Liberal-Conservative coalition between 2001 and 2011 and again from 2015 to 2019.\nThe Socialist People's Party, minorities within the Social Liberal Party and Social Democratic Party, and some smaller parties were against accession to the European Union in 1972. Still in 1986, these parties advocated a no vote in the Single European Act referendum. Later, the Social Liberal Party changed to a strongly EU-positive party, and EU opposition within the Social Democratic Party faded. The Socialist People's Party were against the Amsterdam Treaty in 1998 and Denmark's joining the euro in 2000, but has become increasingly EU-positive, for example when MEP Margrete Auken left the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left and joined The Greens\u2013European Free Alliance in 2004.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election, the Danish People's Party came first by a large margin with 27% of the vote, gaining 2 extra seats for a total of 4 MEPs. The People's Movement against the EU polled 8%, retaining its single MEP.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Danish People's Party lost around two-thirds of their previous vote share dropping from 4 seats to just 1. The People's Movement against the EU lost their seat and the Red-Green Alliance got one seat.\nThe 2019 Danish general election saw the emergence of a new hard Eurosceptic party Nye Borgerlige which supports Denmark leaving the EU. The party won four seats in parliament.\nEstonia.\nThe Independence Party and Centre Party were against accession to the EU, but only the Independence Party still wants Estonia to withdraw from the EU. The Conservative People's Party (EKRE) also has some Eurosceptic policies and increased its vote share from 4% in 2014 to 13% in the 2019 European Elections winning one seat.\nFinland.\nThe largest Eurosceptic party in Finland is the Finns Party. In the European Parliament election, 2014, the Finns Party increased their vote share by 3% to 13%, adding a second MEP. With their 39 seats, the Finns Party are also the second-biggest party in the 200-seat Finnish Eduskunta.\nIn Eurobarometer 77 (fieldwork in Spring 2012), 41% of Finns trusted the European Union (EU-27 average: 31%), 51% trusted The European Parliament (EU-27average: 40%), and 74% were in favour of the euro currency (EU-27 average: 52%).\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Finns Party increased their vote share slightly from 13% to 14% and retained their 2 seats.\nIn its latest party platform written in 2019, the Finns Party is strongly opposed to further EU integration. The party proposes introducing a parallel currency within Finland in tandem with the Euro in order to phase out Finnish membership of the Eurozone and argues that while Finland is needed in the short-term in the European Parliament to defend Finland's interests, the country should also enact policies to help gradually withdraw Finland from the EU. During the 2018 Finnish presidential election, the Finns Party candidate Laura Huhtasaari stated that her campaign would support exiting the EU.\nFrance.\nIn France there are multiple parties that are Eurosceptic to different degrees, varying from advocating less EU intervention in national affairs, to advocating outright withdrawal from the EU and the Eurozone. These parties belong to all sides of the political spectrum, so the reasons for their Euroscepticism may differ. In the past many French people appeared to be uninterested in such matters, with only 40% of the French electorate voting in the 2009 European Parliament elections.\nRight-wing Eurosceptic parties include the Gaullist \"Debout la R\u00e9publique\", and \"Mouvement pour la France\", which was part of Libertas, a pan-European Eurosceptic party. In the 2009 European Parliament elections, Debout la R\u00e9publique received 1.8% of the national vote, and Libertas 4.8%. In a similar way to some moderate parties, the French right and far-right in general are naturally opposed to the EU, as they criticise France's loss of political and economic sovereignty to a supranational entity. Some of these hard Eurosceptic parties include the Popular Republican Union and formerly the Front National (FN). Popular Republican Union seek France's withdrawal from the EU and the euro as well as France's withdrawal from NATO. The FN received 33.9% of the votes in the 2017 French presidential election, making it the largest Eurosceptic party in France. In June 2018, the National Front was renamed as National Rally (RN) and in 2019 dropped support for France leaving the European Union and the Eurozone from its manifesto, instead calling for \"reform from within\" the union.\nEurosceptic parties on the left in France tend to criticise what they see as the neoliberal agenda of the EU, as well as the elements of its structure which are undemocratic and seen as top-down. These parties include the \"Parti de Gauche\" and the French Communist Party, which formed the \"Front de Gauche\" for the 2009 European Parliament elections and received 6.3% of the votes. The leader of the Left Front defends a complete reform of the Monetary Union, rather than the withdrawal of France from the Eurozone. Some of the major far-left Eurosceptic parties in France include the New Anticapitalist Party which received 4.8% and Lutte Ouvri\u00e8re which received 1.2%. The Citizen and Republican Movement, a left-wing Eurosceptic and souverainist party, have not participated in any elections for the European Parliament.\nThe party \"Chasse, P\u00eache, Nature &amp; Traditions\", is an agrarianist Eurosceptic party that says it is neither left nor right.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the National Front won the elections with 24.9% of the vote, a swing of 18.6%, winning 24 seats, up from 3 previously. The former French President Fran\u00e7ois Hollande had called for the EU to be reformed and for a scaling back of its power.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the renamed National Rally won the elections with 23.3% of the vote, winning 22 seats, down from 23 previously when their vote share was 24.9%.\nGermany.\nThe Alternative for Germany (AfD) is Germany's largest Eurosceptic party. It was elected into the German Parliament with 94 seats in September 2017. Initially the AfD was a soft Eurosceptic party, that considered itself pro-Europe and pro-EU, but opposed the euro, which it believed had undermined European integration, and called for reforms to the Eurozone.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the Alternative for Germany came 5th with 7% of the vote, winning 7 seats and is a member of the Eurosceptic European Conservatives and Reformists. The Alternative for Germany went on to take seats in three state legislatures in the Autumn of 2014.\nThe party became purely Eurosceptic in 2015, when an internal split occurred, leading to Frauke Petry's leadership and a more hard-line approach to the European Union, including its calling for an end for German Eurozone membership, withdrawal from EU common asylum policies and significantly reducing the power of the EU with some AfD members supporting a complete exit from the EU altogether.\nIn July 2015 an AfD splinter group created a new soft Eurosceptic party called Alliance for Progress and Renewal.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Alternative for Germany increased their vote share from 7% and 7 seats to 11% and 11 seats.\nIn the 2021 German Federal Election, AfD won 10.3% of the vote and 94 seats whereas in 2017, they received 12.6% of the vote and 83 seats; this meant they moved from third place to fifth place, falling behind the Green Party and FDP, both of which had been less popular than the AfD in 2017. Despite their overall electoral decline, the AfD still emerged as the largest in the states of Saxony and Thuringia, and saw a strong performance in eastern Germany.\nGreece.\nGolden Dawn, Communist Party of Greece (KKE), Greek Solution, ANEL, Course of Freedom, Popular Unity, and LAOS have been the main Eurosceptic parties in Greece. According to the London School of Economics, Greece used to be the second most Eurosceptic country in the European Union, with 50% of Greeks thinking that their country has not benefited at all from the EU (only behind the UK). Meanwhile, 33% of Greeks viewed Greek membership in EU as a good thing, marginally ahead of the UK. 81% of Greeks felt that the EU was going in the wrong direction. These figures represented a major increase in Euroscepticism in Greece since 2009.\nIn June 2012, the Eurosceptic parties in Greece that were represented in the parliament before the Election in January 2015 (ANEL, Golden Dawn, KKE) got 45.8% of the votes and 40.3% of the seats in the parliament. In the legislative election of January 2015 the pro-European (left and right-wing) parties (ND, PASOK, Potami, KIDISO, EK and Prasinoi-DIMAR) got 43.3% of the votes. The Eurosceptic parties got 54.6%. The Eurosceptic left (KKE, ANTARSYA-MARS and KKE (M\u2013L)/M\u2013L KKE) got 42.6% of the votes and the Eurosceptic right (Golden Dawn, ANEL and LAOS) got 12.1% of the votes, with Syriza ahead with 36.3%. The Eurosceptic parties got 194 seats in the new parliament and the pro-EU parties got 106 seats.\nAccording to the polls conducted in June and July 2015 (12 polls), the Eurosceptic left would get on average 48.0% (excluding extraparliamentary parties as ANTARSYA-MARS and KKE (m\u2013l)/ML-KKE), the parliamentary pro-EU parties (Potami, New Democracy and PASOK) would get 33.8%, the extra-parliamentary (not represented in the Hellenic Parliament) pro-EU parties (KIDISO and EK) would get 4.4% and the Eurosceptic right would get 10.2% (excluding extraparliamentary parties, such as LAOS, not displayed on recent opinion polls). The soft Eurosceptic parties would get 42.3%, the hard Eurosceptic parties (including KKE, ANEL and Golden Dawn) would get 15.9%, and the pro-EU parties (including extra-parliamentary parties displayed on opinion polls) would get 38.3% of the votes.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, Syriza won the election with 26.6% of the vote (a swing of 21.9%) taking 6 seats (up 5), with Golden Dawn coming 3rd taking 3 seats, the Communist Party taking 2 seats and the Independent Greeks gaining their first ever seat. Syriza's leader Tsipras said he's not anti-European and does not want to leave the euro. According to \"The Economist\", Tsipras is willing to negotiate with Greece's European partners, and it is believed a Syriza victory could encourage radical leftist parties across Europe. Alexis Tsipras vowed to reverse many of the austerity measures adopted by Greece since a series of bailouts began in 2010, at odds with the Eurogroup's positions.\nThe government coalition in Greece was composed by Syriza and ANEL (right-wing hard Eurosceptic party, led by Panos Kammenos, who is the current Minister of Defence).\nEuroscepticism has softened in Greece as the economy improved. According to a research in early 2018, 68% of Greeks judge as positive the participation of Greece in the EU (instead of 53.5% in 2017).\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the New Democracy movement, beat the ruling left-wing Syriza formation with 33.1% and 23.8% of the vote respectively, maintaining Syriza's 6 seats and prompting the Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras to call a legislative election on 7 July 2019. In this election, which was won by ND, the pro-European parties (ND, SYRIZA, KINAL, MeRA25, and the extra-parliamentary Union of Centrists and Recreate Greece) got 84.9% of the vote and the Eurosceptic parties (KKE, Greek Solution, the extraparliamentary Golden Dawn and a host of other small mainly left-wing parties) got 15.1%. That drastic change in the balance is mostly the result of SYRIZA abandoning Euroscepticism.\nHungary.\nViktor Orb\u00e1n is the soft Eurosceptic Prime Minister of Hungary for the national-conservative Fidesz Party. Another Eurosceptic party that was present in Hungary was Jobbik, which until around 2016, it was identified as a radical and far-right party. Those far-right factions, who left Jobbik, they decided to form the Our Homeland Movement party.\nIn Hungary 39% of the population have a positive image of the EU, 20% have a negative image, and 40% neutral (1% \"Don't know\").\nIn the 2014 Hungarian parliamentary election, Fidesz got 44.5% of the votes, Jobbik got 20.5% of the votes and the communist Hungarian Workers' Party got 0.6% of the votes. Thus at the time, Eurosceptic parties in Hungary obtained 65.7% of the votes, one of the highest figures in Europe.\nThe green-liberal Politics Can Be Different (Lehet M\u00e1s a Politika, LMP) classifies as a soft or reformist Eurosceptic party given its self-professed \"euro-critical\" stance. During the European parliamentary campaign of 2014 party Co-president Andr\u00e1s Schiffer described LMP as having a pronounced pro-integration position on environmental, wage and labour policy as supporting member state autonomy on the self-determination of local communities concerning land resources. So as to combat the differentiated integration of the multi-speed Europe which discriminates against Eastern and Southern member states, LMP would like to initiate an eco-social market economy within the union.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, Fidesz consolidated their position by increasing their vote share to 51.5% and adding a seat to take their tally to 13. Former Eurosceptic (now pro-European) Jobbik dropped to 6.3% of the votes, losing 2 of its 3 seats. The Momentum Movement, a newly created pro-European party, came 3rd with 9.3% of the vote, with the strongly pro-European Democratic Coalition coming second with 16.1% of the vote. Our Homeland Movement got to 3.3% of the votes, gaining no seats.\nIreland.\nEuroscepticism is a minority view in Ireland, with opinion polls from 2016 to 2018 indicating growing support for EU membership, moving from 70% to 92% in that time.\nThe Irish people initially voted against ratifying the Nice and Lisbon Treaties. Following renegotiations, second referendums on both were passed with approximately 2:1 majorities in both cases. Some commentators and smaller political groups questioned the validity of the Irish Government's decision to call second referendums.\nThe left-wing Irish republican party Sinn F\u00e9in expresses soft Eurosceptic positions on the current structure of the European Union and the direction in which it is moving.\nThe party expresses, \"support for Europe-wide measures that promote and enhance human rights, equality and the all-Ireland agenda\", but has a \"principled opposition\" to a European superstate. In its manifesto for the 2015 UK general election, Sinn F\u00e9in pledged that the party would campaign for the UK to stay within the EU. In the last European Parliament election in 2014, Sinn F\u00e9in won 3 seats coming second in seats and third in votes with 19.5% of the vote up 8.3%.\nThe Trotskyist organisation, the Socialist Party, supports Ireland leaving the EU and supported the Brexit result. It argues that the European Union is institutionally capitalist and neoliberal. The Socialist Party campaigned against the Lisbon and Nice Treaties and favours the foundation of an alternative Socialist European Union.\nItaly.\nThe Five Star Movement (M5S), an anti-establishment movement founded by comedian Beppe Grillo, originally set itself out as a Eurosceptic party. The M5S received 25.5% of vote in the 2013 general election, becoming the largest anti-establishment and Eurosceptic party in Europe. The party used to advocate a non-binding referendum on the withdrawal of Italy from the Eurozone (but not from the European Union) and the return to the lira. Since then, the party has toned down its eurosceptic rhetoric and such policy was rejected in 2018, and the M5S's leader has since stated that the \"European Union is the Five Star Movement's home\", clarifying that the party wants Italy to stay in the EU, even though it remains critical of some of its treaties. The M5S's popular support is distributed all across Italy: in the 2018 general election the party won 32.7% of the popular vote nationwide, and was particularly successful in central and southern Italy.\nA party that retains a Eurosceptic identity is the Northern League (LN), a regionalist movement led by Matteo Salvini favouring Italy's exit from the Eurozone and the re-introduction of the lira. When in government, Lega approved the Treaty of Lisbon. The party won 6.2% of the vote in the 2014 European Parliament elections, but two of its leading members are presidents of Lombardy and Veneto (where Lega gained 40.9% of the vote in 2015).\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election the Five Star Movement came second, with 17 seats and 21.2% of the vote after contesting EP seats for the first time. Northern League had five seats and The Other Europe with Tsipras had three seats.\nOther minor Eurosceptic organizations include right-wing political parties (e.g., Brothers of Italy, Tricolour Flame, New Force, National Front, CasaPound, National Movement for Sovereignty, the No Euro Movement), far-left political parties (e.g., the Communist Party of Marco Rizzo, the Italian Communist Party and the political movement Power to the People) and other political movements (e.g., the Sovereignist Front, MMT Italy). In addition, the European Union is criticized (especially for the austerity and the creation of the euro) by some left-wing thinkers, like the trade unionist Giorgio Cremaschi and the journalist Paolo Barnard, and some academics, such as the economists Alberto Bagnai and Vladimiro Giacch\u00e9, the philosopher Diego Fusaro and the mathematician Marino Badiale.\nAccording to the Standard Eurobarometer 87 conducted by the European Commission in spring 2017, 48% of Italians tend not to trust the European Union compared to 36% of Italians who do.\nIn the 2019 European election, the Italian Eurosceptic and souverainist right-wing, represented in large part by the League, increased its number of seats in the EP, but was not assigned any presidency in the committees of the European Parliament. Despite its national political alliance with the League during the Conte Cabinet, the Five Star Movement voted for Ursula von der Leyen, member of pro-EU Christian Democratic Union of Germany, as President of the European Commission.\nIn July 2020, senator Gianluigi Paragone formed Italexit, a new political party with a main goal to withdraw Italy from the European Union.\nLatvia.\nThe National Alliance (For Fatherland and Freedom/LNNK/All for Latvia!), Union of Greens and Farmers and For Latvia from the Heart are parties that are described by some political commentators as bearing soft Eurosceptic views. A small hard Eurosceptic party Eurosceptic Party of Action exists, but it has failed to gain any administrative seats throughout history of its existence.\nLithuania.\nThe Order and Justice party had mainly Eurosceptic views.\nLuxembourg.\nThe Alternative Democratic Reform Party is a soft Eurosceptic party. It is a member of the Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists.\nMalta.\nThe Labour Party was not in favour of Malta entering the European Union. It was in favour of a partnership with the EU. After a long battle, the Nationalist Party led by Eddie Fenech Adami won the referendum and the following election, making Malta one of the states to enter the European Union on 1 May 2004. The party is now pro-European. Nowadays the People's Party often adopts Eurosceptic views.\nNetherlands.\nHistorically, the Netherlands have been a very pro-European country, being one of the six founding members of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1952, and campaigning with much effort to include the United Kingdom into the Community in the 1970s and others after that. It has become slightly more Eurosceptic in the 2000s, rejecting the European Constitution in 2005 and complaining about the relatively high financial investment into the Union or the democratic deficit amongst other issues.\nA number of hard and soft eurosceptic parties have politicians elected to the Dutch House of Representatives and European Parliament which include:\nA prominent former Eurosceptic party in the Netherlands was the Pim Fortuyn List (LPF) established by politician and academic Pim Fortuyn in 2002. The party campaigned to reduce Dutch financial contributions to the EU, was against Turkish membership and opposed what it saw as the excessive bureaucracy and threat to national sovereignty posed by the EU. During the 2002 general election, the LPF polled in second place with 17% of the vote. Following the assassination of Fortuyn in the run-up to the election, support for the party declined soon after and it was disbanded in 2008 with many of is former supporters transferring to the Party for Freedom.\nDespite these concerns, in 2014 the majority of the Dutch electorate continued to support parties that favour ongoing European integration: the Social Democrats, the Christian Democrats, the Liberals, but most of all the (Liberal) Democrats.\nIn 2016, a substantial majority in a low-turnout referendum rejected the ratification of an EU trade and association treaty with Ukraine.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Eurosceptic parties had mixed results with Geert Wilders' Party for Freedom losing all 4 of its seats taking only 3.5% of the vote. The new Forum for Democracy established in late 2016 took 11.0% of the vote and entered the European Parliament with 3 seats.\nPoland.\nThe main parties with Eurosceptic views are Law and Justice (PiS), United Poland (SP) and the Confederation Liberty and Independence and the main Eurosceptic politicians include Ryszard Bender, Andrzej Grzesik, Krzysztof Bosak, Dariusz Grabowski, Janusz Korwin-Mikke, Marian Kowalski, Pawe\u0142 Kukiz, Zbigniew Ziobro, Anna Sobecka, Robert Winnicki, Artur Zawisza, and Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142tek.\nFormer president of Poland Lech Kaczy\u0144ski resisted giving his signature on behalf of Poland to the Treaty of Lisbon, objecting specifically to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Subsequently, Poland got an opt-out from this charter. As Polish President, Kaczy\u0144ski also opposed the Polish government's intentions to join the euro.\nIn 2015, it was reported that Euroscepticism was growing in Poland, which was thought to be due to the \"economic crisis, concern over perceived interference from Brussels and migration\". Polish president Andrzej Duda indicated that he wished for Poland to step back from further EU integration. He suggested that the country should \"hold a referendum on joining the euro, resist further integration and fight the EU's green policies\", despite getting the largest share of EU cash.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Law and Justice party won the largest number of seats, with a vote share increase up from 31.8% to 45.4%, increasing its seats from 19 to 27.\nIn 2019, the former MEP Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142tek created a political party called PolEXIT, whose flagship ideology is euroscepticism. Its candidate for president of Poland in the 2020 elections was the party's leader, \u017b\u00f3\u0142tek, who got 45 419 votes (0.23%), ranking 7th out of 11 candidates and did not qualify to the second round.\nPortugal.\nThe main Eurosceptic parties in Portugal are Chega, the Portuguese Communist Party (PCP), and Left Bloc (BE). Opinion polling in Portugal in 2015 indicated that 48 per cent tended not to trust the EU, while 79 per cent tended not to trust the Portuguese government (then led by Portugal Ahead). Eurosceptic political parties hold a combined total of 23 seats out of 230 in Portugal's parliament (BE 5, PCP 6, PNR 0, CHEGA 12) and a combined total of 4 out of Portugal's 21 seats in the European Parliament (PCP 2, BE 2, PNR 0, CHEGA 0).\nIn the last 2014 European Parliament election, the Portuguese Communist Party won three seats and the Left Bloc won one seat.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Left Bloc took 9.8% and gained 1 seat, Portuguese Communist Party working in coalition with Ecologist Party \"The Greens\" took 6.9% and 2 seats and National Renovator Party (PNR) polled just 0.5%, with no seats.\n2019 saw the emergence of a new Eurosceptic political party, Chega, who gained a seat in that year's legislative election. The party did not capture any seats in the 2019 European Parliament elections, but saw its leader Andr\u00e9 Ventura finish third in the 2021 presidential election, securing 11.9% of those voting.\nIn the 2022 Portuguese snap election, Chega got 7.2% of the vote and 12 out of the 230 seats in the Assembly of the Republic.\nRomania.\nSeveral parties espousing Eurosceptic views exist on the right, such as the New Republic, the Greater Romania Party and Noua Dreapt\u0103, but as of June 2020 none of these parties are represented in European Parliament. Euroscepticism is relatively unpopular in Romania, a 2015 survey found 65% of Romanians had a positive view of the country's EU membership.\nThe Eurosceptic parties remained unrepresented in the 2019 European Parliament election.\nThe soft Eurosceptic Alliance for the Union of Romanians, which was founded in September 2019, entered the Romanian parliament in 2020.\nSlovakia.\nParties with primarily Eurosceptic views represented in the National Council are the People's Party Our Slovakia, Republic, We Are Family. Prominent Slovak Eurosceptic politicians include Marian Kotleba, Milan Uhr\u00edk, Boris Koll\u00e1r, Andrej Danko.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, People's Party Our Slovakia came 3rd securing 12.1% and winning their first 2 seats in the European Parliament. We Are Family took just over 3% and no seats.\nSlovenia.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are Slovenian National Party and The Left. Neither won seats in the 2019 European Parliament election in Slovenia.\nSpain.\nThe process of Europeanization changed during the years in Spain. In 1986 Spain entered in the European Community. Since then, Spain has been one of the most Europeanist countries. Therefore, when Spain became part of the European Community, the country had a strong pro-Europeanist feeling, according to Eurobarometer, as it reflected a 60% of the population. In Spain different reasons explain its entrance to the European Community. On the one hand, democracy has just been established in Spain after Francisco Franco dictatorship. On the other hand, the main objectives of Spain were to achieve economic development, and also a social modernization. Spain was one of the few countries to vote Yes for the European Constitution in a referendum in February 2005, though by a lower margin in Catalonia and the Basque Country. In 2008, after the financial crisis reached Spain, the percentage of pro European persons started to fall. Thus, during the five years of the economic crisis, the Eurobarometer shows how the trust in the EU increasingly fell in Spain, and the confidence of the Spanish citizens in the European Union decreased for more than 50 points. Spain became one of the most Eurosceptic countries among all European Union Members, as it happened in pretty much European countries, where nationalist and eurosceptic characterised parties became stronger.\nThe historical two-parties system, composed by the conservative Partido Popular and the social-democratic Partido Socialista Obrero Espa\u00f1ol, collapsed. In the 2000s, the liberal Ciudadanos and leftist party Podemos became part of the political context, gaining electoral consensus, followed years later by ultranationalist party Vox. The new parties were the effect of the disaffection of most Spaniards towards politics and politicians, that increased for several reasons: firstly, corruption at all political levels, reaching the Royal Family too; secondly, recession intensified distrust of the population towards national government; thirdly, a phase of renovation of the autonomous regions which extended the distance between the National government and the Regional ones. Candidatura d'Unitat Popular, a left-wing to far-left political party with about 1,300 members advocates independence for Catalonia outside of the European Union. Up to 2014 European elections, there were no Spanish parties present in the Eurosceptic groups at the European Parliament. In the 2015 Spanish general election, Podemos became the first left-wing Eurosceptic political party to win seats in the Congress of Deputies, obtaining 69 seats, and in the 2019 Spanish general election, Vox became the first far-right Eurosceptic political party to win seats in the Congress of Deputies, obtaining 24 seats.\nSweden.\nThe Left Party of Sweden is against accession to the eurozone and previously wanted Sweden to leave the European Union until 2019.\nThe nationalist and right-wing populist party Sweden Democrats support closer political, economic and military cooperation with neighboring Nordic and certain Northern European countries, but strongly oppose further EU integration and further transfers of Swedish sovereignty to the EU as a whole. The party is also against Swedish accession to the eurozone, the creation of a combined EU military budget and want to renegotiate Swedish membership of the Schengen Agreement.\nThe June List, a Eurosceptic list consisting of members from both the political right and left won three seats in the 2004 Elections to the European Parliament and sat in the EU-critical IND/DEM group in the European Parliament. The movement Folkr\u00f6relsen Nej till EU favours a withdrawal from the EU.\nAround 75% of the Riksdag members represent parties that officially supports the Sweden membership.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the Sweden Democrats gained 2 seats with 9.7% of the vote, up 6.4%, and the Left Party took one seat with 6.3% of the vote.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Sweden Democrats increased from 2 to 3 seats with 15.3% of the vote, up from 9.7%, and the Left Party retained its one seat with 6.8% of the vote.\nIn winter 2019\u20132020, in connection with the request from \"poor\" member countries of much higher membership fees for \"rich\" member countries, for the reason of keeping support levels so \"poor\" countries wouldn't suffer from Brexit, where a \"rich\" country left the union in part due to high membership fees, a media and social media debate for a \"Swexit\" increased. This was still rejected by parties representing a majority of the parliament, with the COVID-19 pandemic quickly taking over the debate.\nIn other European countries.\nArmenia.\nProsperous Armenia represents the main Eurosceptic party in Armenia. Following the 2018 Armenian parliamentary election, the party gained 26 seats in the National Assembly, becoming the official opposition. Following the 2021 Armenian parliamentary election, the party lost all political representation and currently acts as an extra-parliamentary force. The party was a member of the Alliance of Conservatives and Reformists in Europe.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe Alliance of Independent Social Democrats is a Bosnian Serb political party in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Founded in 1996, it is the governing party in Bosnia and Herzegovina's entity called Republika Srpska, with its leader being Milorad Dodik.\nGeorgia.\nGeorgian March is the main Eurosceptic party in Georgia. The party supports a slight distancing of Georgia from the West, as well as rejecting the country's entrance into NATO.\nIn March 2022, Georgia submitted a formal application for membership of the EU.\nIceland.\nThe three main Eurosceptic parties in Iceland are the Independence Party, Left-Green Movement and the Progressive Party. The Independence Party and the Progressive Party won the parliamentary election in April 2013 and they have halted the current negotiations with the European Union regarding Icelandic membership and tabled a parliamentary resolution on 21 February 2014 to withdraw the application completely.\nIn 2017, Iceland's newly elected government announced that it would hold a vote in parliament on whether to hold a referendum on resuming EU membership negotiations. In November 2017 that government was replaced by a coalition of the Independence Party, the Left Green Movement and the Progressive Party; all of whom oppose membership. Only 11 out of 63 MPs are in favour of EU membership.\nMoldova.\nThe main Eurosceptic parties in Moldova are the left-wing Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova, which officially declared its main purpose to be the integration of Moldova in the Eurasian Economic Union, the \u0218or Party, and the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova, even if nowadays its leader speech became more soft on the issue of Euroscepticism. As of March 2022 all the parties are represented in Moldovan Parliament, with 37 MPs out of a total of 101 MPs.\nIn March 2022, Moldova submitted a formal application for membership of the EU.\nMontenegro.\nThe right-wing Democratic Front alliance are the main moderate eurosceptic subject in the Parliament of Montenegro, although its initially declaratively supported country's bid for accession to the European Union, all other parliamentary subjects officially advocates Montenegrin access to EU. The only parties that advocates Montenegro's rejecting the European integration are the extra-parliamentary right-wing populist to far-right parties, such as True Montenegro, Party of Serb Radicals, Democratic Party of Unity and the Serb List, all four are known for their close cooperation with the parliamentary Democratic Front.\nNorth Macedonia.\nSince having come into national opposition, and amid disagreements in the Macedonia naming dispute, the VMRO-DPMNE \u2013 which does not endorse the name of \"North Macedonia\", instead continuing to refer to \"Republic of Macedonia\" without qualifiers \u2013 no longer supports the country's candidacy for EU membership. It has subsequently declared its aspirations towards Russia.\nNorway.\nNorway has rejected EU membership in two referendums, 1972 and 1994. The Centre Party, Christian Democratic Party, Socialist Left Party and Liberal Party were against EU membership in both referendums. The Liberal Party was particularly divided on the issue, and a large pro-EEC minority split off from the party before the 1972 referendum. In 2020, the Liberal Party officially reversed its position and since then, supports Norwegian EU membership.\nAmong the established political parties of Norway, the Centre Party, Socialist Left Party, and Red Party are also against Norway's current membership of the European Economic Area. In addition, the libertarian Capitalist Party and Christian-conservative The Christians, both of whom have never held a seat in the Norwegian parliament, are also against Norway's membership in the EEA.\nRussia.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are the ruling United Russia, and opposition parties the Communist Party of the Russian Federation and Liberal Democratic Party of Russia.\nFollowing the 2014 Crimean crisis, the European Union issued sanctions on the Russian Federation in response to what it regards as the \"illegal\" annexation of Crimea and \"deliberate destabilisation\" of a neighbouring sovereign country. In response to this, Alexey Borodavkin \u2013 Russia's permanent representative with the UN \u2013 said \"The EU is committing a direct violation of human rights by its actions against Russia. The unilateral sanctions introduced against us are not only illegitimate according to international law, they also undermine Russian citizens' freedom of travel, freedom of development, freedom of work and others\". In the same year, Russian president Vladimir Putin said: \"What are the so-called European values? Maintaining the coup, the armed seizure of power and the suppression of dissent with the help of the armed forces?\"\nA February 2014 poll conducted by the Levada Center, Russia's largest independent polling organization, found that nearly 80% of Russian respondents had a \"good\" impression of the EU. This changed dramatically in 2014 with the Ukrainian crisis resulting in 70% taking a hostile view of the EU compared to 20% viewing it positively.\nA Levada poll released in August 2018 found that 68% of Russians polled believe that Russia needs to dramatically improve relations with Western countries. 42% of Russian respondents said they had a positive view of the EU, up from 28% in May 2018.\nSan Marino.\nA referendum was held in the landlocked microstate on 20 October 2013 in which the citizens were asked whether the country should submit an application to join the European Union. The proposal was rejected because of a low turnout, even though 50.3% of voters approved it. The \"Yes\" campaign was supported by the main left-wing parties (Socialist Party, United Left) and the Union for the Republic whereas the Sammarinese Christian Democratic Party suggested voting with a blank ballot, the Popular Alliance declared itself neutral, and We Sammarinese and the RETE movement supported the \"No\" campaign. The Citizens' Rights Directive, which defines the right of free movement for the European citizens, may have been an important reason for those voting no.\nSerbia.\nIn Serbia, political parties with eurosceptic views tend to be right-orientated. The most notable examples are the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS) which since its inception has opposed entering the European Union and the right-wing populist Dveri. Political parties such as the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) had pro-Western views and was initially supportive of the accession into the European Union but under the late 2000s leadership of Vojislav Ko\u0161tunica they turned eurosceptic, and the Enough is Enough (DJB) political party, initially a liberal centrist party that also supported the accession turned towards the right-wing eurosceptic position shortly after 2018.\nHistorically, the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) and the Yugoslav Left (JUL) were the only two left-leaning political parties that imposed eurosceptic and anti-Western views. The ruling coalition in Serbia, For Our Children, which is predominantly pro-European orientated is also composed of two minor eurosceptic parties, the right-wing Serbian People's Party that advocates closer ties to Russia, and the left-leaning Movement of Socialists which was formed as the eurosceptic split from SPS in the 2000s.\nOther minor political parties in Serbia that have eurosceptic views are Healthy Serbia, People's Freedom Movement, Russian Party, Love, Faith, Hope, Serbian Party Oathkeepers, Serbian Right and Leviathan Movement.\nSwitzerland.\nSwitzerland has long been known for its neutrality in international politics. Swiss voters rejected EEA membership in 1992, and EU membership in 2001. Despite the passing of several referendums calling for closer relations between Switzerland and the European Union such as the adoption of bilateral treaties and the joining of the Schengen Area, a second referendum of the joining of the EEA or the EU is not expected, and the general public remains opposed to joining.\nIn February 2014, the Swiss voters narrowly approved a referendum limiting the freedom of movement of EU citizens to Switzerland.\nEurosceptic political parties include the Swiss People's Party, which is the largest political party in Switzerland, with 29.4% of the popular vote as of the 2015 federal election. Smaller Eurosceptic parties include, but are not limited to, the Federal Democratic Union, the Ticino League, and the Geneva Citizens' Movement, all of which are considered right-wing parties.\nIn addition, the Campaign for an Independent and Neutral Switzerland is a political organisation in Switzerland that is strongly opposed to Swiss membership of or further integration otherwise with the European Union.\nRegionally, the German-speaking majority as well as the Italian-speaking areas are the most Eurosceptic, while French-speaking Switzerland tends to be more pro-European integration. In the 2001 referendum, the majority of French-speakers voted against EU membership. According to a 2016 survey conducted by M.I.S Trend and published in \"L'Hebdo\", 69 percent of the Swiss population supports systematic border controls, and 53 percent want restrictions on the EU accord of the free movements of peoples and 14 percent want it completely abolished. 54% of the Swiss population said that if necessary, they would ultimately keep the freedom of movement of people's accord.\nTurkey.\nThe two main Eurosceptic parties are the far-right ultranationalist, Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), which secured 11.1% of votes, and 49 seats in the Parliament at the last election, and the Felicity Party (Saadet Partisi), a far-right Sunni Islamist party, which has no seats in the Parliament, as it only secured 0.7% of the votes in the last election, far below the 10% threshold necessary to be represented in the Parliament.\nMany left-wing nationalist and far-left parties hold no seats at parliament but they control many activist and student movements in Turkey. The Patriotic Party (formerly called Workers' Party) consider the European Union as a front-runner of global imperialism.\nFounded on 26 August 2021 under the leadership of \u00dcmit \u00d6zda\u011f, Victory Party (Turkey) is a Turkish nationalist and anti-immigrant political party. It is represented by two deputies in the Turkish Grand National Assembly. \"The European Union does not want to negotiate with Turkey. We will not humiliate Turkey anymore.\" \u00d6zda\u011f said.\nUkraine.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are Opposition Platform \u2013 For Life, Opposition Bloc, Party of Shariy and Right Sector.\nThe far-right Ukrainian group Right Sector opposes joining the European Union. It regards the EU as an \"oppressor\" of European nations.\nIn the 2019 parliamentary election the Opposition Platform \u2013 For Life won 37 seats on the nationwide party list and 6 constituency seats.\nThe leader of the Party of Shariy Anatoly Shariy is one of the closest associates of Viktor Medvedchuk, whom Ukraine's special services suspect of financing terrorism.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEuroscepticism in the United Kingdom has been a significant element in British politics ever since the inception of the European Economic Community (EEC), the predecessor to the EU. The European Union strongly divides the British public, political parties, media and civil society.\nThe UK Independence Party has backed the idea of the UK unilaterally leaving the European Union (Brexit) since its foundation in 1993. During the 23 June 2016 referendum on the issue, whilst the Conservatives had no official position, although its leader David Cameron was in favour of remaining in the EU albeit after some renegotiation of the terms of membership, the party remained profoundly split, as it always had been. The Labour Party officially supported remaining in the EU, although party leader Jeremy Corbyn did suggest early on in the campaign that he would consider withdrawal, a position he had personally advocated from the far left for many years, in fact throughout his period as a Labour MP. The Liberal Democrats were the most adamantly pro-EU party, and since the referendum, pro-Europeanism has been their main policy.\nThe referendum resulted in an overall vote to leave the EU, as opposed to remaining an EU member, by 51.9% to 48.1%, on a turnout of 72.2%. The vote was split between the constituent countries of the United Kingdom, with a majority in England and Wales voting to leave, and a majority in Scotland and Northern Ireland, as well as Gibraltar (a British Overseas Territory), voting to remain. As a result of the referendum, the UK Government notified the EU of its intention to withdraw on 29 March 2017 by invoking Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty.\nOn 12 April 2019, a new Eurosceptic party, the Brexit Party was officially launched by former UK Independence Party Leader Nigel Farage.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Brexit Party topped the national poll by a large margin with 31.7% gaining 29 seats by running on a single policy of leaving the EU, versus the second-placed Liberal Democrats with 18.5% and 16 seats who promoted themselves as the party of Remain (the total vote for Remain-supporting parties was approximately the same as that for parties supporting a 'no-deal' Brexit). The Conservative Party suffered their lowest ever national vote share of 9.1% with just 4 seats following 3 years of Theresa May's unsuccessful Brexit negotiations. The Labour Party's ambiguous position on Brexit led to their vote share dropping significantly to 14.1% resulting in the loss of half their seats, down from 20 to 10. The rapid growth of the Brexit Party was a contributing factor to Theresa May announcing on 24 May that she would step down as Prime Minister on 7 June 2019. After the elections, the Eurosceptic Blue Collar Conservative caucus of Conservative MPs was formed.\nHistorically, the Conservative Party has expressed divided sentiments on the issue of EU membership, with the official stance changing with party leadership and individual MPs within the party variously favouring total withdrawal and remaining in the EU, while others adopted a position of soft Euroscepticism being supportive of membership but opposed to joining the eurozone and pursuing further integration. Until the 1980s, the Conservative Party was somewhat more pro-EU than the Labour Party: for example, in the 1971 House of Commons vote on whether the UK should join the European Economic Community, only 39 of the then 330 Conservative MPs were opposed to membership. When Margaret Thatcher came into power in 1979, the Conservative parties view on the EU saw a big shift from supporting the EU to becoming skeptical, thus campaigning against increasing its powers. Thatcher was seen as the \"spiritual mother\" of Euroscepticism and was one of the most important Eurosceptic voices in the United Kingdom, ultimately changing the Conservative parties view on the EU throughout the 1980s. In 2009 the Conservative Party actively campaigned against the Lisbon Treaty, which it believes would give away too much sovereignty to Brussels. Shadow Foreign Secretary William Hague stated that, should the treaty be in force by the time of an incoming Conservative government, he would \"not let matters rest there\". Following the election of Boris Johnson as leader in 2019, the Conservative Party became a strong supporter of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union and its platform was changed to unanimously support EU withdrawal. In the 2019 general election the Conservative Party adopted a clear pro-Brexit platform in its manifesto.\nAlthough often associated with being a cause on the right in the twenty-first century with the contemporary Labour Party supporting EU membership, there have been notable Eurosceptic politicians on the left of British politics, such as former Labour cabinet minister Tony Benn who held a longstanding opposition to British membership of the EU throughout his career. Other Labour MPs who have supported eurosceptic sentiments and British withdrawal have included Kate Hoey, Frank Field, Graham Stringer, Ian Austin, Tom Harris, Gisela Stuart and Austin Mitchell. Other figures on the left have included George Galloway and socialist politician and trade unionist Arthur Scargill who both endorsed Britain's exit from the European Union.\nOn 23 January 2020, the Parliament of the United Kingdom ratified a withdrawal agreement from the European Union, which was ratified by the EU Parliament on 30 January. On 31 January, the United Kingdom officially left the European Union after 47 years. During a transition period until 31 December 2020, the UK still followed EU rules and continued free trade and free movement for people within the European Union.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10039", "revid": "6369861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10039", "title": "Ermland", "text": ""}
{"id": "10041", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10041", "title": "European Article Numbering", "text": ""}
{"id": "10042", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10042", "title": "EAN", "text": ""}
{"id": "10043", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10043", "title": "Estimator", "text": "Rule for calculating an estimate of a given quantity based on observed data\nIn statistics, an estimator is a rule for calculating an estimate of a given quantity based on observed data: thus the rule (the estimator), the quantity of interest (the estimand) and its result (the estimate) are distinguished. For example, the sample mean is a commonly used estimator of the population mean.\nThere are point and interval estimators. The point estimators yield single-valued results. This is in contrast to an interval estimator, where the result would be a range of plausible values. \"Single value\" does not necessarily mean \"single number\", but includes vector valued or function valued estimators.\n\"Estimation theory\" is concerned with the properties of estimators; that is, with defining properties that can be used to compare different estimators (different rules for creating estimates) for the same quantity, based on the same data. Such properties can be used to determine the best rules to use under given circumstances. However, in robust statistics, statistical theory goes on to consider the balance between having good properties, if tightly defined assumptions hold, and having less good properties that hold under wider conditions.\nBackground.\nAn \"estimator\" or \"point estimate\" is a statistic (that is, a function of the data) that is used to infer the value of an unknown parameter in a statistical model. A common way of phrasing it is \"the estimator is the method selected to obtain an estimate of an unknown parameter\". \nThe parameter being estimated is sometimes called the \"estimand\". It can be either finite-dimensional (in parametric and semi-parametric models), or infinite-dimensional (semi-parametric and non-parametric models). If the parameter is denoted formula_1 then the estimator is traditionally written by adding a circumflex over the symbol: formula_2. Being a function of the data, the estimator is itself a random variable; a particular realization of this random variable is called the \"estimate\". Sometimes the words \"estimator\" and \"estimate\" are used interchangeably.\nThe definition places virtually no restrictions on which functions of the data can be called the \"estimators\". The attractiveness of different estimators can be judged by looking at their properties, such as unbiasedness, mean square error, consistency, asymptotic distribution, etc. The construction and comparison of estimators are the subjects of the estimation theory. In the context of decision theory, an estimator is a type of decision rule, and its performance may be evaluated through the use of loss functions.\nWhen the word \"estimator\" is used without a qualifier, it usually refers to point estimation. The estimate in this case is a single point in the parameter space. There also exists another type of estimator: interval estimators, where the estimates are subsets of the parameter space.\nThe problem of density estimation arises in two applications. Firstly, in estimating the probability density functions of random variables and secondly in estimating the spectral density function of a time series. In these problems the estimates are functions that can be thought of as point estimates in an infinite dimensional space, and there are corresponding interval estimation problems.\nDefinition.\nSuppose a fixed \"parameter\" formula_3 needs to be estimated. Then an \"estimator\" is a function that maps the sample space to a set of \"sample estimates\". An estimator of formula_3 is usually denoted by the symbol formula_2. It is often convenient to express the theory using the algebra of random variables: thus if \"X\" is used to denote a random variable corresponding to the observed data, the estimator (itself treated as a random variable) is symbolised as a function of that random variable, formula_6. The estimate for a particular observed data value formula_7 (i.e. for formula_8) is then formula_9, which is a fixed value. Often an abbreviated notation is used in which formula_2 is interpreted directly as a random variable, but this can cause confusion.\nQuantified properties.\nThe following definitions and attributes are relevant.\nError.\nFor a given sample formula_11, the \"error\" of the estimator formula_2 is defined as\nformula_13\nwhere formula_14 is the parameter being estimated. The error, \"e\", depends not only on the estimator (the estimation formula or procedure), but also on the sample.\nMean squared error.\nThe mean squared error of formula_2 is defined as the expected value (probability-weighted average, over all samples) of the squared errors; that is,\nformula_16\nIt is used to indicate how far, on average, the collection of estimates are from the single parameter being estimated. Consider the following analogy. Suppose the parameter is the bull's-eye of a target, the estimator is the process of shooting arrows at the target, and the individual arrows are estimates (samples). Then high MSE means the average distance of the arrows from the bull's eye is high, and low MSE means the average distance from the bull's eye is low. The arrows may or may not be clustered. For example, even if all arrows hit the same point, yet grossly miss the target, the MSE is still relatively large. However, if the MSE is relatively low then the arrows are likely more highly clustered (than highly dispersed) around the target.\nSampling deviation.\nFor a given sample formula_11, the \"sampling deviation\" of the estimator formula_2 is defined as\nformula_19\nwhere formula_20 is the expected value of the estimator. The sampling deviation, \"d\", depends not only on the estimator, but also on the sample.\nVariance.\nThe variance of formula_2 is the expected value of the squared sampling deviations; that is, formula_22. It is used to indicate how far, on average, the collection of estimates are from the \"expected value\" of the estimates. (Note the difference between MSE and variance.) If the parameter is the bull's-eye of a target, and the arrows are estimates, then a relatively high variance means the arrows are dispersed, and a relatively low variance means the arrows are clustered. Even if the variance is low, the cluster of arrows may still be far off-target, and even if the variance is high, the diffuse collection of arrows may still be unbiased. Finally, even if all arrows grossly miss the target, if they nevertheless all hit the same point, the variance is zero.\nBias.\nThe bias of formula_2 is defined as formula_24. It is the distance between the average of the collection of estimates, and the single parameter being estimated. The bias of formula_2 is a function of the true value of formula_3 so saying that the bias of formula_2 is formula_28 means that for every formula_3 the bias of formula_2 is formula_28. \nThere are two kinds of estimators: biased estimators and unbiased estimators. Whether an estimator is biased or not can be identified by the relationship between formula_32 and 0:\nThe bias is also the expected value of the error, since formula_37. If the parameter is the bull's eye of a target and the arrows are estimates, then a relatively high absolute value for the bias means the average position of the arrows is off-target, and a relatively low absolute bias means the average position of the arrows is on target. They may be dispersed, or may be clustered. The relationship between bias and variance is analogous to the relationship between accuracy and precision.\nThe estimator formula_2 is an unbiased estimator of formula_3 if and only if formula_40. Bias is a property of the estimator, not of the estimate. Often, people refer to a \"biased estimate\" or an \"unbiased estimate\", but they really are talking about an \"estimate from a biased estimator\", or an \"estimate from an unbiased estimator\". Also, people often confuse the \"error\" of a single estimate with the \"bias\" of an estimator. That the error for one estimate is large, does not mean the estimator is biased. In fact, even if all estimates have astronomical absolute values for their errors, if the expected value of the error is zero, the estimator is unbiased. Also, an estimator's being biased does not preclude the error of an estimate from being zero in a particular instance. The ideal situation is to have an unbiased estimator with low variance, and also try to limit the number of samples where the error is extreme (that is, have few outliers). Yet unbiasedness is not essential. Often, if just a little bias is permitted, then an estimator can be found with lower mean squared error and/or fewer outlier sample estimates.\nAn alternative to the version of \"unbiased\" above, is \"median-unbiased\", where the median of the distribution of estimates agrees with the true value; thus, in the long run half the estimates will be too low and half too high. While this applies immediately only to scalar-valued estimators, it can be extended to any measure of central tendency of a distribution: see median-unbiased estimators.\nIn a practical problem, formula_2 can always have functional relationship with formula_3. For example, A genetic theory states there is a type of leave, starchy green, occur with probability formula_43, with formula_44.\nFor formula_45 leaves, the random variable formula_46, the number of starchy green leaves, can be modeled with a formula_47 distribution. The number can be used to express the following estimator for formula_3: formula_49. One can show that formula_2 is an unbiased estimator for formula_3:\nformula_52\nformula_53\nformula_54\nformula_55\nformula_56\nformula_57\nformula_58.\nBehavioral properties.\nConsistency.\nA consistent sequence of estimators is a sequence of estimators that converge in probability to the quantity being estimated as the index (usually the sample size) grows without bound. In other words, increasing the sample size increases the probability of the estimator being close to the population parameter.\nMathematically, a sequence of estimators {\"tn\"; \"n\" \u2265 0} is a consistent estimator for parameter \"\u03b8\" if and only if, for all \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0, no matter how small, we have\nformula_65.\nThe consistency defined above may be called weak consistency. The sequence is \"strongly consistent\", if it converges almost surely to the true value.\nAn estimator that converges to a \"multiple\" of a parameter can be made into a consistent estimator by multiplying the estimator by a scale factor, namely the true value divided by the asymptotic value of the estimator. This occurs frequently in estimation of scale parameters by measures of statistical dispersion.\nAsymptotic normality.\nAn asymptotically normal estimator is a consistent estimator whose distribution around the true parameter \"\u03b8\" approaches a normal distribution with standard deviation shrinking in proportion to formula_66 as the sample size \"n\" grows. Using formula_67 to denote convergence in distribution, \"tn\" is asymptotically normal if\nformula_68\nfor some \"V\".\nIn this formulation \"V/n\" can be called the \"asymptotic variance\" of the estimator. However, some authors also call \"V\" the \"asymptotic variance\".\nNote that convergence will not necessarily have occurred for any finite \"n\", therefore this value is only an approximation to the true variance of the estimator, while in the limit the asymptotic variance (V/n) is simply zero. To be more specific, the distribution of the estimator \"tn\" converges weakly to a dirac delta function centered at formula_3.\nThe central limit theorem implies asymptotic normality of the sample mean formula_70 as an estimator of the true mean.\nMore generally, maximum likelihood estimators are asymptotically normal under fairly weak regularity conditions \u2014 see the asymptotics section of the maximum likelihood article. However, not all estimators are asymptotically normal; the simplest examples are found when the true value of a parameter lies on the boundary of the allowable parameter region.\nEfficiency.\nThe efficiency of an estimator is used to estimate the quantity of interest in a \"minimum error\" manner. In reality, there is not an explicit best estimator; there can only be a better estimator. The good or not of the efficiency of an estimator is based on the choice of a particular loss function, and it is reflected by two naturally desirable properties of estimators: to be unbiased formula_35 and have minimal mean squared error (MSE) formula_72. These cannot in general both be satisfied simultaneously: an unbiased estimator may have a lower mean squared error than any biased estimator (see estimator bias).\nA function relates the mean squared error with the estimator bias. \nformula_73 \nThe first term represents the mean squared error; the second term represents the square of the estimator bias; and the third term represents the variance of the sample. The quality of the estimator can be identified from the comparison between the variance, the square of the estimator bias, or the MSE. The variance of the good estimator (good efficiency) would be smaller than the variance of the bad estimator (bad efficiency). The square of a estimator bias with a good estimator would be smaller than the estimator bias with a bad estimator. The MSE of a good estimator would be smaller than the MSE of the bad estimator. Suppose there are two estimator, formula_74 is the good estimator and formula_75 is the bad estimator. The above relationship can be expressed by the following formulas.\nformula_76\nformula_77\nformula_78\nBesides using formula to identify the efficiency of the estimator, it can also be identified through the graph. If an estimator is efficient, in the frequency vs. value graph, there will be a curve with high frequency at the center and low frequency on the two sides. For example:\nIf an estimator is not efficient, the frequency vs. value graph, there will be a relatively more gentle curve.\nTo put it simply, the good estimator has a narrow curve, while the bad estimator has a large curve. Plotting these two curves on one graph with a shared y-axis, the difference becomes more obvious.\nAmong unbiased estimators, there often exists one with the lowest variance, called the minimum variance unbiased estimator (MVUE). In some cases an unbiased efficient estimator exists, which, in addition to having the lowest variance among unbiased estimators, satisfies the Cram\u00e9r\u2013Rao bound, which is an absolute lower bound on variance for statistics of a variable.\nConcerning such \"best unbiased estimators\", see also Cram\u00e9r\u2013Rao bound, Gauss\u2013Markov theorem, Lehmann\u2013Scheff\u00e9 theorem, Rao\u2013Blackwell theorem.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10045", "revid": "45137862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10045", "title": "Emerald", "text": "Green gemstone, a beryl variety\nEmerald is a gemstone and a variety of the mineral beryl (Be3Al2(SiO3)6) colored green by trace amounts of chromium or sometimes vanadium. Beryl has a hardness of 7.5\u20138 on the Mohs scale. Most emeralds have lots of material trapped inside during the gem's formation, so their toughness (resistance to breakage) is classified as generally poor. Emerald is a cyclosilicate.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"emerald\" is derived (via and ), from Vulgar Latin: \"esmaralda\"/\"esmaraldus\", a variant of Latin \"smaragdus\", which was via (sm\u00e1ragdos; \"green gem\") from a Semitic language. According to \"Webster's Dictionary\" the term emerald was first used in the 14th century.\nProperties determining value.\nEmeralds, like all colored gemstones, are graded using four basic parameters known as \"the four \"C\"s\": \"color\", \"clarity,\" \"cut\" and \"carat weight\". Normally, in the grading of colored gemstones, color is by far the most important criterion. However, in the grading of emeralds, clarity is considered a close second. A fine emerald must possess not only a pure verdant green hue as described below, but also a high degree of transparency to be considered a top gemstone.\nThis member of the beryl family ranks among the traditional \"big four\" gems along with diamonds, rubies and sapphires.\nIn the 1960s, the American jewelry industry changed the definition of \"emerald\" to include the green vanadium-bearing beryl. As a result, \"vanadium emeralds\" purchased as emeralds in the United States are not recognized as such in the United Kingdom and Europe. In America, the distinction between traditional emeralds and the new vanadium kind is often reflected in the use of terms such as \"Colombian emerald\".\nColor.\nIn gemology, color is divided into three components: \"hue\", \"saturation\", and \"tone\". Emeralds occur in hues ranging from yellow-green to blue-green, with the primary hue necessarily being green. Yellow and blue are the normal secondary hues found in emeralds. Only gems that are medium to dark in tone are considered emeralds; light-toned gems are known instead by the species name \"green beryl\". The finest emeralds are approximately 75% tone on a scale where 0% tone is colorless and 100% is opaque black. In addition, a fine emerald will be saturated and have a hue that is bright (vivid). Gray is the normal saturation modifier or mask found in emeralds; a grayish-green hue is a dull-green hue.\nClarity.\nEmeralds tend to have numerous inclusions and surface-breaking fissures. Unlike diamonds, where the loupe standard, i.e. 10\u00d7 magnification, is used to grade clarity, emeralds are graded by eye. Thus, if an emerald has no visible inclusions to the eye (assuming normal visual acuity) it is considered flawless. Stones that lack surface breaking fissures are extremely rare and therefore almost all emeralds are treated (\"oiled\", see below) to enhance the apparent clarity. The inclusions and fissures within an emerald are sometimes described as \"jardin\" (French for \"garden\"), because of their mossy appearance. Imperfections are unique for each emerald and can be used to identify a particular stone. Eye-clean stones of a vivid primary green hue (as described above), with no more than 15% of any secondary hue or combination (either blue or yellow) of a medium-dark tone, command the highest prices. The relative non-uniformity motivates the cutting of emeralds in cabochon form, rather than faceted shapes. Faceted emeralds are most commonly given an oval cut, or the signature emerald cut, a rectangular cut with facets around the top edge.\nTreatments.\nMost emeralds are oiled as part of the post-lapidary process, in order to fill in surface-reaching cracks so that clarity and stability are improved. Cedar oil, having a similar refractive index, is often used in this widely adopted practice. Other liquids, including synthetic oils and polymers with refractive indexes close to that of emeralds, such as \"Opticon\", are also used. The least expensive emeralds are often treated with epoxy resins, which are effective for filling stones with many fractures. These treatments are typically applied in a vacuum chamber under mild heat, to open the pores of the stone and allow the fracture-filling agent to be absorbed more effectively. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission requires the disclosure of this treatment when an oil-treated emerald is sold. The use of oil is traditional and largely accepted by the gem trade, although oil-treated emeralds are worth much less than untreated emeralds of similar quality. Untreated emeralds must also be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed, independent gemology laboratory. Other treatments, for example the use of green-tinted oil, are not acceptable in the trade. Gems are graded on a four-step scale; \"none\", \"minor\", \"moderate\" and \"highly\" enhanced. These categories reflect levels of enhancement, not \"clarity\". A gem graded \"none\" on the enhancement scale may still exhibit visible inclusions. Laboratories apply these criteria differently. Some gemologists consider the mere presence of oil or polymers to constitute enhancement. Others may ignore traces of oil if the presence of the material does not improve the look of the gemstone.\nEmerald mines.\nEmeralds in antiquity were mined in Ancient Egypt at locations on Mount Smaragdus since 1500 BC, and India and Austria since at least the 14th century AD. The Egyptian mines were exploited on an industrial scale by the Roman and Byzantine Empires, and later by Islamic conquerors. Mining in Egypt ceased with the discovery of the Colombian deposits. Today, only ruins remain.\nColombia is by far the world's largest producer of emeralds, constituting 50\u201395% of the world production, with the number depending on the year, source and grade. Emerald production in Colombia has increased drastically in the last decade, increasing by 78% from 2000 to 2010. The three main emerald mining areas in Colombia are Muzo, Coscuez, and Chivor. Rare \"trapiche\" emeralds are found in Colombia, distinguished by ray-like spokes of dark impurities.\nZambia is the world's second biggest producer, with its Kafubu River area deposits (Kagem Mines) about southwest of Kitwe responsible for 20% of the world's production of gem-quality stones in 2004. In the first half of 2011, the Kagem Mines produced 3.74 tons of emeralds.\nEmeralds are found all over the world in countries such as Afghanistan, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, India, Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Russia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Tanzania, the United States, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. In the US, emeralds have been found in Connecticut, Montana, Nevada, North Carolina, and South Carolina. In 1998, emeralds were discovered in the Yukon Territory of Canada.\nOrigin determinations.\nSince the onset of concerns regarding diamond origins, research has been conducted to determine if the mining location could be determined for an emerald already in circulation. Traditional research used qualitative guidelines such as an emerald's color, style and quality of cutting, type of fracture filling, and the anthropological origins of the artifacts bearing the mineral to determine the emerald's mine location. More recent studies using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy methods have uncovered trace chemical element differences between emeralds, including ones mined in close proximity to one another. American gemologist David Cronin and his colleagues have extensively examined the chemical signatures of emeralds resulting from fluid dynamics and subtle precipitation mechanisms, and their research demonstrated the chemical homogeneity of emeralds from the same mining location and the statistical differences that exist between emeralds from different mining locations, including those between the three locations: Muzo, Coscuez, and Chivor, in Colombia, South America.\nSynthetic emerald.\nBoth hydrothermal and \"flux-growth\" synthetics have been produced, and a method has been developed for producing an emerald overgrowth on colorless beryl. The first commercially successful emerald synthesis process was that of Carroll Chatham, likely involving a lithium vanadate flux process, as Chatham's emeralds do not have any water and contain traces of vanadate, molybdenum and vanadium. The other large producer of flux emeralds was Pierre Gilson Sr., whose products have been on the market since 1964. Gilson's emeralds are usually grown on natural colorless beryl seeds, which are coated on both sides. Growth occurs at the rate of 1\u00a0mm per month, a typical seven-month growth run produces emerald crystals 7\u00a0mm thick.\nHydrothermal synthetic emeralds have been attributed to IG Farben, Nacken, Tairus, and others, but the first satisfactory commercial product was that of Johann Lechleitner of Innsbruck, Austria, which appeared on the market in the 1960s. These stones were initially sold under the names \"Emerita\" and \"Symeralds\", and they were grown as a thin layer of emerald on top of natural colorless beryl stones. Later, from 1965 to 1970, the Linde Division of Union Carbide produced completely synthetic emeralds by hydrothermal synthesis. According to their patents (attributable to E.M. Flanigen), acidic conditions are essential to prevent the chromium (which is used as the colorant) from precipitating. Also, it is important that the silicon-containing nutrient be kept away from the other ingredients to prevent nucleation and confine growth to the seed crystals. Growth occurs by a diffusion-reaction process, assisted by convection. The largest producer of hydrothermal emeralds today is Tairus, which has succeeded in synthesizing emeralds with chemical composition similar to emeralds in alkaline deposits in Colombia, and whose products are thus known as \u201cColombian created emeralds\u201d or \u201cTairus created emeralds\u201d. Luminescence in ultraviolet light is considered a supplementary test when making a natural versus synthetic determination, as many, but not all, natural emeralds are inert to ultraviolet light. Many synthetics are also UV inert.\nSynthetic emeralds are often referred to as \"created\", as their chemical and gemological composition is the same as their natural counterparts. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has very strict regulations as to what can and what cannot be called a \"synthetic\" stone. The FTC says: \"\u00a7 23.23(c) It is unfair or deceptive to use the word \"laboratory-grown\", \"laboratory-created\", \"[manufacturer name]-created\", or \"synthetic\" with the name of any natural stone to describe any industry product unless such industry product has essentially the same optical, physical, and chemical properties as the stone named.\"\nIn culture and lore.\nEmerald is regarded as the traditional birthstone for May as well as the traditional gemstone for the astrological sign of Cancer (June/July)\nTraditional alchemical lore ascribes several uses and characteristics to emeralds:\nThe virtue of the Emerald is to counteract poison. They say that if a venomous animal should look at it, it will become blinded. The gem also acts as a preservative against epilepsy; it cures leprosy, strengthens sight and memory, checks copulation, during which act it will break, if worn at the time on the finger.\nAccording to French writer Brant\u00f4me (c. 1540-1614) Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s had one of the emeralds which he had looted from Mexico text engraved, \"Inter Natos Mulierum non surrexit major\" (\"Among those born of woman there hath not arisen a greater,\" Matthew 11:11), in reference to John the Baptist. Brant\u00f4me considered engraving such a beautiful and simple product of nature sacrilegious and considered this act the cause for Cortez's loss in 1541 of an extremely precious pearl\n(to which he dedicated a work, \"A beautiful and incomparable pearl\"), and even for the death of King Charles IX of France, who died (1574) soon afterward.\nIn American author L. Frank Baum's 1900 children's novel \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\", and the 1939 MGM film adaptation, the protagonist must travel to an Emerald City to meet the eponymous character, the Wizard.\nThe chief deity of one of India's most famous temples, the Meenakshi Amman Temple in Madurai, is the goddess Meenakshi, whose idol is traditionally thought to be made of emerald.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10046", "revid": "8778325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10046", "title": "Erie Canal", "text": "Waterway in New York, U.S.\nThe Erie Canal is a historic canal in upstate New York that runs east\u2013west between the Hudson River and Lake Erie. Completed in 1825, the canal was the first navigable waterway connecting the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Lakes, vastly reducing the costs of transporting people and goods across the Appalachians. In effect, the canal accelerated the settlement of the Great Lakes region, the westward expansion of the United States, and the economic ascendancy of New York State. It has been called \"The Nation's First Superhighway.\"\nA canal from the Hudson to the Great Lakes was first proposed in the 1780s, but a formal survey was not conducted until 1808. The New York State Legislature authorized construction in 1817. Political opponents of the canal, and of its lead supporter New York Governor DeWitt Clinton, denigrated the project as \"Clinton's Folly\" and \"Clinton's Big Ditch\". Nonetheless, the canal saw quick success upon opening on October 26, 1825, with toll revenue covering the state's construction debt within the first year of operation. The westward connection gave New York City a strong advantage over all other U.S. ports and brought major growth to canal cities such as Albany, Utica, Syracuse, Rochester, and Buffalo.\nThe construction of the Erie Canal was a landmark civil engineering achievement in the early history of the United States. When built, the canal was the second-longest in the world (after the Grand Canal in China). Initially wide and deep, the canal was expanded several times, most notably from 1905 to 1918 when the \"Barge Canal\" was built and over half the original route was abandoned. The modern Barge Canal measures long, wide, and deep. It has 34 locks, including the Waterford Flight, the steepest locks in the United States. When leaving the canal, boats must also traverse the Black Rock Lock to reach Lake Erie or the Troy Federal Lock to reach the tidal Hudson. The overall elevation difference is about .\nThe Erie's peak year was 1855, when 33,000 commercial shipments took place. It continued to be competitive with railroads until about 1902, when tolls were abolished. Commercial traffic declined heavily in the latter half of the 20th century due to competition from trucking and the 1959 opening of the larger St. Lawrence Seaway. The canal's last regularly scheduled hauler, the \"Day Peckinpaugh\", ended service in 1994.\nToday, the Erie Canal is mainly used by recreational watercraft. It connects the three other canals in the New York State Canal System: the Champlain, Oswego, and Cayuga\u2013Seneca. Some long-distance boaters take the Erie as part of the Great Loop. The canal has also become a tourist attraction in its own right\u2014a number of parks and museums are dedicated to its history. The Erie Canalway Trail is a popular cycling path that follows the canal across the state. In 2000, Congress designated the Erie Canalway National Heritage Corridor to protect and promote the system.\nAmbiguity in name.\nThe waterway today referred to as the Erie Canal is quite different from the nineteenth-century Erie Canal. More than half of the original Erie Canal was destroyed or abandoned during construction of the New York State Barge Canal in the early 20th century. The sections of the original route remaining in use were widened significantly, mostly west of Syracuse, with bridges rebuilt and locks replaced. It was called the Barge Canal at the time, but that name fell into disuse with the disappearance of commercial traffic and the increase of recreational travel in the later 20th century.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nPrior to the advent of railroads, water transport was the most cost-effective way to ship bulk goods. A mule can only carry about , but can draw a barge weighing as much as along a towpath. In total, a canal could cut transport costs by about 95 percent.\nIn the early years of the United States, transportation of goods between the coastal ports and the interior was slow and difficult. Close to the seacoast, rivers provided easy inland transport up to the fall line, since floating vessels encounter much less friction than land vehicles. However, the Appalachian Mountains were a great obstacle to further transportation or settlement, stretching from Maine to Alabama, with just five places where mule trains or wagon roads could be routed. Passengers and freight bound for the western parts of the country had to travel overland, a journey made more difficult by the rough condition of the roads. In 1800, it typically took 2\u00bd weeks to travel overland from New York to Cleveland, Ohio, () and 4 weeks to Detroit ().\nThe principal exportable product of the Ohio Valley was grain, which was a high-volume, low-priced commodity, bolstered by supplies from the coast. Frequently it was not worth the cost of transporting it to far-away population centers. This was a factor leading to farmers in the west turning their grains into whiskey for easier transport and higher sales, and later the Whiskey Rebellion. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, it became clear to coastal residents that the city or state that succeeded in developing a cheap, reliable route to the West would enjoy economic success, and the port at the seaward end of such a route would see business increase greatly. In time, projects were devised in Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and relatively deep into the coastal states.\nTopography.\nThe Mohawk River (a tributary of the Hudson River) rises near Lake Ontario and runs in a glacial meltwater channel just north of the Catskill range of the Appalachian Mountains, separating them from the geologically distinct Adirondacks to the north. The Mohawk and Hudson valleys form the only cut across the Appalachians north of Alabama. A navigable canal through the Mohawk Valley would allow an almost complete water route from New York City in the south to Lake Ontario and Lake Erie in the west. Via the canal and these lakes, other Great Lakes, and to a lesser degree, related rivers, a large part of the continent's interior (and many settlements) would be made well connected to the Eastern seaboard.\nProposals.\nThe idea of a canal to tie the East Coast to the new western settlements was discussed as early as 1724: New York provincial official Cadwallader Colden made a passing reference (in a report on fur trading) to improving the natural waterways of western New York.\nGouverneur Morris and Elkanah Watson were early proponents of a canal along the Mohawk River. Their efforts led to the creation of the \"Western and Northern Inland Lock Navigation Companies\" in 1792, which took the first steps to improve navigation on the Mohawk and construct a canal between the Mohawk and Lake Ontario, but it was soon discovered that private financing was insufficient.\nChristopher Colles (who was familiar with the Bridgewater Canal) surveyed the Mohawk Valley, and made a presentation to the New York state legislature in 1784, proposing a shorter canal from Lake Ontario. The proposal drew attention and some action but was never implemented.\nJesse Hawley had envisioned encouraging the growing of large quantities of grain on the western New York plains (then largely unsettled) for sale on the Eastern seaboard. However, he went bankrupt trying to ship grain to the coast. While in Canandaigua debtors' prison, Hawley began pressing for the construction of a canal along the -long Mohawk River valley with support from Joseph Ellicott (agent for the Holland Land Company in Batavia). Ellicott realized that a canal would add value to the land he was selling in the western part of the state. He later became the first canal commissioner.\nNew York legislators became interested in the possibility of building a canal across New York in the first decade of the 19th century. Shipping goods west from Albany was a costly and tedious affair; there was no railroad yet, and to cover the distance from Buffalo to New York City by stagecoach took two weeks. The problem was that the land rises about from the Hudson to Lake Erie. Locks at the time could handle up to of lift, so even with the heftiest cuttings and viaducts, fifty locks would be required along the canal. Such a canal would be expensive to build even with modern technology; in 1800, the expense was barely imaginable. President Thomas Jefferson called it \"little short of madness\" and rejected it.\nEventually, Hawley interested New York Governor DeWitt Clinton in the project. There was much opposition, and the project was ridiculed as \"Clinton's folly\" and \"Clinton's ditch\". In 1817, though, Clinton received approval from the legislature for $7 million for construction.\nConstruction.\nThe original canal was long, from Albany on the Hudson to Buffalo on Lake Erie. The channel was cut wide and deep, with removed soil piled on the downhill side to form a walkway known as a towpath. Its construction, through limestone and mountains, proved a daunting task. To move earth, animals pulled a \"slip scraper\" (similar to a bulldozer). The sides of the canal were lined with stone set in clay, and the bottom was also lined with clay. The Canal was built by Irish laborers and German stonemasons. All labor on the canal depended upon human and animal power or the force of water. Engineering techniques developed during its construction included the building of aqueducts to redirect water; one aqueduct was long to span of river. As the canal progressed, the crews and engineers working on the project developed expertise and became a skilled labor force.\nThe men who planned and oversaw construction were novices as surveyors and as engineers. There were no civil engineers in the United States. James Geddes and Benjamin Wright, who laid out the route, were judges whose experience in surveying was in settling boundary disputes. Geddes had only used a surveying instrument for a few hours before his work on the Canal. Canvass White was a 27-year-old amateur engineer who persuaded Clinton to let him go to Britain at his own expense to study the canal system there. Nathan Roberts was a mathematics teacher and land speculator. Yet these men \"carried the Erie Canal up the Niagara escarpment at Lockport, maneuvered it onto a towering embankment to cross over Irondequoit Creek, spanned the Genesee River on an awesome aqueduct, and carved a route for it out of the solid rock between Little Falls and Schenectady\u2014and all of those venturesome designs worked precisely as planned\".\nConstruction began on July 4, 1817, at Rome, New York. The first , from Rome to Utica, opened in 1819. At that rate, the canal would not be finished for 30 years. The main delays were caused by felling trees to clear a path through virgin forest and moving excavated soil, which took longer than expected, but the builders devised ways to solve these problems. To fell a tree, they threw rope over the top branches and winched it down. They pulled out the stumps with an innovative stump puller. Two huge wheels were mounted loose on the ends of an axle. A third wheel, slightly smaller than the others, was fixed to the center of the axle. A chain was wrapped around the axle and hooked to the stump. A rope was wrapped around the center wheel and hooked to a team of oxen. The mechanical advantage (torque) obtained ripped the stumps out of the soil. Soil to be moved was shoveled into large wheelbarrows that were dumped into mule-pulled carts. Using a scraper and a plow, a three-man team with oxen, horses and mules could build a mile in a year.\nThe remaining problem was finding labor; increased immigration helped fill the need. Many of the laborers working on the canal were Irish, who had recently come to the United States as a group of about 5,000. Most of them were Roman Catholic, a religion that raised much suspicion in early America because of its hierarchic structure, and many laborers on the canal suffered violent assault as the result of misjudgment and xenophobia.\nConstruction continued at an increased rate as new workers arrived. When the canal reached Montezuma Marsh (at the outlet of Cayuga Lake west of Syracuse), it was rumored that over 1,000 workers died of \"swamp fever\" (malaria), and construction was temporarily stopped. However, recent research has revealed that the death toll was likely much lower, as no contemporary reports mention significant worker mortality, and mass graves from the period have never been found in the area. Work continued on the downhill side towards the Hudson, and the crews worked on the section across the swampland when it froze in winter.\nThe middle section from Utica to Salina (Syracuse) was completed in 1820, and traffic on that section started up immediately. Expansion to the east and west proceeded simultaneously, and the whole eastern section, from Brockport to Albany, opened on September 10, 1823, to great fanfare. The Champlain Canal, a separate but connected north\u2013south route from Watervliet on the Hudson to Lake Champlain, opened on the same date.\nAfter Montezuma Marsh, the next difficulties were crossing Irondequoit Creek and the Genesee River near Rochester. The former ultimately required building the long \"Great Embankment,\" to carry the canal at a height of above the level of the creek, which ran through a culvert underneath. The canal crossed the river on a stone aqueduct, long and wide, supported by 11 arches.\nIn 1823 construction reached the Niagara Escarpment, an -high wall of hard dolomitic limestone. The route followed the channel of a creek that had cut a ravine steeply down the escarpment. The construction and operation of two sets of five locks along a corridor soon gave rise to the community of Lockport. The lift-locks had a total lift of , exiting into a deeply cut channel. The final leg had to be cut deep through another limestone mass, the Onondaga ridge. Much of that section was blasted with black powder, and the inexperience of the crews often led to accidents, and sometimes to rocks falling on nearby homes.\nTwo villages competed to be the terminus: Black Rock, on the Niagara River, and Buffalo, at the eastern tip of Lake Erie. Buffalo expended great energy to widen and deepen Buffalo Creek to make it navigable and to create a harbor at its mouth. Buffalo won over Black Rock, and grew into a large city, eventually encompassing its former rival.\nCompletion.\nIn 1824, before the canal was completed, a detailed \"Pocket Guide for the Tourist and Traveler, Along the Line of the Canals, and the Interior Commerce of the State of New York\", was published for the benefit of travelers and land speculators.\nThe entire canal was officially completed on October 26, 1825. The event was marked by a statewide \"Grand Celebration,\" culminating in a series of cannon shots along the length of the canal and the Hudson, a 90-minute cannonade from Buffalo to New York City. A flotilla of boats, led by Governor Dewitt Clinton aboard \"Seneca Chief\", sailed from Buffalo to New York City over ten days. Clinton then ceremonially poured Lake Erie water into New York Harbor to mark the \"Wedding of the Waters\". On its return trip, \"Seneca Chief\" brought back a keg of Atlantic Ocean water, which was poured into Lake Erie by Buffalo's Judge Samuel Wilkeson, who would later become mayor.\nThe Erie Canal was thus completed in eight years at a total length of and cost $7.143 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2022). It was acclaimed as an engineering marvel that united the country and helped New York City develop as an international trade center.\nProblems developed but were quickly solved. Leaks developed along the entire length of the canal, but these were sealed using cement that hardened underwater (hydraulic cement). Erosion on the clay bottom proved to be a problem and the speed was limited to .\nBranch canals.\nAdditional feeder canals soon extended the Erie Canal into a system. These included the Cayuga-Seneca Canal south to the Finger Lakes, the Oswego Canal from Three Rivers north to Lake Ontario at Oswego, and the Champlain Canal from Troy north to Lake Champlain. From 1833 to 1877, the short Crooked Lake Canal connected Keuka Lake and Seneca Lake. The Chemung Canal connected the south end of Seneca Lake to Elmira in 1833, and was an important route for Pennsylvania coal and timber into the canal system. The Chenango Canal in 1836 connected the Erie Canal at Utica to Binghamton and caused a business boom in the Chenango River valley. The Chenango and Chemung canals linked the Erie with the Susquehanna River system. The Black River Canal connected the Black River to the Erie Canal at Rome and remained in operation until the 1920s. The Genesee Valley Canal was run along the Genesee River to connect with the Allegheny River at Olean, but the Allegheny section, which would have connected to the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, was never built. The Genesee Valley Canal was later abandoned and became the route of the Genesee Valley Canal Railroad.\nFirst Enlargement.\nThe original design planned for an annual tonnage of 1.5 million tons (1.36 million metric tons), but this was exceeded immediately. An ambitious program to improve the canal began in 1834. During this massive series of construction projects, known as the First Enlargement, the canal was widened from and deepened from . Locks were widened and/or rebuilt in new locations, and many new navigable aqueducts were constructed. The canal was straightened and slightly re-routed in some stretches, resulting in the abandonment of short segments of the original 1825 canal. The First Enlargement was completed in 1862, with further minor enlargements in later decades.\nRailroad competition.\nThe Mohawk and Hudson Railroad opened in 1837, providing a bypass to the slowest part of the canal between Albany and Schenectady. Other railroads were soon chartered and built to continue the line west to Buffalo, and in 1842 a continuous line (which later became the New York Central Railroad and its Auburn Road in 1853) was open the whole way to Buffalo. As the railroad served the same general route as the canal, but provided for faster travel, passengers soon switched to it. However, as late as 1852, the canal carried thirteen times more freight tonnage than all the railroads in New York State combined. The New York, West Shore and Buffalo Railway was completed in 1884, as a route running closely parallel to both the canal and the New York Central Railroad. However, it went bankrupt and was acquired the next year by the New York Central. The canal continued to compete well with the railroads through 1902, when tolls were abolished.\nBarge Canal.\nIn 1903 the New York State legislature authorized construction of the New York State Barge Canal as the \"Improvement of the Erie, the Oswego, the Champlain, and the Cayuga and Seneca Canals\".\nIn 1905, construction of the Barge Canal began, which was completed in 1918, at a cost of $96.7 million.\nThis new canal replaced much of the original route, leaving many abandoned sections (most notably between Syracuse and Rome). New digging and flood control technologies allowed engineers to canalize rivers that the original canal had sought to avoid, such as the Mohawk, Seneca, and Clyde rivers, and Oneida Lake. In sections that did not consist of canalized rivers (particularly between Rochester and Buffalo), the original Erie Canal channel was enlarged to wide and deep. The expansion allowed barges up to to use the Canal. This expensive project was politically unpopular in parts of the state not served by the canal, and failed to save it from becoming obsolete for commercial shipping.\nCommercial decline.\nFreight traffic reached a total of 5.2 million short tons (4.7 million metric tons) by 1951. The growth of railroads and highways across the state, and the opening of the St. Lawrence Seaway in 1959, caused commercial traffic on the canal to decline dramatically during the second half of the 20th century. Since the 1990s, the canal system has been used primarily by recreational traffic.\nNew York State Canal System.\nIn 1992, the New York State Barge Canal was renamed the New York State Canal System (including the Erie, Cayuga-Seneca, Oswego, and Champlain canals) and placed under the newly created New York State Canal Corporation, a subsidiary of the New York State Thruway Authority. While part of the Thruway, the canal system was operated using money generated by Thruway tolls. In 2017, the New York State Canal Corporation was transferred from the New York State Thruway to the New York Power Authority.\nIn 2000, Congress designated the Erie Canalway National Heritage Corridor, covering of navigable water from Lake Champlain to the Capital Region and west to Buffalo. The area has a population of 2.7 million; about 75% of Central and Western New York's population lives within of the Erie Canal.\nThere were some 42 commercial shipments on the canal in 2008, compared to 15 such shipments in 2007 and more than 33,000 shipments in 1855, the canal's peak year. The new growth in commercial traffic is due to the rising cost of diesel fuel. Canal barges can carry a short ton of cargo on one gallon of diesel fuel, while a gallon allows a train to haul the same amount of cargo and a truck . Canal barges can carry loads up to , and are used to transport objects that would be too large for road or rail shipment. In 2012, the New York State Canal System as a whole was used to ship 42,000 tons of cargo.\nTravel on the canal's middle section (particularly in the Mohawk Valley) was severely hampered by flooding in late June and early July 2006. Flood damage to the canal and its facilities was estimated as at least $15 million.\nRoute.\nOriginal Canal.\n&lt;mapframe width=400 height=200 zoom=6 latitude=42.977 longitude=-76.506 align=right text=\"The original path of the Erie Canal\"&gt;\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"page\",\n \"title\": \"Original Erie Canal.map\"\n&lt;/mapframe&gt;\nThe Erie made use of the favorable conditions of New York's unique topography, which provided that area with the only break in the Appalachians south of the St. Lawrence River. The Hudson is tidal to Troy, and Albany is west of the Appalachians. It allowed for east\u2013west navigation from the coast to the Great Lakes within US territory.\nThe canal began on the west side of the Hudson River at Albany, and ran north to Watervliet, where the Champlain Canal branched off. At Cohoes, it climbed the escarpment on the west side of the Hudson River\u201416 locks rising \u2014and then turned west along the south shore of the Mohawk River, crossing to the north side at Crescent and again to the south at Rexford. The canal continued west near the south shore of the Mohawk River all the way to Rome, where the Mohawk turns north.\nAt Rome, the canal continued west parallel to Wood Creek, which flows westward into Oneida Lake, and turned southwest and west cross-country to avoid the lake. From Canastota west, it ran roughly along the north (lower) edge of the Onondaga Escarpment, passing through Syracuse, Onondaga Lake, and Rochester. Before reaching Rochester, the canal uses a series of natural ridges to cross the deep valley of Irondequoit Creek. At Lockport the canal turned southwest to rise to the top of the Niagara Escarpment, using the ravine of Eighteen Mile Creek.\nThe canal continued south-southwest to Pendleton, where it turned west and southwest, mainly using the channel of Tonawanda Creek. From the Tonawanda south toward Buffalo, it ran just east of the Niagara River, where it reached its \"Western Terminus\" at Little Buffalo Creek (later it became the Commercial Slip), which discharged into the Buffalo River just above its confluence with Lake Erie. With Buffalo's re-excavation of the Commercial Slip, completed in 2008, the Canal's original terminus is now re-watered and again accessible by boats. With several miles of the Canal inland of this location still lying under 20th-century fill and urban construction, the effective western navigable terminus of the Erie Canal is found at Tonawanda.\nBarge Canal.\nThe new alignment began on the Hudson River at the border between Cohoes and Waterford, where it ran northwest with five locks (the so-called \"Waterford Flight\"), running into the Mohawk River east of Crescent. The Waterford Flight is claimed to be one of the steepest series of locks in the world.\nWhile the old Canal ran next to the Mohawk all the way to Rome, the new canal ran through the river, which was straightened or widened where necessary. At Ilion, the new canal left the river for good, but continued to run on a new alignment parallel to both the river and the old canal to Rome. From Rome, the new route continued almost due west, merging with Fish Creek just east of its entry into Oneida Lake.\nFrom Oneida Lake, the new canal ran west along the Oneida River, with cutoffs to shorten the route. At Three Rivers, the Oneida River turns northwest, and was deepened for the Oswego Canal to Lake Ontario. The new Erie Canal turned south there along the Seneca River, which turns west near Syracuse and continues west to a point in the Montezuma Marsh. There the Cayuga and Seneca Canal continued south with the Seneca River, and the new Erie Canal again ran parallel to the old canal along the bottom of the Niagara Escarpment, in some places running along the Clyde River, and in some places replacing the old canal. At Pittsford, southeast of Rochester, the canal turned west to run around the south side of Rochester, rather than through downtown. The canal crosses the Genesee River at the Genesee Valley Park, then rejoins the old path near North Gates.\nFrom there it was again roughly an upgrade to the original canal, running west to Lockport. This reach of from Henrietta to Lockport is called \"the 60\u2011mile level\" since there are no locks and the water level rises only over the entire segment. Diversions from and to adjacent natural streams along the way are used to maintain the canal's level. It runs southwest to Tonawanda, where the new alignment discharges into the Niagara River, which is navigable upstream to the New York Barge Canal's Black Rock Lock and thence to the Canal's original \"Western Terminus\" at Buffalo's Inner Harbor.\nOperations.\nFreight boats.\nCanal boats up to in draft were pulled by horses and mules walking on the towpath. The canal had one towpath, generally on the north side. When canal boats met, the boat with the right of way remained on the towpath side of the canal. The other boat steered toward the berm (or heelpath) side of the canal. The driver (or \"hoggee\", pronounced HO-gee) of the privileged boat kept his towpath team by the canalside edge of the towpath, while the hoggee of the other boat moved to the outside of the towpath and stopped his team. His towline would be unhitched from the horses, go slack, fall into the water and sink to the bottom, while his boat coasted with its remaining momentum. The privileged boat's team would step over the other boat's towline, with its horses pulling the boat over the sunken towline without stopping. Once clear, the other boat's team would continue on its way.\nPulled by teams of horses, canal boats moved slowly, but methodically, shrinking time and distance. Efficiently, the smooth, nonstop method of transportation cut the travel time between Albany and Buffalo nearly in half, moving by day and by night. Migrants took passage on freight boats, camping on deck or on top of crates.\nPassenger boats.\nPacket boats, serving passengers exclusively, reached speeds of up to and ran at much more frequent intervals than the cramped, bumpy stagecoach wagons. These boats, measuring up to long and wide, made ingenious use of space, accommodating up to 40 passengers at night and up to three times as many in the daytime. The best examples, furnished with carpeted floors, stuffed chairs, and mahogany tables stocked with books and current newspapers, served as sitting rooms during the days. At mealtimes, crews transformed the cabin into a dining room. Drawing a curtain across the width of the room divided the cabin into ladies' and gentlemen's sleeping quarters at night. Pull-down tiered beds folded from the walls, and additional cots could be hung from hooks in the ceiling. Some captains hired musicians and held dances.\nSunday closing debate.\nThe New York State Legislature debated closing the locks of the Erie Canal on Sundays, when they convened in 1858. However, George Jeremiah and Dwight Bacheller, two of the bill's opponents, argued that the state had no right to stop canal traffic on the grounds that the Erie Canal and its tributaries had ceased to be wards of the state. The canal at its inception had been imagined as an extension of nature, an artificial river where there had been none. The canal succeeded by sharing more in common with lakes and seas than it had with public roads. Jeremiah and Bacheller argued, successfully, that just as it was unthinkable to halt oceangoing navigation on Sunday, so it was with the canal.\nImpact.\nEconomic impact.\nThe Erie Canal greatly lowered the cost of shipping between the Midwest and the Northeast, bringing much lower food costs to Eastern cities and allowing the East to ship machinery and manufactured goods to the Midwest more economically. To give an example, the cost to transport barrel of flour from Rochester to Albany dropped from $3 (before the canal) to 75\u00a2 on the canal. The canal also made an immense contribution to the wealth and importance of New York City, Buffalo and New York State. Its impact went much further, increasing trade throughout the nation by opening eastern and overseas markets to Midwestern farm products and by enabling migration to the West. The port of New York became essentially the Atlantic home port for all of the Midwest. Because of this vital connection and others to follow, such as the railroads, New York would become known as the \"Empire State\" or \"the great Empire State\".\nThe Erie Canal was an immediate success. Tolls collected on freight had already exceeded the state's construction debt in its first year of official operation. By 1828, import duties collected at the New York Customs House supported federal government operations and provided funds for all the expenses in Washington except the interest on the national debt. Additionally, New York State's initial loan for the original canal had been paid by 1837. Although it had been envisioned as primarily a commercial channel for freight boats, passengers also traveled on the canal's packet boats. In 1825 more than 40,000 passengers took advantage of the convenience and beauty of canal travel. The canal's steady flow of tourists, businessmen and settlers lent it to uses never imagined by its initial sponsors. Evangelical preachers made their circuits of the upstate region, and the canal served as the last leg of the Underground Railroad ferrying runaway slaves to Buffalo near the Canada\u2013US border. Aspiring merchants found that tourists were reliable customers. Vendors moved from boat to boat peddling items such as books, watches and fruit, while less scrupulous \"confidence men\" sold remedies for foot corns or passed off counterfeit bills. Tourists were carried along the \"northern tour,\" which ultimately led to the popular honeymoon destination Niagara Falls, just north of Buffalo.\nAs the canal brought travelers to New York City, it took business away from other ports such as Philadelphia and Baltimore. Those cities and their states started projects to compete with the Erie Canal. In Pennsylvania, the Main Line of Public Works was a combined canal and railroad running west from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh on the Ohio River, opened in 1834. In Maryland, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ran west to Wheeling, West Virginia, then a part of Virginia, also on the Ohio River, and was completed in 1853.\nThe canal played a major role in the growth of Standard Oil, as founder John D. Rockefeller used the canal as a cheaper form of transportation \u2013 in the summer months when it was not frozen \u2013 to get his refined oil from Cleveland to New York City. In the winter months his only options were the three trunk lines: the Erie Railroad, the New York Central Railroad, or the Pennsylvania Railroad.\nMigratory impact.\nNew ethnic Irish communities formed in some towns along its route after completion, as Irish immigrants were a large portion of the construction labor force. A plaque honoring the canal's construction is located in Battery Park in southern Manhattan.\nBecause so many immigrants traveled on the canal, many genealogists have sought copies of canal passenger lists. Apart from the years 1827\u20131829, canal boat operators were not required to record passenger names or report them to the New York government. Some passenger lists survive today in the New York State Archives, and other sources of traveler information are sometimes available.\nThe canal allowed Buffalo to grow from just 200 settlers in 1820 to more than 18,000 people by 1840.\nCultural impact.\nThe Canal also helped bind the still-new nation closer to Britain and Europe. Repeal of Britain's Corn Law resulted in a huge increase in exports of Midwestern wheat to Britain. Trade between the United States and Canada also increased as a result of the repeal and a reciprocity (free-trade) agreement signed in 1854. Much of this trade flowed along the Erie.\nIts success also prompted imitation: a rash of canal-building followed. Also, the many technical hurdles that had to be overcome made heroes of those whose innovations made the canal possible. This led to an increased public esteem for practical education. Chicago, among other Great Lakes cities, recognized the importance of the canal to its economy, and two West Loop streets are named \"Canal\" and \"Clinton\" (for canal proponent DeWitt Clinton).\nConcern that erosion caused by logging in the Adirondacks could silt up the canal contributed to the creation in 1885 of another New York National Historic Landmark, the Adirondack Park.\nMany notable authors wrote about the canal, including Herman Melville, Frances Trollope, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Mark Twain, Samuel Hopkins Adams and the Marquis de Lafayette, and many tales and songs were written about life on the canal. The popular song \"Low Bridge, Everybody Down\" by Thomas S. Allen was written in 1905 to memorialize the canal's early heyday, when barges were pulled by mules rather than engines.\nConsisting of a massive stone aqueduct that carried boats over incredible cascades, Little Falls was one of the most popular stops for American and foreign tourists. This is shown in Scene 4 of William Dunlap's play \"A Trip to Niagara\", where he depicts the general preference of tourists to travel by canal so that they could experience a combination of artificial and natural sights. Canal travel was, for many, an opportunity to take in the sublime and commune with nature. The play also reflects the less enthusiastic view of some who saw movement on the canal as tedious.\nThe Erie Canal changed property law in New York. Most importantly, it expanded the government's right to take private property. Cases surrounding the newly built Erie Canal expanded condemnation theory to permit canal builders to appropriate private land and broadened the meaning of \"public use\" in the 5th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The canal also had an impact on water access jurisprudence as well as nuisance law.\nThe canal today.\nToday, the Erie Canal is used primarily by recreational vessels, though it remains served by several commercial barge-towing companies.\nThe canal is open to small craft and some larger vessels from May through November each year. During winter, water is drained from parts of the canal for maintenance. The Champlain Canal, Lake Champlain, and the Chambly Canal, and Richelieu River in Canada form the Lakes to Locks Passage, making a tourist attraction of the former waterway linking eastern Canada to the Erie Canal. In 2006 recreational boating fees were eliminated to attract more visitors.\nThe Erie Canal is a destination for tourists from all over the world, and has inspired guidebooks dedicated to exploration of the waterway. An Erie Canal Cruise company, based in Herkimer, operates from mid-May until mid-October with daily cruises. The cruise goes through the history of the canal and also takes passengers through Lock 18.\nAside from transportation, numerous businesses, farms, factories and communities alongside its banks still utilize the canal's waters for other purposes such as irrigation for farmland, hydroelectricity, research, industry, and even drinking. Use of the canal system has an estimated total economic impact of $6.2 billion annually.\nOld Erie Canal.\nToday, the reconfiguration of the canal created during the First Enlargement is commonly referred to as the \"Improved Erie Canal\" or the \"Old Erie Canal\", to distinguish it from the canal's modern-day course. Existing remains of the 1825 canal abandoned during the Enlargement are officially referred to today as \"Clinton's Ditch\" (which was also the popular nickname for the entire Erie Canal project during its original 1817\u20131825 construction).\nSections of the Old Erie Canal not used after 1918 are owned by New York State, or have been ceded to or purchased by counties or municipalities. Many stretches of the old canal have been filled in to create roads such as Erie Boulevard in Syracuse and Schenectady, and Broad Street and the Rochester Subway in Rochester. A 36\u2011mile (58\u00a0km) stretch of the old canal from the town of DeWitt, New York, east of Syracuse, to just outside Rome, New York, is preserved as the Old Erie Canal State Historic Park. In 1960 the Schoharie Crossing State Historic Site, a section of the canal in Montgomery County, was one of the first sites recognized as a National Historic Landmark.\nSome municipalities have preserved sections as town or county canal parks, or have plans to do so. Camillus Erie Canal Park preserves a stretch and has restored Nine Mile Creek Aqueduct, built in 1841 as part of the First Enlargement of the canal. In some communities, the old canal has refilled with overgrowth and debris. Proposals have been made to rehydrate the old canal through downtown Rochester or Syracuse as a tourist attraction. In Syracuse, the location of the old canal is represented by a reflecting pool in downtown's Clinton Square and the downtown hosts a canal barge and weigh lock structure, now dry. Buffalo's Commercial Slip is the restored and re-watered segment of the canal which formed its \"Western Terminus\".\nIn 2004, the administration of New York Governor George Pataki was criticized when officials of New York State Canal Corporation attempted to sell private development rights to large stretches of the Old Erie Canal to a single developer for $30,000, far less than the land was worth on the open market. After an investigation by the \"Syracuse Post-Standard\" newspaper, the Pataki administration nullified the deal.\nParks and museums.\nParks and museums related to the Old Erie Canal include (listed from east to west):\nRecords and research.\nRecords of the planning, funding, design, construction, and administration of the Erie Canal are vast and can be found in the New York State Archives. Except for two years (1827\u20131829), the State of New York did not require canal boat operators to maintain or submit passenger lists.\nLocks.\nThe following list of locks is provided for the current canal, from east to west. There are a total of 36 (35 numbered) locks on the Erie Canal.\nAll locks on the New York State Canal System are single-chamber; the dimensions are long and wide with a minimum depth of water over the miter sills at the upstream gates upon lift. They can accommodate a vessel up to long and wide. Overall sidewall height will vary by lock, ranging between depending on the lift and navigable stages. Lock E17 at Little Falls has the tallest sidewall height at .\nDistance is based on position markers from an interactive canal map provided online by the New York State Canal Corporation and may not exactly match specifications on signs posted along the canal. Mean surface elevations are comprised from a combination of older canal profiles and history books as well as specifications on signs posted along the canal. The margin of error should normally be within .\nThe Waterford Flight series of locks (comprising Locks E2 through E6) is one of the steepest in the world, lifting boats in less than .\n\"All surface elevations are approximate.\"\nThere is a natural rise between locks E33 and E34 as well as a natural rise between Lock E35 and the Niagara River.\nThere is no Lock E1 or Lock E31 on the Erie Canal. The place of \"Lock E1\" on the passage from the lower Hudson River to Lake Erie is taken by the Troy Federal Lock, located just north of Troy, New York, and is not part of the Erie Canal System proper. It is operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The Erie Canal officially begins at the confluence of the Hudson and Mohawk rivers at Waterford, New York.\nAlthough the original alignment of the Erie Canal through Buffalo has been filled in, travel by water is still possible from Buffalo via the Black Rock Lock in the Niagara River to the canal's modern western terminus in Tonawanda, and eastward to Albany. The Black Rock Lock is operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.\nOneida Lake lies between locks E22 and E23, and has a mean surface elevation of . Lake Erie has a mean surface elevation of .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10048", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10048", "title": "Ethanol", "text": "Organic compound (CH\u2083CH\u2082OH)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nEthanol (abbr. EtOH; also called ethyl alcohol, grain alcohol, drinking alcohol, or simply alcohol) is an organic compound. It is an alcohol with the chemical formula . Its formula can also be written as or (an ethyl group linked to a hydroxyl group). Ethanol is a volatile, flammable, colorless liquid with a characteristic wine-like odor and pungent taste. It is a psychoactive recreational drug, and the active ingredient in alcoholic drinks.\nEthanol is naturally produced by the fermentation process of sugars by yeasts or via petrochemical processes such as ethylene hydration. Historically it was used as a general anesthetic, and has modern medical applications as an antiseptic, disinfectant, solvent for some medications, and antidote for methanol poisoning and ethylene glycol poisoning. It is used as a chemical solvent and in the synthesis of organic compounds, and as a fuel source. Ethanol also can be dehydrated to make ethylene, an important chemical feedstock. As of 2006, world production of ethanol was , coming mostly from Brazil and the U.S.\nEtymology.\n\"Ethanol\" is the systematic name defined by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry for a compound consisting of an alkyl group with two carbon atoms (prefix \"eth-\"), having a single bond between them (infix \"-an-\") and an attached \u2212OH functional group (suffix \"-ol\").\nThe \"eth-\" prefix and the qualifier \"ethyl\" in \"ethyl alcohol\" originally come from the name \"ethyl\" assigned in 1834 to the group C2H5\u2212 by Justus Liebig. He coined the word from the German name \"Aether\" of the compound C2H5\u2212O\u2212C2H5 (commonly called \"ether\" in English, more specifically called \"diethyl ether\"). According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", \"Ethyl\" is a contraction of the Ancient Greek \u03b1\u1f30\u03b8\u03ae\u03c1 (', \"upper air\") and the Greek word \u1f55\u03bb\u03b7 (', \"substance\").\nThe name \"ethanol\" was coined as a result of a resolution on naming alcohols and phenols that was adopted at the International Conference on Chemical Nomenclature that was held in April 1892 in Geneva, Switzerland.\nThe term \"alcohol\" now refers to a wider class of substances in chemistry nomenclature, but in common parlance it remains the name of ethanol. It is a medieval loan from Arabic \"al-ku\u1e25l\", a powdered ore of antimony used since antiquity as a cosmetic, and retained that meaning in Middle Latin. The use of 'alcohol' for ethanol (in full, \"alcohol of wine\") is modern and was first recorded in 1753. Before the late 18th century the term \"alcohol\" generally referred to any sublimated substance.\nUses.\nMedical.\nAnesthetic.\nEthanol is the oldest known sedative, used as an oral general anesthetic during surgery in ancient Mesopotamia and in medieval times. Mild intoxication starts at a blood alcohol concentration of 0.03-0.05% and induces anesthetic coma at 0.4%. However, this use carried the high risk of deadly alcohol intoxication and pulmonary aspiration on vomit, which led to use of alternatives in antiquity, such as opium and cannabis, and later diethyl ether starting in the 1840s.\nAntiseptic.\nEthanol is used in medical wipes and most commonly in antibacterial hand sanitizer gels as an antiseptic for its bactericidal and anti-fungal effects. Ethanol kills microorganisms by dissolving their membrane lipid bilayer and denaturing their proteins, and is effective against most bacteria, fungi and viruses. However, it is ineffective against bacterial spores, but that can be alleviated by using hydrogen peroxide. A solution of 70% ethanol is more effective than pure ethanol because ethanol relies on water molecules for optimal antimicrobial activity. Absolute ethanol may inactivate microbes without destroying them because the alcohol is unable to fully permeate the microbe's membrane. Ethanol can also be used as a disinfectant and antiseptic because it causes cell dehydration by disrupting the osmotic balance across the cell membrane, so water leaves the cell leading to cell death.\nAntidote.\nEthanol may be administered as an antidote to ethylene glycol poisoning and methanol poisoning. Ethanol serves this process by acting as a competitive inhibitor against methanol and ethylene glycol for alcohol dehydrogenase. Though it has more side effects, ethanol is less expensive and more readily available than fomepizole, which is also used as an antidote for methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning.\nMedicinal solvent.\nEthanol, often in high concentrations, is used to dissolve many water-insoluble medications and related compounds. Liquid preparations of pain medications, cough and cold medicines, and mouth washes, for example, may contain up to 25% ethanol and may need to be avoided in individuals with adverse reactions to ethanol such as alcohol-induced respiratory reactions. Ethanol is present mainly as an antimicrobial preservative in over 700 liquid preparations of medicine including acetaminophen, iron supplements, ranitidine, furosemide, mannitol, phenobarbital, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and over-the-counter cough medicine.\nPharmacology.\nIn mammals, ethanol is primarily metabolized in the liver and stomach by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) enzymes. These enzymes catalyze the oxidation of ethanol into acetaldehyde (ethanal):\nCH3CH2OH + NAD+ \u2192 CH3CHO + NADH + H+\nWhen present in significant concentrations, this metabolism of ethanol is additionally aided by the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2E1 in humans, while trace amounts are also metabolized by catalase.\nThe resulting intermediate, acetaldehyde, is a known carcinogen, and poses significantly greater toxicity in humans than ethanol itself. Many of the symptoms typically associated with alcohol intoxication\u2014as well as many of the health hazards typically associated with the long-term consumption of ethanol\u2014can be attributed to acetaldehyde toxicity in humans.\nThe subsequent oxidation of acetaldehyde into acetate is performed by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) enzymes. A mutation in the ALDH2 gene that encodes for an inactive or dysfunctional form of this enzyme affects roughly 50% of east Asian populations, contributing to the characteristic alcohol flush reaction that can cause temporary reddening of the skin as well as a number of related, and often unpleasant, symptoms of acetaldehyde toxicity. This mutation is typically accompanied by another mutation in the alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme ADH1B in roughly 80% of east Asians, which improves the catalytic efficiency of converting ethanol into acetaldehyde.\nRecreational.\nAs a central nervous system depressant, ethanol is one of the most commonly consumed psychoactive drugs.\nDespite alcohol's psychoactive, addictive, and carcinogenic properties, it is readily available and legal for sale in most countries. There are laws regulating the sale, exportation/importation, taxation, manufacturing, consumption, and possession of alcoholic beverages. The most common regulation is prohibition for minors. \nFuel.\nEngine fuel.\nThe largest single use of ethanol is as an engine fuel and fuel additive. Brazil in particular relies heavily upon the use of ethanol as an engine fuel, due in part to its role as one of the world's leading producers of ethanol. Gasoline sold in Brazil contains at least 25% anhydrous ethanol. Hydrous ethanol (about 95% ethanol and 5% water) can be used as fuel in more than 90% of new gasoline-fueled cars sold in the country.\nThe US and many other countries primarily use E10 (10% ethanol, sometimes known as gasohol) and E85 (85% ethanol) ethanol/gasoline mixtures. Over time, it is believed that a material portion of the \u2248 per year market for gasoline will begin to be replaced with fuel ethanol.\nAustralian law limits the use of pure ethanol from sugarcane waste to 10% in automobiles. Older cars (and vintage cars designed to use a slower burning fuel) should have the engine valves upgraded or replaced.\nAccording to an industry advocacy group, ethanol as a fuel reduces harmful tailpipe emissions of carbon monoxide, particulate matter, oxides of nitrogen, and other ozone-forming pollutants. Argonne National Laboratory analyzed greenhouse gas emissions of many different engine and fuel combinations, and found that biodiesel/petrodiesel blend (B20) showed a reduction of 8%, conventional E85 ethanol blend a reduction of 17% and cellulosic ethanol 64%, compared with pure gasoline. Ethanol has a much greater research octane number (RON) than gasoline, meaning it is less prone to pre-ignition, allowing for better ignition advance which means more torque, and efficiency in addition to the lower carbon emissions.\nEthanol combustion in an internal combustion engine yields many of the products of incomplete combustion produced by gasoline and significantly larger amounts of formaldehyde and related species such as acetaldehyde. This leads to a significantly larger photochemical reactivity and more ground level ozone. This data has been assembled into The Clean Fuels Report comparison of fuel emissions and show that ethanol exhaust generates 2.14\u00a0times as much ozone as gasoline exhaust. When this is added into the custom \"Localized Pollution Index\" of The Clean Fuels Report, the local pollution of ethanol (pollution that contributes to smog) is rated 1.7, where gasoline is 1.0 and higher numbers signify greater pollution. The California Air Resources Board formalized this issue in 2008 by recognizing control standards for formaldehydes as an emissions control group, much like the conventional NOx and reactive organic gases (ROGs).\nMore than 20% of Brazilian cars are able to use 100% ethanol as fuel, which includes ethanol-only engines and flex-fuel engines. Flex-fuel engines in Brazil are able to work with all ethanol, all gasoline or any mixture of both. In the United States, flex-fuel vehicles can run on 0% to 85% ethanol (15% gasoline) since higher ethanol blends are not yet allowed or efficient. Brazil supports this fleet of ethanol-burning automobiles with large national infrastructure that produces ethanol from domestically grown sugarcane.\nEthanol's high miscibility with water makes it unsuitable for shipping through modern pipelines like liquid hydrocarbons. Mechanics have seen increased cases of damage to small engines (in particular, the carburetor) and attribute the damage to the increased water retention by ethanol in fuel.\nRocket fuel.\nEthanol was commonly used as fuel in early bipropellant rocket (liquid-propelled) vehicles, in conjunction with an oxidizer such as liquid oxygen. The German A-4 ballistic rocket of World War\u00a0II (better known by its propaganda name V-2), which is credited as having begun the space age, used ethanol as the main constituent of \"B-Stoff\". Under such nomenclature, the ethanol was mixed with 25% water to reduce the combustion chamber temperature. The V-2's design team helped develop U.S. rockets following World War\u00a0II, including the ethanol-fueled Redstone rocket, which launched the first U.S. satellite. Alcohols fell into general disuse as more energy-dense rocket fuels were developed, although ethanol is currently used in lightweight rocket-powered racing aircraft.\nFuel cells.\nCommercial fuel cells operate on reformed natural gas, hydrogen or methanol. Ethanol is an attractive alternative due to its wide availability, low cost, high purity and low toxicity. There is a wide range of fuel cell concepts that have entered trials including direct-ethanol fuel cells, auto-thermal reforming systems and thermally integrated systems. The majority of work is being conducted at a research level although there are a number of organizations at the beginning of the commercialization of ethanol fuel cells.\nHousehold heating and cooking.\nEthanol fireplaces can be used for home heating or for decoration. Ethanol can also be used as stove fuel for cooking.\nFeedstock.\nEthanol is an important industrial ingredient. It has widespread use as a precursor for other organic compounds such as ethyl halides, ethyl esters, diethyl ether, acetic acid, and ethyl amines.\nSolvent.\nEthanol is considered a universal solvent, as its molecular structure allows for the dissolving of both polar, hydrophilic and nonpolar, hydrophobic compounds. As ethanol also has a low boiling point, it is easy to remove from a solution that has been used to dissolve other compounds, making it a popular extracting agent for botanical oils. Cannabis oil extraction methods often use ethanol as an extraction solvent, and also as a post-processing solvent to remove oils, waxes, and chlorophyll from solution in a process known as winterization.\nEthanol is found in paints, tinctures, markers, and personal care products such as mouthwashes, perfumes and deodorants. Polysaccharides precipitate from aqueous solution in the presence of alcohol, and ethanol precipitation is used for this reason in the purification of DNA and RNA.\nLow-temperature liquid.\nBecause of its low freezing point of and low toxicity, ethanol is sometimes used in laboratories (with dry ice or other coolants) as a cooling bath to keep vessels at temperatures below the freezing point of water. For the same reason, it is also used as the active fluid in alcohol thermometers.\nChemistry.\nChemical formula.\nEthanol is a 2-carbon alcohol. Its molecular formula is CH3CH2OH. An alternative notation is CH3\u2212CH2\u2212OH, which indicates that the carbon of a methyl group (CH3\u2212) is attached to the carbon of a methylene group (\u2212CH2\u2013), which is attached to the oxygen of a hydroxyl group (\u2212OH). It is a constitutional isomer of dimethyl ether. Ethanol is sometimes abbreviated as EtOH, using the common organic chemistry notation of representing the ethyl group (C2H5\u2212) with Et.\nPhysical properties.\nEthanol is a volatile, colorless liquid that has a slight odor. It burns with a smokeless blue flame that is not always visible in normal light. The physical properties of ethanol stem primarily from the presence of its hydroxyl group and the shortness of its carbon chain. Ethanol's hydroxyl group is able to participate in hydrogen bonding, rendering it more viscous and less volatile than less polar organic compounds of similar molecular weight, such as propane.\nEthanol's adiabatic flame temperature for combustion in air is 2082 \u00b0C or 3779 \u00b0F.\nEthanol is slightly more refractive than water, having a refractive index of 1.36242 (at \u03bb=589.3\u00a0nm and ). The triple point for ethanol is 150 K at a pressure of 4.3 \u00d7 10\u22124 Pa.\nSolvent properties.\nEthanol is a versatile solvent, miscible with water and with many organic solvents, including acetic acid, acetone, benzene, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, diethyl ether, ethylene glycol, glycerol, nitromethane, pyridine, and toluene. Its main use as a solvent is in making tincture of iodine, cough syrups, etc. It is also miscible with light aliphatic hydrocarbons, such as pentane and hexane, and with aliphatic chlorides such as trichloroethane and tetrachloroethylene.\nEthanol's miscibility with water contrasts with the immiscibility of longer-chain alcohols (five or more carbon atoms), whose water miscibility decreases sharply as the number of carbons increases. The miscibility of ethanol with alkanes is limited to alkanes up to undecane: mixtures with dodecane and higher alkanes show a miscibility gap below a certain temperature (about 13\u00a0\u00b0C for dodecane). The miscibility gap tends to get wider with higher alkanes, and the temperature for complete miscibility increases.\nEthanol-water mixtures have less volume than the sum of their individual components at the given fractions. Mixing equal volumes of ethanol and water results in only 1.92 volumes of mixture. Mixing ethanol and water is exothermic, with up to 777\u00a0J/mol being released at 298\u00a0K.\nMixtures of ethanol and water form an azeotrope at about 89 mole-% ethanol and 11 mole-% water or a mixture of 95.6% ethanol by mass (or about 97% alcohol by volume) at normal pressure, which boils at 351 K (78\u00a0\u00b0C). This azeotropic composition is strongly temperature- and pressure-dependent and vanishes at temperatures below 303\u00a0K.\nHydrogen bonding causes pure ethanol to be hygroscopic to the extent that it readily absorbs water from the air. The polar nature of the hydroxyl group causes ethanol to dissolve many ionic compounds, notably sodium and potassium hydroxides, magnesium chloride, calcium chloride, ammonium chloride, ammonium bromide, and sodium bromide. Sodium and potassium chlorides are slightly soluble in ethanol. Because the ethanol molecule also has a nonpolar end, it will also dissolve nonpolar substances, including most essential oils and numerous flavoring, coloring, and medicinal agents.\nThe addition of even a few percent of ethanol to water sharply reduces the surface tension of water. This property partially explains the \"tears of wine\" phenomenon. When wine is swirled in a glass, ethanol evaporates quickly from the thin film of wine on the wall of the glass. As the wine's ethanol content decreases, its surface tension increases and the thin film \"beads up\" and runs down the glass in channels rather than as a smooth sheet.\nFlammability.\nAn ethanol\u2013water solution will catch fire if heated above a temperature called its flash point and an ignition source is then applied to it. For 20% alcohol by mass (about 25% by volume), this will occur at about . The flash point of pure ethanol is , but may be influenced very slightly by atmospheric composition such as pressure and humidity. Ethanol mixtures can ignite below average room temperature. Ethanol is considered a flammable liquid (Class 3 Hazardous Material) in concentrations above 2.35% by mass (3.0% by volume; 6 proof).\nDishes using burning alcohol for culinary effects are called flamb\u00e9.\nNatural occurrence.\nEthanol is a byproduct of the metabolic process of yeast. As such, ethanol will be present in any yeast habitat. Ethanol can commonly be found in overripe fruit. Ethanol produced by symbiotic yeast can be found in bertam palm blossoms. Although some animal species, such as the pentailed treeshrew, exhibit ethanol-seeking behaviors, most show no interest or avoidance of food sources containing ethanol. Ethanol is also produced during the germination of many plants as a result of natural anaerobiosis. Ethanol has been detected in outer space, forming an icy coating around dust grains in interstellar clouds.\nMinute quantity amounts (average 196 ppb) of endogenous ethanol and acetaldehyde were found in the exhaled breath of healthy volunteers. Auto-brewery syndrome, also known as gut fermentation syndrome, is a rare medical condition in which intoxicating quantities of ethanol are produced through endogenous fermentation within the digestive system.\nProduction.\nEthanol is produced both as a petrochemical, through the hydration of ethylene and, via biological processes, by fermenting sugars with yeast. Which process is more economical depends on prevailing prices of petroleum and grain feed stocks.\nSources.\nWorld production of ethanol in 2006 was , with 69% of the world supply coming from Brazil and the U.S. Brazilian ethanol is produced from sugarcane, which has relatively high yields (830% more fuel than the fossil fuels used to produce it) compared to some other energy crops. Sugarcane not only has a greater concentration of sucrose than corn (by about 30%), but is also much easier to extract. The bagasse generated by the process is not discarded, but burned by power plants to produce electricity. Bagasse burning accounts for around 9% of the electricity produced in Brazil.\nIn the 1970s most industrial ethanol in the U.S. was made as a petrochemical, but in the 1980s the U.S. introduced subsidies for corn-based ethanol. According to the Renewable Fuels Association, as of 30 October 2007, 131 grain ethanol bio-refineries in the U.S. have the capacity to produce of ethanol per year. An additional 72 construction projects underway (in the U.S.) can add of new capacity in the next 18 months.\nIn India ethanol is made from sugarcane. Sweet sorghum is another potential source of ethanol, and is suitable for growing in dryland conditions. The International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics is investigating the possibility of growing sorghum as a source of fuel, food, and animal feed in arid parts of Asia and Africa. Sweet sorghum has one-third the water requirement of sugarcane over the same time period. It also requires about 22% less water than corn. The world's first sweet sorghum ethanol distillery began commercial production in 2007 in Andhra Pradesh, India.\nHydration.\nEthanol can be produced from petrochemical feed stocks, primarily by the acid-catalyzed hydration of ethylene. It is often referred to as synthetic ethanol.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe catalyst is most commonly phosphoric acid, adsorbed onto a porous support such as silica gel or diatomaceous earth. This catalyst was first used for large-scale ethanol production by the Shell Oil Company in 1947. The reaction is carried out in the presence of high pressure steam at where a 5:3 ethylene to steam ratio is maintained. This process was used on an industrial scale by Union Carbide Corporation and others. It is no longer practiced in the US as fermentation ethanol produced from corn is more economical.\nIn an older process, first practiced on the industrial scale in 1930 by Union Carbide but now almost entirely obsolete, ethylene was hydrated indirectly by reacting it with concentrated sulfuric acid to produce ethyl sulfate, which was hydrolyzed to yield ethanol and regenerate the sulfuric acid:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrom carbon dioxide.\nEthanol has been produced in the laboratory by converting carbon dioxide via biological and electrochemical reactions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFermentation.\nEthanol in alcoholic beverages and fuel is produced by fermentation. Certain species of yeast (e.g., \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\") metabolize sugar (namely polysaccharides, producing ethanol and carbon dioxide. The chemical equations below summarize the conversion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFermentation is the process of culturing yeast under favorable thermal conditions to produce alcohol. This process is carried out at around . Toxicity of ethanol to yeast limits the ethanol concentration obtainable by brewing; higher concentrations, therefore, are obtained by fortification or distillation. The most ethanol-tolerant yeast strains can survive up to approximately 18% ethanol by volume.\nTo produce ethanol from starchy materials such as cereals, the starch must first be converted into sugars. In brewing beer, this has traditionally been accomplished by allowing the grain to germinate, or malt, which produces the enzyme amylase. When the malted grain is mashed, the amylase converts the remaining starches into sugars.\nCellulose.\nSugars for ethanol fermentation can be obtained from cellulose. Deployment of this technology could turn a number of cellulose-containing agricultural by-products, such as corncobs, straw, and sawdust, into renewable energy resources. Other agricultural residues such as sugarcane bagasse and energy crops such as switchgrass may also be fermentable sugar sources.\nTesting.\nBreweries and biofuel plants employ two methods for measuring ethanol concentration. Infrared ethanol sensors measure the vibrational frequency of dissolved ethanol using the C\u2212H band at 2900\u00a0cm\u22121. This method uses a relatively inexpensive solid-state sensor that compares the C\u2212H band with a reference band to calculate the ethanol content. The calculation makes use of the Beer\u2013Lambert law. Alternatively, by measuring the density of the starting material and the density of the product, using a hydrometer, the change in specific gravity during fermentation indicates the alcohol content. This inexpensive and indirect method has a long history in the beer brewing industry.\nPurification.\nDistillation.\nEthylene hydration or brewing produces an ethanol\u2013water mixture. For most industrial and fuel uses, the ethanol must be purified. Fractional distillation at atmospheric pressure can concentrate ethanol to 95.6% by weight (89.5 mole%). This mixture is an azeotrope with a boiling point of , and \"cannot\" be further purified by distillation. Addition of an entraining agent, such as benzene, cyclohexane, or heptane, allows a new ternary azeotrope comprising the ethanol, water, and the entraining agent to be formed. This lower-boiling ternary azeotrope is removed preferentially, leading to water-free ethanol.\nMolecular sieves and desiccants.\nApart from distillation, ethanol may be dried by addition of a desiccant, such as molecular sieves, cellulose, or cornmeal. The desiccants can be dried and reused. Molecular sieves can be used to selectively absorb the water from the 95.6% ethanol solution. Molecular sieves of pore-size 3\u00a0\u00c5ngstrom, a type of zeolite, effectively sequester water molecules while excluding ethanol molecules. Heating the wet sieves drives out the water, allowing regeneration of their desiccant capability.\nMembranes and reverse osmosis.\nMembranes can also be used to separate ethanol and water. Membrane-based separations are not subject to the limitations of the water-ethanol azeotrope because the separations are not based on vapor-liquid equilibria. Membranes are often used in the so-called hybrid membrane distillation process. This process uses a pre-concentration distillation column as the first separating step. The further separation is then accomplished with a membrane operated either in vapor permeation or pervaporation mode. Vapor permeation uses a vapor membrane feed and pervaporation uses a liquid membrane feed.\nOther techniques.\nA variety of other techniques have been discussed, including the following:\nGrades of ethanol.\nDenatured alcohol.\nPure ethanol and alcoholic beverages are heavily taxed as psychoactive drugs, but ethanol has many uses that do not involve its consumption. To relieve the tax burden on these uses, most jurisdictions waive the tax when an agent has been added to the ethanol to render it unfit to drink. These include bittering agents such as denatonium benzoate and toxins such as methanol, naphtha, and pyridine. Products of this kind are called \"denatured alcohol.\"\nAbsolute alcohol.\nAbsolute or anhydrous alcohol refers to ethanol with a low water content. There are various grades with maximum water contents ranging from 1% to a few parts per million (ppm). If azeotropic distillation is used to remove water, it will contain trace amounts of the material separation agent (e.g. benzene). Absolute alcohol is not intended for human consumption. Absolute ethanol is used as a solvent for laboratory and industrial applications, where water will react with other chemicals, and as fuel alcohol. Spectroscopic ethanol is an absolute ethanol with a low absorbance in ultraviolet and visible light, fit for use as a solvent in ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy.\nPure ethanol is classed as 200 proof in the US, equivalent to 175 degrees proof in the UK system.\nRectified spirits.\nRectified spirit, an azeotropic composition of 96% ethanol containing 4% water, is used instead of anhydrous ethanol for various purposes. Spirits of wine are about 94% ethanol (188 proof). The impurities are different from those in 95% (190 proof) laboratory ethanol.\nReactions.\nEthanol is classified as a primary alcohol, meaning that the carbon that its hydroxyl group attaches to has at least two hydrogen atoms attached to it as well. Many ethanol reactions occur at its hydroxyl group.\nEster formation.\nIn the presence of acid catalysts, ethanol reacts with carboxylic acids to produce ethyl esters and water:\nRCOOH + HOCH2CH3 \u2192 RCOOCH2CH3 + H2O\nThis reaction, which is conducted on large scale industrially, requires the removal of the water from the reaction mixture as it is formed. Esters react in the presence of an acid or base to give back the alcohol and a salt. This reaction is known as saponification because it is used in the preparation of soap. Ethanol can also form esters with inorganic acids. Diethyl sulfate and triethyl phosphate are prepared by treating ethanol with sulfur trioxide and phosphorus pentoxide respectively. Diethyl sulfate is a useful ethylating agent in organic synthesis. Ethyl nitrite, prepared from the reaction of ethanol with sodium nitrite and sulfuric acid, was formerly used as a diuretic.\nDehydration.\nIn the presence of acid catalysts, alcohols can be converted to alkenes such as ethanol to ethylene. Typically solid acids such as alumina are used.\n\u00a0\u00a0 CH3CH2OH \u2192 H2C=CH2 + H2O\nSince water is removed from the same molecule, the reaction is known as intramolecular dehydration. Intramolecular dehydration of an alcohol requires a high temperature and the presence of an acid catalyst such as sulfuric acid.\nEthylene produced from sugar-derived ethanol (primarily in Brazil) competes with ethylene produced from petrochemical feedstocks such as naphtha and ethane.\nAt a lower temperature than that of intramolecular dehydration, intermolecular alcohol dehydration may occur producing a symmetrical ether. This is a condensation reaction. In the following example, diethyl ether is produced from ethanol:\n2 CH3CH2OH \u2192 CH3CH2OCH2CH3 + H2O\nCombustion.\nComplete combustion of ethanol forms carbon dioxide and water:\nC2H5OH (l) + 3 O2 (g) \u2192 2 CO2 (g) + 3 H2O (l); \u2212\u0394Hc = 1371\u00a0kJ/mol = 29.8\u00a0kJ/g = 327\u00a0kcal/mol = 7.1\u00a0kcal/g\nC2H5OH (l) + 3 O2 (g) \u2192 2 CO2 (g) + 3 H2O (g); \u2212\u0394Hc = 1236\u00a0kJ/mol = 26.8\u00a0kJ/g = 295.4\u00a0kcal/mol = 6.41 kcal/g\nSpecific heat = 2.44 kJ/(kg\u00b7K)\nAcid-base chemistry.\nEthanol is a neutral molecule and the pH of a solution of ethanol in water is nearly 7.00. Ethanol can be quantitatively converted to its conjugate base, the ethoxide ion (CH3CH2O\u2212), by reaction with an alkali metal such as sodium:\n2 CH3CH2OH + 2 Na \u2192 2 CH3CH2ONa + H2\nor a very strong base such as sodium hydride:\nCH3CH2OH + NaH \u2192 CH3CH2ONa + H2\nThe acidities of water and ethanol are nearly the same, as indicated by their pKa of 15.7 and 16 respectively. Thus, sodium ethoxide and sodium hydroxide exist in an equilibrium that is closely balanced:\nCH3CH2OH + NaOH \u21cc CH3CH2ONa + H2O\nHalogenation.\nEthanol is not used industrially as a precursor to ethyl halides, but the reactions are illustrative. Ethanol reacts with hydrogen halides to produce ethyl halides such as ethyl chloride and ethyl bromide via an SN2 reaction:\nCH3CH2OH + HCl \u2192 CH3CH2Cl + H2O\nHCl requires a catalyst such as zinc chloride.\nHBr requires refluxing with a sulfuric acid catalyst. Ethyl halides can, in principle, also be produced by treating ethanol with more specialized halogenating agents, such as thionyl chloride or phosphorus tribromide.\nCH3CH2OH + SOCl2 \u2192 CH3CH2Cl + SO2 + HCl\nUpon treatment with halogens in the presence of base, ethanol gives the corresponding haloform (CHX3, where X = Cl, Br, I). This conversion is called the haloform reaction.\nAn intermediate in the reaction with chlorine is the aldehyde called chloral, which forms chloral hydrate upon reaction with water:\n4 Cl2 + CH3CH2OH \u2192 CCl3CHO + 5 HCl\nCCl3CHO + H2O \u2192 CCl3C(OH)2H\nOxidation.\nEthanol can be oxidized to acetaldehyde and further oxidized to acetic acid, depending on the reagents and conditions. This oxidation is of no importance industrially, but in the human body, these oxidation reactions are catalyzed by the enzyme liver alcohol dehydrogenase. The oxidation product of ethanol, acetic acid, is a nutrient for humans, being a precursor to acetyl CoA, where the acetyl group can be spent as energy or used for biosynthesis.\nMetabolism.\nEthanol is similar to macronutrients such as proteins, fats, and carbohydrates in that it provides calories. When consumed and metabolized, it contributes 7\u00a0kilocalories per gram via ethanol metabolism.\nSafety.\nEthanol is very flammable and should not be used around an open flame. \nPure ethanol will irritate the skin and eyes. Nausea, vomiting, and intoxication are symptoms of ingestion. Long-term use by ingestion can result in serious liver damage. Atmospheric concentrations above one part per thousand are above the European Union occupational exposure limits.\nHistory.\nThe fermentation of sugar into ethanol is one of the earliest biotechnologies employed by humans. Ethanol has historically been identified variously as spirit of wine or ardent spirits, and as aqua vitae or aqua vita. The intoxicating effects of its consumption have been known since ancient times. Ethanol has been used by humans since prehistory as the intoxicating ingredient of alcoholic beverages. Dried residue on 9,000-year-old pottery found in China suggests that Neolithic people consumed alcoholic beverages.\nThe inflammable nature of the exhalations of wine was already known to ancient natural philosophers such as Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE), Theophrastus (c.\u2009371\u2013287 BCE), and Pliny the Elder (23/24\u201379 CE). However, this did not immediately lead to the isolation of ethanol, even despite the development of more advanced distillation techniques in second- and third-century Roman Egypt. An important recognition, first found in one of the writings attributed to J\u0101bir ibn \u1e24ayy\u0101n (ninth century CE), was that by adding salt to boiling wine, which increases the wine's relative volatility, the flammability of the resulting vapors may be enhanced. The distillation of wine is attested in Arabic works attributed to al-Kind\u012b (c.\u2009801\u2013873 CE) and to al-F\u0101r\u0101b\u012b (c.\u2009872\u2013950), and in the 28th book of al-Zahr\u0101w\u012b's (Latin: Abulcasis, 936\u20131013) \"Kit\u0101b al-Ta\u1e63r\u012bf\" (later translated into Latin as \"Liber servatoris\"). In the twelfth century, recipes for the production of \"aqua ardens\" (\"burning water\", i.e., ethanol) by distilling wine with salt started to appear in a number of Latin works, and by the end of the thirteenth century it had become a widely known substance among Western European chemists.\nThe works of Taddeo Alderotti (1223\u20131296) describe a method for concentrating ethanol involving repeated fractional distillation through a water-cooled still, by which an ethanol purity of 90% could be obtained. The medicinal properties of ethanol were studied by Arnald of Villanova (1240\u20131311 CE) and John of Rupescissa (c.\u20091310\u20131366), the latter of whom regarded it as a life-preserving substance able to prevent all diseases (the \"aqua vitae\" or \"water of life\", also called by John the \"quintessence\" of wine).\nIn China, archaeological evidence indicates that the true distillation of alcohol began during the Jin (1115\u20131234) or Southern Song (1127\u20131279) dynasties. A still has been found at an archaeological site in Qinglong, Hebei, dating to the 12th century. In India, the true distillation of alcohol was introduced from the Middle East, and was in wide use in the Delhi Sultanate by the 14th century.\nIn 1796, German-Russian chemist Johann Tobias Lowitz obtained pure ethanol by mixing partially purified ethanol (the alcohol-water azeotrope) with an excess of anhydrous alkali and then distilling the mixture over low heat. French chemist Antoine Lavoisier described ethanol as a compound of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and in 1807 Nicolas-Th\u00e9odore de Saussure determined ethanol's chemical formula. Fifty years later, Archibald Scott Couper published the structural formula of ethanol. It was one of the first structural formulas determined.\nEthanol was first prepared synthetically in 1825 by Michael Faraday. He found that sulfuric acid could absorb large volumes of coal gas. He gave the resulting solution to Henry Hennell, a British chemist, who found in 1826 that it contained \"sulphovinic acid\" (ethyl hydrogen sulfate). In 1828, Hennell and the French chemist Georges-Simon Serullas independently discovered that sulphovinic acid could be decomposed into ethanol. Thus, in 1825 Faraday had unwittingly discovered that ethanol could be produced from ethylene (a component of coal gas) by acid-catalyzed hydration, a process similar to current industrial ethanol synthesis.\nEthanol was used as lamp fuel in the U.S. as early as 1840, but a tax levied on industrial alcohol during the Civil War made this use uneconomical. The tax was repealed in 1906. Use as an automotive fuel dates back to 1908, with the Ford Model T able to run on petrol (gasoline) or ethanol. It fuels some spirit lamps.\nEthanol intended for industrial use is often produced from ethylene. Ethanol has widespread use as a solvent of substances intended for human contact or consumption, including scents, flavorings, colorings, and medicines. In chemistry, it is both a solvent and a feedstock for the synthesis of other products. It has a long history as a fuel for heat and light, and more recently as a fuel for internal combustion engines.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10049", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10049", "title": "Eric Clapton", "text": "English guitarist, singer, and songwriter (born 1945)\nEric Patrick Clapton (born 30 March 1945) is an English rock and blues guitarist, singer, and songwriter. He is regarded as one of the most successful and influential guitarists in rock music. Clapton ranked second in \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of the \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" and fourth in Gibson's \"Top 50 Guitarists of All Time\". He was also named number five in \"Time\" magazine's list of \"The 10 Best Electric Guitar Players\" in 2009.\nAfter playing in a number of different local bands, Clapton joined the Yardbirds in 1963, replacing founding guitarist Top Topham. Dissatisfied with the change of the Yardbirds sound from blues rock to a more radio-friendly pop rock sound, Clapton left in 1965 to play with John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers. On leaving Mayall in 1966, after one album, he formed the power trio Cream with drummer Ginger Baker and bassist Jack Bruce, in which Clapton played sustained blues improvisations and \"arty, blues-based psychedelic pop\". After Cream broke up in November 1968, he formed the blues rock band Blind Faith with Baker, Steve Winwood, and Ric Grech, recording one album and performing on one tour before they broke up. Clapton embarked on a solo career in 1970.\nAlongside his solo career, he also performed with Delaney &amp; Bonnie and Derek and the Dominos, with whom he recorded \"Layla\", one of his signature songs. He continued to record a number of successful solo albums and songs over the next several decades, including a 1974 cover of Bob Marley's \"I Shot the Sheriff\" (which helped reggae reach a mass market), the country-infused \"Slowhand\" album (1977) and the pop rock of 1986's \"August\". Following the death of his son Conor in 1991, Clapton's grief was expressed in the song \"Tears in Heaven\", which appeared on his \"Unplugged\" album, and in 1996 he had another top-40 hit with the R&amp;B crossover \"Change the World\". In 1998, he released the Grammy award-winning \"My Father's Eyes\". Since 1999, he has recorded a number of traditional blues and blues rock albums and hosted the periodic Crossroads Guitar Festival. His most recent studio album is \"Happy Xmas\" (2018).\nClapton has received 18 Grammy Awards as well as the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music. In 2004, he was awarded a CBE for services to music. He has received four Ivor Novello Awards from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors, including the Lifetime Achievement Award. He is the only three-time inductee to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: once as a solo artist and separately as a member of the Yardbirds and of Cream. In his solo career, Clapton has sold more than 280 million records worldwide, making him one of the best-selling musicians of all time. In 1998, Clapton, a recovering alcoholic and drug addict, founded the Crossroads Centre on Antigua, a medical facility for those recovering from substance abuse.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nClapton was born on 30 March 1945 in Ripley, Surrey, England, to 16-year-old Patricia Molly Clapton (7 January 1929 \u2013 March 1999) and Edward Walter Fryer (21 March 1920 \u2013 15 May 1985), a 25-year-old soldier from Montreal, Quebec. Fryer was drafted to war before Clapton's birth and then returned to Canada. Clapton grew up believing that his grandmother, Rose, and her second husband, Jack Clapp, Patricia's stepfather, were his parents, and that his mother was actually his older sister. The similarity in surnames gave rise to the erroneous belief that Clapton's real surname is Clapp (Reginald Cecil Clapton was the name of Rose's first husband, Eric Clapton's maternal grandfather). Years later, his mother married another Canadian soldier and moved to Germany, leaving Eric with his grandparents in Surrey.\nClapton received an acoustic Hoyer guitar, made in Germany, for his thirteenth birthday, but the inexpensive steel-stringed instrument was difficult to play and he briefly lost interest. Two years later he picked it up again and started playing consistently. Clapton was influenced by blues music from an early age, and practised long hours to learn the chords of blues music by playing along to the records. He preserved his practice sessions using his portable Grundig reel-to-reel tape recorder, listening to them over and over until satisfied.\nIn 1961, after leaving Hollyfield School in Surbiton, Clapton studied at the Kingston College of Art but was expelled at the end of the academic year because his focus had remained on music rather than art. His guitar playing was sufficiently advanced that, by the age of 16, he was getting noticed. Around this time, he began busking around Kingston, Richmond, and the West End.\nIn 1962, Clapton started performing as a duo with fellow blues enthusiast Dave Brock in pubs around Surrey. When he was 17 years old, Clapton joined his first band, an early British R&amp;B group, the Roosters, whose other guitarist was Tom McGuinness. He stayed with this band from January until August 1963. In October of that year, Clapton did a seven-gig stint with Casey Jones &amp; the Engineers.\nCareer.\nThe Yardbirds and the Bluesbreakers.\nIn October 1963, Clapton joined the Yardbirds, a rhythm and blues band, and stayed with them until March 1965. Synthesising influences from Chicago blues and leading blues guitarists such as Buddy Guy, Freddie King, and B.B. King, Clapton forged a distinctive style and rapidly became one of the most talked-about guitarists in the British music scene. The band initially played Chess/Checker/Vee-Jay blues numbers and began to attract a large cult following when they took over the Rolling Stones' residency at the Crawdaddy Club in Richmond, London. They toured England with American bluesman Sonny Boy Williamson II; a joint LP album, recorded in December 1963, was issued in 1965.\nYardbirds' rhythm guitarist, Chris Dreja, recalled that whenever Clapton broke a guitar string during a concert, he would stay on stage and replace it. The English audiences would wait out the delay by doing what is called a \"slow handclap\". Clapton's nickname of \"Slowhand\" came from Giorgio Gomelsky, a pun on the slow handclapping that ensued when Clapton stopped playing while he replaced a string. In December 1964, Clapton made his first appearance at the Royal Albert Hall in London, with the Yardbirds. Since then, Clapton has performed at the Hall over 200 times, and has stated that performing at the venue is like \"playing in my front room\".\nIn March 1965, Clapton and the Yardbirds had their first major hit, \"For Your Love\", written by songwriter Graham Gouldman, who also wrote hit songs for Herman's Hermits and the Hollies (and later achieved success of his own as a member of 10cc). In part because of its success, the Yardbirds elected to move toward a pop-orientated sound, much to the annoyance of Clapton, who was devoted to the blues and not commercial success. He left the Yardbirds on the day that \"For Your Love\" went public, a move that left the band without its lead guitarist and most accomplished member. Clapton suggested fellow guitarist Jimmy Page as his replacement, but Page declined out of loyalty to Clapton, putting Jeff Beck forward. Beck and Page played together in the Yardbirds for a while, but Beck, Page, and Clapton were never in the group together. They first appeared together in 1983 on the 12-date benefit tour for Action for Research into multiple sclerosis with the first date on 23 September at the Royal Albert Hall.\nClapton joined John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers in April 1965, only to quit a few months later. In June, Clapton was invited to jam with Jimmy Page, recording a number of tracks that were retroactively credited to The Immediate All-Stars. In the summer of 1965 he left for Greece with a band called the Glands, which included his old friend Ben Palmer on piano. After a car crash that killed the bassist and injured the guitarist of the Greek band the Juniors, on 17 October 1965 the surviving members played memorial shows in which Clapton played with the band. In October 1965 he rejoined John Mayall. In March 1966, while still a member of the Bluesbreakers, Clapton briefly collaborated on a side project with Jack Bruce and Steve Winwood among others, recording only a few tracks under the name Eric Clapton and the Powerhouse. During his second Bluesbreakers stint, Clapton gained a reputation as the best blues guitarist on the club circuit. Although Clapton gained fame for playing on the influential album, \"Blues Breakers \u2013 John Mayall \u2013 With Eric Clapton\", this album was not released until he had left the band for the last time in July 1966. The album itself is often called \"The Beano Album\" by fans because of its cover photograph showing Clapton reading the British children's comic \"The Beano\".\nHaving swapped his Fender Telecaster and Vox AC30 amplifier for a 1960 Gibson Les Paul Standard guitar and Marshall amplifier, Clapton's sound and playing inspired the famous slogan \"Clapton is God\", spray-painted by an unknown admirer on a wall in Islington, North London in 1967. The graffito was captured in a now-famous photograph, in which a dog is urinating on the wall. Clapton is reported to have been embarrassed by the slogan, saying in his \"The South Bank Show\" profile in 1987, \"I never accepted that I was the greatest guitar player in the world. I always \"wanted\" to be the greatest guitar player in the world, but that's an ideal, and I accept it as an ideal\".\nCream.\nClapton left the Bluesbreakers in July 1966 (replaced by Peter Green) and was invited by drummer Ginger Baker to play in his newly formed band Cream, one of the earliest supergroups, with Jack Bruce on bass (Bruce was previously of the Bluesbreakers, the Graham Bond Organisation and Manfred Mann). Before the formation of Cream, Clapton was not well known in the United States; he left the Yardbirds before \"For Your Love\" hit the US top ten, and had yet to perform there. During his time with Cream, Clapton began to develop as a singer, songwriter and guitarist, though Bruce took most of the lead vocals and wrote the majority of the material with lyricist Pete Brown. Cream's first gig was an unofficial performance at the Twisted Wheel Club in Manchester on 29 July 1966 before their full debut two nights later at the National Jazz and Blues Festival in Windsor. Cream established its enduring legend with the high-volume blues jamming and extended solos of their live shows.\nBy early 1967, fans of the emerging blues-rock sound in the UK had begun to portray Clapton as Britain's top guitarist; however, he found himself rivalled by the emergence of Jimi Hendrix, an acid rock-infused guitarist who used wailing feedback and effects pedals to create new sounds for the instrument. Hendrix attended a performance of the newly formed Cream at the Central London Polytechnic on 1 October 1966, during which he sat in on a double-timed version of \"Killing Floor\". Top UK stars, including Clapton, Pete Townshend and members of the Rolling Stones and the Beatles, avidly attended Hendrix's early club performances. Hendrix's arrival had an immediate and major effect on the next phase of Clapton's career.\nClapton first visited the United States while touring with Cream. In March 1967, Cream performed a nine-show stand at the RKO Theater in New York. Clapton's 1964 painted Gibson SG guitar \u2013 The Fool \u2013 a \"psychedelic fantasy\", according to Clapton, made its debut at the RKO Theater. Clapton used the guitar for most of Cream's recordings after \"Fresh Cream\", particularly on \"Disraeli Gears\", until the band broke up in 1968. One of the world's best-known guitars, it symbolises the psychedelic era. They recorded \"Disraeli Gears\" in New York from 11 to 15 May 1967. Cream's repertoire varied from hard rock (\"I Feel Free\") to lengthy blues-based instrumental jams (\"Spoonful\"). \"Disraeli Gears\" contained Clapton's searing guitar lines, Bruce's soaring vocals and prominent, fluid bass playing, and Baker's powerful, polyrhythmic jazz-influenced drumming. Together, Cream's talents secured them as an influential power trio. Clapton's voice can be heard on Frank Zappa's album \"We're Only in It for the Money\", on the tracks \"Are You Hung Up?\" and \"Nasal Retentive Calliope Music\".\nIn 28 months, Cream had become a commercial success, selling millions of records and playing throughout the US and Europe. They redefined the instrumentalist's role in rock and were one of the first blues-rock bands to emphasise musical virtuosity and lengthy jazz-style improvisation sessions. Their US hit singles include \"Sunshine of Your Love\" (No. 5, 1968), \"White Room\" (No. 6, 1968) and \"Crossroads\" (No. 28, 1969) \u2013 a live version of Robert Johnson's \"Cross Road Blues\". Though Cream were hailed as one of the greatest groups of its day, and the adulation of Clapton as a guitar legend reached new heights, the supergroup was short-lived. Drug and alcohol use escalated tension between the three members, and conflicts between Bruce and Baker eventually led to Cream's demise. A strongly critical \"Rolling Stone\" review of a concert of the group's second headlining US tour was another significant factor in the trio's demise, and it affected Clapton profoundly. Clapton has also credited \"Music from Big Pink\", the debut album of The Band, and its revolutionary Americana sound as influencing his decision to leave Cream.\nCream's farewell album, \"Goodbye\", comprising live performances recorded at The Forum, Los Angeles, on 19 October 1968, was released shortly after Cream disbanded. It also spawned the studio single \"Badge\", co-written by Clapton and George Harrison. (Clapton had met and become close friends with Harrison after the Beatles shared a bill with the Clapton-era Yardbirds at the London Palladium.) In 1968, Clapton played the lead guitar solo on Harrison's \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\", from the Beatles' self-titled double album (also known as the \"White Album\"). Harrison's debut solo album, \"Wonderwall Music\" (1968), became the first of many Harrison solo records to include Clapton on guitar. Clapton went largely uncredited for his contributions to Harrison's albums due to contractual restraints, and Harrison was credited as \"L'Angelo Misterioso\" for his contributions to the song \"Badge\" on \"Goodbye\". The pair often played live together as each other's guest. A year after Harrison's death in 2001, Clapton was musical director for the Concert for George.\nIn January 1969, when the Beatles were recording and filming what became \"Let It Be\", tensions became so acute that Harrison quit the group for several days, prompting John Lennon to suggest they complete the project with Clapton if Harrison did not return. Michael Lindsay-Hogg, television director of the recording sessions for \"Let It Be\", later recalled: \"I was there when John mentioned Clapton \u2013 but that wasn't going to happen. Would Eric have become a Beatle? No. Paul [McCartney] didn't want to go there. He didn't want them to break up. Then George came back.\" Clapton was on good terms with all four of the Beatles; in December 1968 he had played with Lennon at \"The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus\" as part of the one-off group the Dirty Mac.\nCream briefly reunited in 1993 to perform at the ceremony inducting them into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. A full reunion took place in May 2005, with Clapton, Bruce and Baker playing four sold-out concerts at London's Royal Albert Hall, and three shows at New York's Madison Square Garden that October. Recordings from the London shows, \"Royal Albert Hall London May 2-3-5-6, 2005\", were released on CD, LP and DVD in late 2005.\nBlind Faith, Delaney and Bonnie and Friends.\nClapton's next group, Blind Faith, formed in 1969, was composed of Cream drummer Ginger Baker, Steve Winwood of Traffic, and Ric Grech of Family, and yielded one LP and one arena-circuit tour. The supergroup debuted before 100,000 fans in London's Hyde Park on 7 June 1969. They performed several dates in Scandinavia and began a sold-out American tour in July before their only album was released. The LP \"Blind Faith\" consisted of just six songs, one of them the hit \"Can't Find My Way Home\". Another, \"Presence of the Lord\", is the first song credited solely to Clapton. The album's jacket image of a topless pubescent girl was deemed controversial in the US and was replaced by a photograph of the band. Blind Faith dissolved after less than seven months.\nClapton subsequently toured as a sideman for an act that had opened for Blind Faith, Delaney and Bonnie and Friends. He also performed as a member of Lennon's Plastic Ono Band at the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival in September 1969, a recording from which was released as the album \"Live Peace in Toronto 1969\". On 30 September, Clapton played lead guitar on Lennon's second solo single, \"Cold Turkey\". On 15 December that year, Clapton performed with Lennon, Harrison and others as the Plastic Ono Supergroup at a fundraiser for UNICEF in London.\nDelaney Bramlett encouraged Clapton in his singing and writing. Using the Bramletts' backing group and an all-star cast of session players (including Leon Russell and Stephen Stills), Clapton recorded his first solo album during two brief tour hiatuses, titled \"Eric Clapton\". Delaney Bramlett co-wrote six of the songs with Clapton, also producing the LP, and Bonnie Bramlett co-wrote \"Let It Rain\". The album yielded the unexpected US No.\u00a018 hit, J. J. Cale's \"After Midnight\". Clapton also worked with much of Delaney and Bonnie's band to record George Harrison's \"All Things Must Pass\" in spring 1970.\nDuring this period, Clapton also recorded with artists such as Dr. John, Leon Russell, Billy Preston, Ringo Starr and Dave Mason. With Chicago blues artist Howlin' Wolf, he recorded \"The London Howlin' Wolf Sessions\", that also included long-time Wolf guitarist Hubert Sumlin and members of the Rolling Stones, Winwood and Starr. Despite the superstar line-up, critic Cub Koda noted: \"Even Eric Clapton, who usually welcomes any chance to play with one of his idols, has criticized this album repeatedly in interviews, which speaks volumes in and of itself.\" Other noted recordings from this period include Clapton's guitar work on \"Go Back Home\" from Stephen Stills' self-titled first solo album.\nDerek and the Dominos.\nWith the intention of counteracting the \"star\" cult faction that had begun to form around him, Clapton assembled a new band composed of Delaney and Bonnie's former rhythm section, Bobby Whitlock as keyboardist and vocalist, Carl Radle as the bassist, and drummer Jim Gordon, with Clapton playing guitar. It was his intention to show that he need not fill a starring role, and functioned well as a member of an ensemble. During this period, Clapton was increasingly influenced by The Band and their 1968 album \"Music from Big Pink\", saying: \"What I appreciated about the Band was that they were more concerned with songs and singing. They would have three- and four-part harmonies, and the guitar was put back into perspective as being accompaniment. That suited me well, because I had gotten so tired of the virtuosity \u2013 or \"pseudo\"-virtuosity \u2013 thing of long, boring guitar solos just because they were expected. The Band brought things back into perspective. The priority was the song.\"\nThe band was originally called \"Eric Clapton and Friends\". The eventual name was a fluke that occurred when the band's provisional name of \"Del and the Dynamos\" was misread as Derek and the Dominos. Clapton's biography states that Tony Ashton of Ashton, Gardner and Dyke told Clapton to call the band \"Del and the Dominos\", since \"Del\" was his nickname for Eric Clapton. Del and Eric were combined and the final name became \"Derek and the Dominos\".\nClapton's close friendship with George Harrison brought him into contact with Harrison's wife, Pattie Boyd, with whom he became deeply infatuated. When she spurned his advances, Clapton's unrequited affections prompted most of the material for the Dominos' album \"Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs\" (1970). Heavily blues-influenced, the album features the twin lead guitars of Clapton and Duane Allman, with Allman's slide guitar as a key ingredient of the sound. Working at Criteria Studios in Miami with Atlantic Records producer Tom Dowd, who had worked with Clapton on Cream's \"Disraeli Gears\", the band recorded a double album.\nThe album contained the hit love song \"Layla\", inspired by the classical poet of Persian literature, Nizami Ganjavi's \"The Story of Layla and Majnun\", a copy of which Ian Dallas had given to Clapton. The book moved Clapton profoundly, as it was the tale of a young man who fell hopelessly in love with a beautiful, unavailable woman and went crazy because he could not marry her. The two parts of \"Layla\" were recorded in separate sessions: the opening guitar section was recorded first, and for the second section, laid down a few weeks later, drummer Jim Gordon played the piano part for the melody, which he claimed to have written (though Bobby Whitlock stated that Rita Coolidge wrote it).\nThe \"Layla\" LP was actually recorded by a five-piece version of the group, thanks to the unforeseen inclusion of guitarist Duane Allman of the Allman Brothers Band. A few days into the Layla sessions, Dowd \u2013 who was also producing the Allmans \u2013 invited Clapton to an Allman Brothers outdoor concert in Miami. The two guitarists met first on stage, then played all night in the studio, and became friends. Duane first added his slide guitar to \"Tell the Truth\" and \"Nobody Knows You When You're Down and Out\". In four days, the five-piece Dominos recorded \"Key to the Highway\", \"Have You Ever Loved a Woman\" (a blues standard popularised by Freddie King and others) and \"Why Does Love Got to be So Sad?\" In September, Duane briefly left the sessions for gigs with his own band, and the four-piece Dominos recorded \"I Looked Away\", \"Bell Bottom Blues\" and \"Keep on Growing\". Allman returned to record \"I Am Yours\", \"Anyday\" and \"It's Too Late\". On 9 September, they recorded Hendrix's \"Little Wing\" and the title track. The following day, the final track, \"It's Too Late\", was recorded.\nTragedy dogged the group throughout its brief career. During the sessions, Clapton was devastated by news of the death of Jimi Hendrix; eight days previously the band had cut a cover of \"Little Wing\" as a tribute. On 17 September 1970, one day before Hendrix's death, Clapton had purchased a left-handed Fender Stratocaster that he had planned to give to Hendrix as a birthday gift. Adding to Clapton's woes, \"Layla\" received only lukewarm reviews upon release. The shaken group undertook a US tour without Allman, who had returned to the Allman Brothers Band. Despite Clapton's later admission that the tour took place amid a blizzard of drugs and alcohol, it resulted in the live double album \"In Concert\".\nRecording of a second Dominos studio album was underway when a clash of egos took place and Clapton walked out, thus disbanding the group. Allman was killed in a motorcycle accident on 29 October 1971. Clapton wrote later in his autobiography that he and Allman were inseparable during the \"Layla\" sessions in Florida; he talked about Allman as the \"musical brother I'd never had but wished I did\". Although Radle remained Clapton's bass player until the summer of 1979 (Radle died in May 1980 from the effects of alcohol and narcotics), it was not until 2003 that Clapton and Whitlock appeared together again; Clapton guested on Whitlock's appearance on the \"Later with Jools Holland\" show. Another tragic footnote to the Dominos story was the fate of drummer Jim Gordon, who had undiagnosed schizophrenia and years later murdered his mother during a psychotic episode. Gordon was confined to 16-years-to-life imprisonment, later being moved to a mental institution, where he remained for the rest of his life.\nPersonal problems and early solo success.\nClapton's career successes in the 1970s were in stark contrast with the struggles he coped with in his personal life, which was troubled by romantic longings and drug and alcohol addiction. Still infatuated with Boyd and torn by his friendship with Harrison, he withdrew from recording and touring to isolation in his Surrey residence as the Dominos broke up. He nursed a heroin addiction, which resulted in a lengthy career hiatus interrupted only by performing at Harrison's Concert for Bangladesh benefit shows in New York in August 1971; there, he passed out on stage, was revived, and managed to finish his performance. In January 1973, the Who's Pete Townshend organised a comeback concert for Clapton at London's Rainbow Theatre, titled the \"Rainbow Concert\", to help Clapton kick his addiction. Clapton returned the favour by playing \"The Preacher\" in Ken Russell's film version of the Who's \"Tommy\" in 1975. His appearance in the film (performing \"Eyesight to the Blind\") is notable as he is clearly wearing a fake beard in some shots, the result of deciding to shave off his real beard after the initial takes in an attempt to force the director to remove his earlier scene from the film and leave the set.\nIn 1974, Clapton started living with Boyd (they would not marry until 1979) and was no longer using heroin (although he gradually began to drink heavily). He assembled a low-key touring band that included Radle, Miami guitarist George Terry, keyboardist Dick Sims (who died in 2011), drummer Jamie Oldaker, and vocalists Yvonne Elliman and Marcy Levy (also known as Marcella Detroit). With this band Clapton recorded \"461 Ocean Boulevard\" (1974), an album with an emphasis on more compact songs and fewer guitar solos; the cover version of \"I Shot the Sheriff\" was Clapton's first number one hit and was important in bringing reggae and the music of Bob Marley to a wider audience. The 1975 album \"There's One in Every Crowd\" continued this trend. The album's original title, \"The World's Greatest Guitar Player (There's One in Every Crowd)\", was changed before pressing, as it was felt its ironic intention would be misunderstood. The band toured the world and subsequently released the 1975 live LP \"E. C. Was Here\". Clapton continued to release albums and toured regularly. Highlights of the period include \"No Reason to Cry\" (a collaboration with Bob Dylan and The Band); \"Slowhand\", which contained \"Wonderful Tonight\" and a second J. J. Cale cover, \"Cocaine\". In 1976, he performed as one of a string of notable guests at the farewell performance of The Band, filmed in a Martin Scorsese documentary titled \"The Last Waltz\".\nContinued success.\nIn 1981, Clapton was invited by producer Martin Lewis to appear at the Amnesty International benefit The Secret Policeman's Other Ball in London. Clapton accepted the invitation and teamed up with Jeff Beck to perform a series of duets \u2013 reportedly their first ever billed stage collaboration. Three of the performances were released on the album of the show, and one of the songs appeared in the film. The performances at London's Drury Lane theatre heralded a return to form and prominence for Clapton in the new decade. Many factors had influenced Clapton's comeback, including his \"deepening commitment to Christianity\", to which he had converted prior to his heroin addiction.\nAfter calling his manager and admitting he was an alcoholic, Clapton flew to Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul in January 1982 and checked in at Hazelden Treatment Center, located in Center City, Minnesota. On the flight over, Clapton indulged in a large number of drinks, for fear he would never be able to drink again. Clapton wrote in his autobiography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the lowest moments of my life, the only reason I didn't commit suicide was that I knew I wouldn't be able to drink any more if I was dead. It was the only thing I thought was worth living for, and the idea that people were about to try and remove me from alcohol was so terrible that I drank and drank and drank, and they had to practically carry me into the clinic.\nAfter being discharged, it was recommended by doctors of Hazelden that Clapton not partake in any activities that would act as triggers for his alcoholism or stress. But it did happen. Clapton would go back to the Hazelden Treatment Center in November 1987. He has stayed sober ever since. A few months after his discharge from his first rehab, Clapton began working on his next album, against doctors' orders. Working with Tom Dowd, he produced what he thought as his \"most forced\" album to date, \"Money and Cigarettes\". Clapton chose the name of the album \"because that's all I saw myself having left\" after his first rehabilitation from alcoholism.\nIn 1984, he performed on former Pink Floyd member Roger Waters' solo album \"The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking\", and participated in the supporting tour. Since then Waters and Clapton have had a close relationship. In 2005, they performed together for the Tsunami Relief Fund. In 2006, they performed at the Highclere Castle, in aid of the Countryside Alliance, playing two set pieces of \"Wish You Were Here\" and \"Comfortably Numb\". Clapton, now a regular charity performer, played at the Live Aid concert at John F. Kennedy Stadium in Philadelphia on 13 July 1985, playing with Phil Collins, Tim Renwick, Chris Stainton, Jamie Oldaker, Marcy Levy, Shaun Murphy and Donald 'Duck' Dunn. When offered a slot close to peak viewing hours, he was apparently flattered. His album output continued in the 1980s, including two produced with Phil Collins, 1985's \"Behind the Sun\", which produced the hits \"Forever Man\" and \"She's Waiting\", and 1986's \"August\".\n\"August\" was suffused with Collins's trademark drum and horn sound, and became Clapton's biggest seller in the UK to date, matching his highest chart position, number 3. The album's first track, the hit \"It's in the Way That You Use It\", appeared in the Tom Cruise\u2013Paul Newman film \"The Color of Money\". The songs \"Tearing Us Apart\" (with Tina Turner) and \"Miss You\" continued Clapton's more angry sound. This rebound kicked off Clapton's two-year period of touring with Collins and their \"August\" collaborators, bassist Nathan East and keyboard player/songwriter Greg Phillinganes. While on tour for \"August\", two concert videos were recorded of the four-man band: \"Eric Clapton Live from Montreux\" and \"Eric Clapton and Friends\". Clapton later remade \"After Midnight\" as a single and a promotional track for the Michelob beer brand, which had also used earlier songs by Collins and Steve Winwood. Clapton won a British Academy Television Award for his collaboration with Michael Kamen on the score for the 1985 BBC television thriller series \"Edge of Darkness\". At the 1987 Brit Awards in London, Clapton was awarded the prize for Outstanding Contribution to Music. In 1987, he played on George Harrison's album \"Cloud Nine\", contributing guitar to \"Cloud 9\", \"That's What It Takes\", \"Devil's Radio\" and \"Wreck of the Hesperus\".\nClapton also got together with the Bee Gees for charity. The supergroup called itself the Bunburys, and recorded a charity album with the proceeds going to the Bunbury Cricket Club in Cheshire, which plays exhibition cricket matches to raise money for nonprofit organisations in England. The Bunburys recorded three songs for \"The Bunbury Tails\": \"We're the Bunburys\", \"Bunbury Afternoon\" and \"Fight (No Matter How Long)\". The last song also appeared on \"The 1988 Summer Olympics Album\" and went to No. 8 on the rock music chart. Clapton played at the cricket club's 25th anniversary celebrations in 2011, which were held at London's Grosvenor House Hotel. In 1988, he played with Dire Straits and Elton John at the Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute at Wembley Stadium and the Prince's Trust rock gala at the Royal Albert Hall. In 1989, Clapton released \"Journeyman\", an album that covered a wide range of styles, including blues, jazz, soul and pop. Collaborators included George Harrison, Phil Collins, Daryl Hall, Chaka Khan, Mick Jones, David Sanborn and Robert Cray. The song \"Bad Love\" was released as a single and later won the Grammy Award for Best Male Rock Vocal Performance.\nSon's death, \"Tears in Heaven\".\nThe 1990s brought a series of 32 concerts to the Royal Albert Hall, such as the 24 Nights series of concerts that took place around January through February 1990, and February to March 1991. On 30 June 1990, Dire Straits, Clapton and Elton John made a guest appearance in the Nordoff-Robbins charity show held at Knebworth in England. On 27 August 1990, fellow blues guitarist Stevie Ray Vaughan, who was touring with Clapton, and three members of their road crew were killed in a helicopter crash between concerts. Then, on 20 March 1991, Clapton's four-year-old son, Conor, died after falling from the 53rd-floor window of his mother's friend's New York City apartment at 117 East 57th Street. Conor's funeral took place on 28 March at St Mary Magdalene's Church in Clapton's home village in Ripley, Surrey, with Conor buried in the church graveyard. In 1991, Clapton appeared on Richie Sambora's album, \"Stranger in This Town\", in a song dedicated to him, called \"Mr. Bluesman\". He contributed guitar and vocals to \"Runaway Train\", a duet with Elton John on the latter's \"The One\" album the following year.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI almost subconsciously used music for myself as a healing agent, and lo and behold, it worked\u00a0... I have got a great deal of happiness and a great deal of healing from music.\n\u2014Clapton on the healing process in writing \"Tears in Heaven\".\nClapton's grief was expressed in the song \"Tears in Heaven\", which was co-written by Will Jennings. At the 35th Annual Grammy Awards, Clapton received six Grammys for the single \"Tears in Heaven\" and his \"Unplugged\" album, for which Clapton performed live in front of a small audience on 16 January 1992 at Bray Film Studios in Windsor, Berkshire, England. The album reached number one on the \"Billboard\" 200, and is certified Diamond by the RIAA for selling over 10 million copies in the US. It reached number two in the UK Albums Chart and is certified four times platinum in the UK. On 9 September 1992, Clapton performed \"Tears in Heaven\" at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards, and won the award for Best Male Video.\nIn 1992, Clapton received the Ivor Novello Award for Lifetime Achievement from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors. In October 1992 Clapton was among the dozens of artists performing at Bob Dylan's 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration. Recorded at Madison Square Garden in New York City, the live two-disk CD/DVD captured a show full of celebrities performing classic Dylan songs, with Clapton playing the lead on a nearly 7-minute version of Dylan's \"Knockin' on Heaven's Door\" as part of the finale. While Clapton played acoustic guitar on \"Unplugged\", his 1994 album \"From the Cradle\" contained new versions of old blues standards, highlighted by his electric guitar playing. In 1995, Clapton for the first and only time appeared on a UK No. 1 single, collaborating with Chrissie Hynde, Cher and Neneh Cherry on a solo to a cover of \"Love Can Build a Bridge\" released in aid of the British charity telethon Comic Relief.\nOn 12 September 1996 Clapton played a party for Armani at New York City's Lexington Armory with Greg Phillinganes, Nathan East and Steve Gadd. Sheryl Crow appeared on one number, performing \"Tearing Us Apart\", a track from \"August\", which was first performed by Tina Turner during the Prince's Trust All-Star Rock show in 1986. It was Clapton's sole US appearance that year, following the open-air concert held at Hyde Park. The concert was taped and the footage was released both on VHS video cassette and later, on DVD. \nClapton's 1996 recording of the Wayne Kirkpatrick/Gordon Kennedy/Tommy Sims tune \"Change the World\" (on the soundtrack of the film \"Phenomenon\") won the Grammy Award for Song of the Year in 1997, the same year he recorded \"Retail Therapy\" (an album of electronic music with Simon Climie under the pseudonym TDF). On 15 September 1997, Clapton appeared at the \"Music for Montserrat\" concert at the Royal Albert Hall, London, performing \"Layla\" and \"Same Old Blues\" before finishing with \"Hey Jude\" alongside fellow English artists Paul McCartney, Elton John, Phil Collins, Mark Knopfler and Sting. That autumn, Clapton released the album \"Pilgrim\", the first record containing new material for almost a decade.\nIn 1996, Clapton had a relationship with singer-songwriter Sheryl Crow. They remain friends, and Clapton appeared as a guest on Crow's Central Park Concert. The duo performed a Cream hit single, \"White Room\". Later, Clapton and Crow performed an alternate version of \"Tulsa Time\" with other guitar legends at the Crossroads Guitar Festival in June 2007 as well as Robert Johnson's blues classic \"Crossroads\" at London's Hyde Park in August 2008 with John Mayer and Robert Randolph.\nAt the 41st Annual Grammy Awards on 24 February 1999, Clapton received his third Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance, for his song \"My Father's Eyes\". In October 1999, the compilation album, \"\", was released, which contained a new song, \"Blue Eyes Blue\", that also appears in soundtrack for the film, \"Runaway Bride\". Clapton finished the twentieth century with collaborations with Carlos Santana and B.B. King. Clapton looked up to King and had always wanted to make an album with him, while King said of Clapton, \"I admire the man. I think he's No. 1 in rock 'n' roll as a guitarist and No. 1 as a great person.\"\nCollaboration albums.\nClapton released the album \"Reptile\" in March 2001. One month after the 11 September attacks, Clapton appeared at the Concert for New York City, performing alongside Buddy Guy. An event marking the Golden Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II in June 2002, Clapton performed \"Layla\" and \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\" at the Party at the Palace concert in the grounds of Buckingham Palace. On 29 November 2002, the Concert for George was held at the Royal Albert Hall, a tribute to George Harrison, who had died a year earlier of lung cancer. Clapton was a performer and the musical director. The concert included Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Jeff Lynne, Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, Ravi Shankar, Gary Brooker, Billy Preston, Joe Brown and Dhani Harrison. In 2004, Clapton released two albums of covers of songs by bluesman Robert Johnson, \"Me and Mr. Johnson\" and \"Sessions for Robert J\". Guitarist Doyle Bramhall II worked on the album with Clapton (after opening Clapton's 2001 tour with his band Smokestack) and joined him on his 2004 tour. In 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Clapton No.\u00a053 on their list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\". Other media appearances include the Toots &amp; the Maytals Grammy award-winning album \"True Love\", where he played guitar on the track \"Pressure Drop\".\nOn 22 January 2005, Clapton performed in the Tsunami Relief Concert held at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff, in aid of the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In May 2005, Clapton, Jack Bruce, and Ginger Baker reunited as Cream for a series of concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Concert recordings were released on CD and DVD. Later, Cream performed in New York at Madison Square Garden. Clapton's first album of new original material in nearly five years, \"Back Home\", was released on Reprise Records on 30 August.\nA collaboration with guitarist J. J. Cale, \"The Road to Escondido\", was released on 7 November 2006, featuring Derek Trucks and Billy Preston (Preston had also been a part of Clapton's 2004 touring band). He invited Trucks to join his band for his 2006\u20132007 world tour. Bramhall remained, giving Clapton three elite guitarists in his band, allowing him to revisit many Derek and the Dominos songs that he hadn't played in decades. Trucks became the third member of the Allman Brothers Band to tour supporting Clapton, the second being pianist/keyboardist Chuck Leavell, who appeared on the \"MTV Unplugged\" album and the \"24 Nights\" performances at the Royal Albert Hall, London in 1990 and 1991, as well as Clapton's 1992 US tour.\nOn 20 May 2006, Clapton performed with Queen drummer Roger Taylor and former Pink Floyd bassist/songwriter Roger Waters at Highclere Castle, Hampshire, in support of the Countryside Alliance, which promotes issues relating to the British countryside. On 13 August 2006, Clapton made a guest appearance at the Bob Dylan concert in Columbus, Ohio, playing guitar on three songs in Jimmie Vaughan's opening act. The chemistry between Trucks and Clapton convinced him to invite the Derek Trucks Band to open for Clapton's set at his 2007 Crossroads Guitar Festival. Trucks remained on set and performed with Clapton's band throughout his performances. The rights to Clapton's official memoirs, written by Christopher Simon Sykes and published in 2007, were sold at the 2005 Frankfurt Book Fair for US$4 million.\nIn 2007, Clapton learned more about his father, a Canadian soldier who left the UK after the war. Although Clapton's grandparents eventually told him the truth about his parentage, he only knew that his father's name was Edward Fryer. This was a source of disquiet for Clapton, as witnessed by his 1998 song \"My Father's Eyes\". A Montreal journalist named Michael Woloschuk researched Canadian Armed Forces service records and tracked down members of Fryer's family, and finally pieced together the story. He learned that Clapton's father was Edward Walter Fryer, born 21 March 1920, in Montreal and died 15 May 1985 in Newmarket, Ontario. Fryer was a musician (piano and saxophone) and a lifelong drifter who was married several times, had several children, and apparently never knew that he was the father of Eric Clapton. Clapton thanked Woloschuk in an encounter at Macdonald\u2013Cartier Airport, in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.\nOn 26 February 2008, it was reported that Clapton had been invited to play a concert in North Korea by government officials. Clapton agreed in principle and suggested it take place in 2009. Kristen Foster, a spokesperson for Clapton, said that he regularly received offers to play abroad and that there had been no agreement for him to play in North Korea. In February 2008, Clapton performed with his long-time friend Steve Winwood at Madison Square Garden and guested on his recorded single, \"Dirty City\", on Winwood's album \"Nine Lives\". The two former Blind Faith bandmates met again for a series of 14 concerts throughout the United States in June 2009. Clapton's 2008 Summer Tour began on 3 May at the Ford Amphitheatre, Tampa, Florida, and then moved to Canada, Ireland, England, Norway, Iceland, Denmark, Poland, Germany, and Monaco. On 28 June 2008, he headlined Saturday night for Hard Rock Calling 2008 in London's Hyde Park (previously Hyde Park Calling) with support from Sheryl Crow and John Mayer.\nIn March 2009, the Allman Brothers Band (amongst many notable guests) celebrated their 40th year, dedicating their string of concerts to the late Duane Allman on their annual run at the Beacon Theatre. Eric Clapton was one of the performers, with drummer Butch Trucks remarking that the performance was not the typical Allman Brothers experience, given the number and musical styles of the guests who were invited to perform. Songs like \"In Memory of Elizabeth Reed\" were punctuated with others, including \"The Weight\", with Levon Helm; Johnny Winter sitting in on Hendrix's \"Red House\"; and \"Layla\". On 4 May 2009 Clapton appeared at the Royal Albert Hall, playing \"Further on Up the Road\" with Joe Bonamassa.\nClapton was scheduled to perform at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 25th anniversary concert in Madison Square Garden on 30 October 2009, but cancelled due to gallstone surgery. Van Morrison (who also cancelled) said in an interview that he and Clapton were to do a \"couple of songs\", but that they would do something else together at \"some other stage of the game\".\n\"Clapton\", \"Old Sock\" and \"I Still Do\".\nClapton performed a two-night show with Jeff Beck at the O2 Arena in London on 13\u201314 February 2010. The two former Yardbirds extended their 2010 tour with stops at Madison Square Garden, the Air Canada Centre in Toronto, and the Bell Centre in Montreal. Clapton performed a series of concerts in 11 cities throughout the United States from 25 February to 13 March 2010, including Roger Daltrey as opening act. His third European tour with Steve Winwood began on 18 May and ended 13 June, including Tom Norris as opening act. He then began a short North American tour lasting from 26 June to 3 July, starting with his third Crossroads Guitar Festival on 26 June at Toyota Park in Bridgeview, Illinois. Clapton released a new studio album, \"Clapton\", on 27 September 2010 in the United Kingdom and 28 September 2010 in the United States. On 17 November 2010, Clapton performed as guest on the Prince's Trust rock gala held at the Royal Albert Hall, supported by the house band for the evening, which included Jools Holland, Midge Ure and Mark King.\nOn 24 June 2011, Clapton was in concert with Pino Daniele in Cava de' Tirreni stadium before performing a series of concerts in South America from 6 to 16 October 2011. He spent November and December 2011 touring Japan with Steve Winwood, playing 13 shows in various cities throughout the country. On 24 February 2012 Clapton, Keith Richards, Gary Clark Jr., Derek Trucks, Doyle Bramhall II, Kim Wilson and other artists performed together in the Howlin' For Hubert Tribute concert held at the Apollo Theater of New York City honouring blues guitarist Hubert Sumlin who died at age 80 on 4 December 2011. On 29 November 2012, Clapton joined The Rolling Stones at London's O2 Arena during the band's second of five arena dates celebrating their 50th anniversary. On 12 December, Clapton performed at Madison Square Garden, broadcast live via television, radio, cinemas and the Internet across six continents. In January 2013, Surfdog Records announced a signed deal with Clapton for the release of his forthcoming album \"Old Sock\" on 12 March. On 8 April 2013, Eric and Hard Rock International launched the limited-edition Eric Clapton Artist Spotlight merchandise programme benefiting Crossroads Centre Antigua. Clapton toured the US and Europe from 14 March to 19 June 2013 to celebrate 50 years as a professional musician. On 28 February 2013, Clapton announced his intention to stop touring in 2015 due to hassles with travel.\nOn 15 October 2013, Clapton's popular \"Unplugged\" album and concert DVD were re-released, titled \"Unplugged: Expanded &amp; Remastered.\" The album includes the original 14 tracks, remastered, as well as 6 additional tracks, including 2 versions of \"My Father's Eyes\". The DVD includes a restored version of the concert, as well as over 60 minutes of unseen footage from the rehearsal. On 13 and 14 November 2013, Clapton headlined the final two evenings of the \"Baloise Session\", an annual indoor music festival in Basel, Switzerland. On 20 November 2013, Warner Bros released Crossroads Guitar Festival 2013 in CD/DVD/Blu-ray. On 30 April 2014, Clapton announced the release of \"\" as an homage to J. J. Cale who died on 26 July 2013. This tribute album is named after the 1972 single \"Call Me the Breeze\" and comprises 16 Cale songs performed by Clapton, Mark Knopfler, John Mayer, Willie Nelson, Tom Petty and others. On 21 June 2014, Clapton abruptly walked off stage during a concert at the Glasgow Hydro. Although he did return to perform one final song, thousands of fans were upset by the lack of explanation from Clapton or the venue and booed after the concert ended around 40 minutes before advertised to finish. Both Clapton and the venue apologised the next day, blaming 'technical difficulties' for making sound conditions 'unbearable' for Clapton on stage. A week later he confirmed his retirement plans attributing his decision to the road being \"unbearable\" in addition to \"odd ailments\" that may force him to put down his guitar permanently. In a 2016 interview with \"Classic Rock\" magazine, Clapton revealed that he had been diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy in 2013, a condition involving damage to peripheral nerves that typically causes stabbing, burning, or tingling pain in the arms and legs.\nClapton performed two shows at Madison Square Garden in New York on 1 and 3 May 2015 followed by a 7-night residency at London's Royal Albert Hall from 14 to 23 May 2015 to celebrate his 70th birthday on 30 March. The shows also mark 50 years since Clapton first played at the Royal Albert Hall \u2013 his debut was on 7 December 1964 when he performed as part of The Yardbirds for the BBC's \"Top Beat Show\". The concert film, \"Slowhand at 70 \u2013 Live at the Royal Albert Hall\", was released by Eagle Rock Entertainment on 13 November 2015 on DVD, CD, Blu-ray and LP. The 2-night concerts in the US marked the 46th anniversary since Clapton, with Cream, opened the \"new\" Madison Square Garden on 2 November 1968. Clapton has performed more times at Madison Square Garden than any other US venue, a total of 45 times. On 20 May 2016, Clapton released his twenty-third studio album \"I Still Do\". On 30 September 2016 the live-album \"Live in San Diego\" was released. In August 2018, Clapton announced that he had recorded his twenty-fourth studio album, \"Happy Xmas\", which consists of blues-tinged interpretations of Christmas songs, with the album released on 12 October. Between April and September 2019, he played 17 concerts in Japan, Europe and the Southwestern United States. He returned to the road in September 2021, playing eight shows in the southern United States. In May 2022, Clapton announced a run of seven US concerts in September with Jimmie Vaughan. In May 2023, Clapton performed at the Jeff Beck tribute concerts held at the Royal Albert Hall, sharing the stage with Rod Stewart, Ronnie Wood, Kirk Hammett and Johnny Depp among others.\nInfluences.\nClapton cites Muddy Waters, Freddie King, B.B. King, Albert King, Buddy Guy and Hubert Sumlin as guitar-playing influences. In his 2007 autobiography, Clapton refers to Muddy Waters as \"the father figure I never really had\". Until his death in 1983, Waters was a part of Clapton's life. \"When I got to know Muddy, unfortunately, my drinking career was in full sway.\" In 2000, Clapton collaborated with B.B. King on their album \"Riding with the King\". The music video for the title track shows Clapton as the chauffeur, with one of his idols in the back seat.\nClapton has said that blues musician Robert Johnson is his single most important influence. In 2004, Clapton released \"Sessions for Robert Johnson\", containing covers of Johnson's songs using electric and acoustic guitars. In an essay for the 1990 boxed set of Johnson's recordings, Clapton wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Robert Johnson to me is the most important blues musician who ever lived\". He was true, absolutely, to his own vision, and as deep as I have gotten into the music over the last 30 years, \"I have never found anything more deeply soulful than Robert Johnson. His music remains the most powerful cry that I think you can find in the human voice, really\" ... it seemed to echo something I had always felt. [italics in original]\nClapton also singled out Buddy Holly as an influence. \"The Chirping Crickets\" was the first album Clapton ever bought; he later saw Holly on \"Sunday Night at the London Palladium\". In his autobiography, Clapton recounts the first time he saw Holly and his Fender, saying, \"I thought I'd died and gone to heaven\u00a0... it was like seeing an instrument from outer space and I said to myself: 'That's the future \u2013 that's what I want.'\" In the 2017 documentary film, \"Eric Clapton: Life in 12 Bars\", Clapton cites Bismillah Khan as an influence, adding that \"I wanted my guitar to sound like his reed instrument.\" In the same documentary he also cited harmonica player Little Walter as an influence: \"The sound he made with the harmonica playing through an amplifier. It was thick and fat and very melodic.\"\nLegacy.\nClapton has been referred to as one of the most important and influential guitarists of all time. Clapton is the only three-time inductee to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: once as a solo artist, and separately as a member of the Yardbirds and Cream. He ranked second in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" and fourth in \"Gibson's\" Top 50 Guitarists of All Time.\nIn 2011, \"The Guardian\" attributed the creation of the cult of the guitar hero to Clapton, ranking it number seven on their list of the 50 key events in rock music history;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothing is more central to rock mythology than the cult of the lead guitarist. And no one did more to create that cult than Eric Clapton. He had already been a member of the Yardbirds before joining John Mayall's Bluesbreakers, the clearing house for guitarists, in April 1965. His two stints with Mayall saw his reputation grow to the extent that a famous graffito captured the popular appraisal of him among rock fans: \"Clapton is God\".\nElias Leight of \"Rolling Stone\" writes that Clapton \"influenced recording techniques as well as guitar-playing technique\". During recording sessions with John Mayall's group, Clapton was frustrated by technicians \"that just came up to your amp with the microphone and just stuck it two inches away from the front of the amplifier. It seemed to me that if you wanted to get the atmosphere we were getting in the clubs, you needed it to sound like you were in the audience 10 feet away, not three inches\". Clapton then moved the microphones, with Pink Floyd's Roger Waters stating, \"That changed everything. Before Eric, guitar playing in England had been Hank Marvin of the Shadows, very simple, not much technique. Suddenly we heard something completely different. The records sounded unlike anything we had heard before.\"\nIn 2012, Clapton was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his artwork \u2013 the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" album cover \u2013 to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires to mark his 80th birthday. Indelibly linked to the Royal Albert Hall in London, a venue he has played at more than any other in his 50-year plus career, Clapton was inducted into the Royal Albert Hall's Walk of Fame in 2018, making him one of the first eleven recipients of a star on the walk, thus joining Muhammad Ali, Winston Churchill, the Suffragettes, and Albert Einstein, among others who were viewed as \"key players\" in the building's history.\nRobert Christgau, in a dissenting appraisal of Clapton's legacy, writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A promiscuous sideman whose monklike aura has never diminished his extravagant appetites, Clapton likes to get paid, and he's amassed a discography that for an artist of his caliber is remarkably undistinguished. In his self-protective self-deprecation he often attributes this to his own laziness or his need for a catalyst, but it's also guitar hero's disease: like many other guys whose hand-ear coordination is off the curve, he's a casual tunesmith and a corny lyricist, and his band concepts are chronically hit-or-miss.\nGuitars.\nLike Hank Marvin, the Beatles and Jimi Hendrix, Clapton exerted a crucial and widespread influence in popularising particular models of electric guitar. With the Yardbirds, Clapton played a Fender Telecaster, a Fender Jazzmaster, a double-cutaway Gretsch 6120, and a 1964 Cherry-Red Gibson ES-335. He became exclusively a Gibson player for a period beginning in mid-1965, when he purchased a used sunburst Gibson Les Paul guitar from a guitar store in London. Clapton commented on the slim profile of the neck, which would indicate it was a 1960 model.\nEarly during his stint in Cream, Clapton's first Les Paul Standard was stolen. He continued to play Les Pauls exclusively with Cream (one bought from Andy Summers was almost identical to the stolen guitar) until 1967, when he acquired his most famous guitar in this period, a 1964 Gibson SG, dubbed \"the Fool\". Clapton used both the Les Paul and the SG to create his self-described \"woman tone\". He explained in a 1967 interview, \"I am playing more smoothly now. I'm developing what I call my 'woman tone.' It's a sweet sound, something like the solo on 'I Feel Free'.\" Writer Michael Dregni describes it as \"thick yet piercing, overdriven yet smooth, distorted yet creamy\". The tone is achieved by a combination of tone control settings on the guitars and Clapton's Marshall JTM45 amplifier. \"Vintage Guitar\" magazine identifies \"the opening riff and solo of 'Sunshine of Your Love' are arguably the best illustrations of full-blown woman tone\". Clapton's \"Fool\" acquired its name from its distinctive psychedelic paint job, created by the visual art collective also known as the Fool (just before Cream's first US appearance in 1967, Clapton's SG, Bruce's Fender VI, and Baker's drum head were all repainted in psychedelic designs).\nIn 1968, Clapton bought a Gibson Firebird and started using the 1964 Cherry-Red Gibson ES-335 again. The aforementioned 1964 ES-335 had a storied career. Clapton used it at the last Cream show in November 1968 as well as with Blind Faith, played it sparingly for slide pieces in the 1970s, used it on \"Hard Times\" from \"Journeyman\", the Hyde Park live concert of 1996, and the \"From the Cradle\" sessions and tour of 1994\u201395. It was sold for US$847,500 at a 2004 auction. Gibson produced a limited run of 250 \"Crossroads 335\" replicas. The 335 was only the second electric guitar Clapton bought.\nIn July 1968 Clapton gave George Harrison a 1957 'goldtop' Gibson Les Paul that been refinished with a red colour, nicknamed Lucy. The following September, Clapton played the guitar on the Beatles' recording of \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\". Lucy was stolen from Harrison, though later tracked down and returned to him \u2013 he lent it to Clapton for his 1973 comeback concert at the Rainbow. His SG \"The Fool\" found its way into the hands of George Harrison's friend Jackie Lomax, who subsequently sold it to musician Todd Rundgren for US$500 in 1972. Rundgren restored the guitar and nicknamed it \"Sunny\", after \"Sunshine of Your Love\". He retained it until 2000, when he sold it at an auction for US$150,000. At the 1969 Blind Faith concert in Hyde Park, London Clapton played a Fender Custom Telecaster, which was fitted with \"Brownie\"'s neck.\nIn late 1969 Clapton made the switch to the Fender Stratocaster. \"I had a lot of influences when I took up the Strat. First there was Buddy Holly, and Buddy Guy. Hank Marvin was the first well known person over here in England who was using one, but that wasn't really my kind of music. Steve Winwood had so much credibility, and when he started playing one, I thought, oh, if he can do it, I can do it\". The first\u2014used during the recording of \"Eric Clapton\"\u2014was \"Brownie\", which in 1973 became the backup to the most famous of all Clapton's guitars, \"Blackie\". In November 1970 Eric bought six Fender Stratocasters from the Sho-bud guitar shop in Nashville, Tennessee while on tour with the Dominos. He gave one each to George Harrison, Steve Winwood, and Pete Townshend.\nClapton assembled the best components of the remaining three to create \"Blackie\", which was his favourite stage guitar until its retirement in 1985. It was first played live 13 January 1973 at the Rainbow Concert. Clapton called the 1956/57 Strat a \"mongrel\". On 24 June 2004, Clapton sold \"Blackie\" at Christie's Auction House, New York, for US$959,500 to raise funds for his Crossroads Centre for drug and alcohol addictions. \"Brownie\" is now on display at the Experience Music Project. The Fender Custom Shop has since produced a limited run of 275 'Blackie' replicas, correct in every detail right down to the 'Duck Brothers' flight case, and artificially aged using Fender's 'Relic' process to simulate years of hard wear. One was presented to Clapton upon the model's release and was used for three numbers during a concert at the Royal Albert Hall on 17 May 2006. In 1979, Clapton gave his signed Fender Lead II guitar to the Hard Rock Cafe in London to designate his favourite bar stool. Pete Townshend also donated his own Gibson Les Paul guitar, with a note attached: \"Mine's as good as his! Love, Pete\".\nSignature guitars in Clapton's honour are made by Fender and C.F. Martin &amp; Company. In 1988, Fender introduced his signature Eric Clapton Stratocaster. Several signature-model 000-sized acoustic guitars made by Martin. The first, of these, introduced in 1995, was a limited edition 000-42EC Eric Clapton signature model with a production run of 461. For the single \"Change the World\" (1996) and the album \"Pilgrim\" (1998) he used a Martin 000-28 EC Eric Clapton signature model, which he subsequently gave to guitarist Paul Wassif. His 1939 000-42 Martin that he played on the \"Unplugged\" album sold for US$791,500 at auction. Clapton uses Ernie Ball Slinky and Super Slinky strings, gauge .10 to.46. His guitar technician for over thirty years was Lee Dickson.\nOther media appearances.\nClapton appeared in the movie version of \"Tommy\", the first full-length rock opera, written by the Who. In the movie version, Clapton appeared as the Preacher, performing Sonny Boy Williamson's song, \"Eyesight to the Blind\". He appeared in \"Blues Brothers 2000\" as one of the Louisiana Gator Boys. In addition to being in the band, he had a small speaking role. Clapton has appeared in an advertisement for the Mercedes-Benz G-Wagen. In March 2007 Clapton appeared in an advertisement for RealNetwork's Rhapsody online music service. In 2010, Clapton started appearing as a spokesman for T-Mobile, advertising their MyTouch Fender cell phone. Clapton also appeared in the 2011 BBC documentary \"Reggae Got Soul: The Story of Toots and the Maytals\", which was described as \"The untold story of one of the most influential artists ever to come out of Jamaica.\"\nWhen asked to describe God by their minister, the characters Eric Forman and Steven Hyde both drew an image of Clapton in the episode \"Holy Crap!\" of season two of \"That '70s Show\". Clapton appeared on the BBC's \"Top Gear\" in 2013, during Series 19 Episode 4 and was involved in testing the new Kia Cee'd. He was called upon to test the Cee'd's auxiliary input, which he tested by plugging in one of his guitars and playing several bars of his most famous hits. He was introduced by \"Top Gear\" host Jeremy Clarkson as a \"local guitarist\".\nIn 2017, a documentary film titled \"Eric Clapton: Life in 12 Bars\" was directed by Lili Fini Zanuck. Clapton wrote the film score for Zanuck's 1991 film \"Rush\" and the two remained friends. In an interview for BBC News, Zanuck said that Clapton only agreed to participate if she directed it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think this got made because Eric was in the right mood. He's an incredibly private man and despite his immense success, he's never cared if he got any publicity at all, he just loves his music... I think it might be something to do with his age, as he turned 70 a couple of years ago. He said to me, \"I didn't want it to be done after I was dead and for it to be wrong.\" Maybe he thought his time had come to lay it all out on the table.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and children.\nClapton's partner from the late 1960s to 1974 was Alice Ormsby-Gore, a British aristocrat; they were often wrongly reported as engaged. He briefly dated funk singer Betty Davis. He married Pattie Boyd on 27 March 1979, in Tucson, Arizona, but their marriage was marred by his infidelities and domestic violence. In a 1999 interview with \"The Sunday Times\", Clapton admitted to raping and abusing her while they were married and he was a \"full-blown\" alcoholic. In 1984, while recording \"Behind the Sun\", Clapton began a relationship with Yvonne Kelly, the manager of AIR Studios Montserrat. Although both were married to other partners at the time, they had a daughter in January 1985. She was named Ruth Kelly Clapton, but her existence was kept from the public until the media realised she was his child in 1991.\nClapton and Boyd tried unsuccessfully to have children, even trying in vitro fertilisation in 1984, but were faced instead with miscarriages. He had an affair with Italian model Lory Del Santo who gave birth to their son, Conor, on 21 August 1986. Clapton and Boyd later divorced in 1989 after she was \"utterly devastated\" by his confession to impregnating Del Santo during this affair. Conor would die on 20 March 1991 at the age of four after falling out of an open bedroom window on the 53rd floor of a Manhattan apartment building.\nIn 1998, Clapton, then 53, met 22-year-old administrative assistant Melia McEnery in Columbus, Ohio, at a party given for him after a performance. He quietly dated her for a year, and went public with the relationship in 1999. They married on 1 January 2002 at St Mary Magdalene church in Clapton's birthplace, Ripley. They have three daughters, Julie Rose (born 13 June 2001), Ella May (born 14 January 2003), and Sophie Belle (born 1 February 2005).\nControversies.\nRacism and August 1976 drunken rant.\n\"Keep Britain White\".\nOn 5 August 1976, Clapton provoked an uproar when he spoke out against increasing immigration during a concert in Birmingham. Visibly intoxicated on stage, Clapton voiced his support for the right-wing British politician Enoch Powell. He addressed the audience as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Do we have any foreigners in the audience tonight? If so, please put up your hands. So where are you? Well wherever you all are, I think you should all just leave. Not just leave the hall, leave our country. I don't want you here, in the room or in my country. Listen to me, man! I think we should vote for Enoch Powell. Enoch's our man. I think Enoch's right, I think we should send them all back. Stop Britain from becoming a black colony. Get the foreigners out. Get the wogs out. Get the coons out. Keep Britain white. I used to be into dope, now I'm into racism. It's much heavier, man. Fucking wogs, man. Fucking Saudis taking over London. Bastard wogs. Britain is becoming overcrowded and Enoch will stop it and send them all back. The black wogs and coons and Arabs and fucking Jamaicans don't belong here, we don't want them here. This is England, this is a white country, we don't want any black wogs and coons living here. We need to make clear to them they are not welcome. England is for white people, man. This is Great Britain, a white country, what is happening to us, for fuck's sake? Throw the wogs out! Keep Britain white!\n\"Keep Britain White\" was, at the time, a slogan of the far-right National Front (NF). This incident, along with some controversial remarks made around the same time by David Bowie, as well as uses of Nazi-related imagery by punk artists Sid Vicious and Siouxsie Sioux (who has stated that the punks were anti-establishment who were deliberately provocative to their parents' generation, as opposed to having any affiliation with Nazi ideology) were the main catalysts for the creation of Rock Against Racism, with a concert on 30 April 1978.\nClapton's response.\nIn an interview from October 1976 with \"Sounds\" magazine, Clapton said that he did not \"know much about politics\" and said of his immigration speech that \"I just don't know what came over me that night. It must have been something that happened in the day but it came out in this garbled thing.\" In a 2004 interview with \"Uncut\", Clapton referred to Enoch Powell as \"outrageously brave\". He said that the UK was \"inviting people in as cheap labour and then putting them in ghettos\". In 2004, Clapton told an interviewer for \"Scotland on Sunday\", \"There's no way I could be a racist. It would make no sense.\" In his 2007 autobiography, Clapton said he was \"deliberately oblivious\" to racial conflict. In a December 2007 interview with Melvyn Bragg on \"The South Bank Show\", Clapton said he was not a racist but still believed Powell's comments were relevant.\nAfter watching unedited footage of the 1976 outburst, which is included in \"Eric Clapton: Life in 12 Bars\"\u2014a documentary which also covers his daily alcohol and drug abuse prior to his sobriety\u2014in 2018 Clapton stated he was \"disgusted\" with himself for his \"chauvinistic\" and \"fascistic\" comments on stage. He added: \"I sabotaged everything I got involved with. I was so ashamed of who I was, a kind of semi-racist, which didn't make sense. Half of my friends were black, I dated a black woman, and I championed black music.\"\nPolitical views.\nOpposition to fox-hunting ban.\nClapton supports the Countryside Alliance, which promotes field sports and issues relating to the British countryside. He has played in concerts to raise funds for the organisation and publicly opposed the Labour Party's ban on fox hunting with the 2004 Hunting Act. A spokesperson for Clapton said, \"Eric supports the Countryside Alliance. He does not hunt himself, but does enjoy rural pursuits such as fishing and shooting. He supports the Alliance's pursuit to scrap the ban on the basis that he disagrees with the state's interference with people's private pursuits.\"\nCOVID-19.\nIn November 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Clapton and Van Morrison collaborated on an anti-mask, anti-lockdown single entitled \"Stand and Deliver\", the profits from which were donated to Morrison's \"Lockdown Financial Hardship Fund\". Morrison's stance was criticised by Northern Ireland Health Minister Robin Swann. In July 2021, Clapton wrote that he would \"not perform on any stage where there is a discriminated audience present\", in response to Boris Johnson requiring vaccination for concerts. Clapton by then had taken both doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine but, he said, had severe reactions to both injections. Whether the symptoms he reported were actually vaccine-related has been called into question, given that Clapton previously reported suffering the same symptoms as early as 2013 due to nerve damage.\nIn August 2021, Clapton released the single \"This Has Gotta Stop\" and an accompanying music video. It was described as a protest song against COVID-19 lockdowns, vaccinations, and contains lyrical and visual statements against what Clapton sees as the erosion of civil liberties as the result of lockdown policies.\nClapton tested positive for COVID-19 in May 2022 shortly after performing at the Royal Albert Hall in London, causing him to cancel some concerts in his tour schedule.\nAssets and philanthropy.\nWealth and assets.\nIn 2009, \"Surrey Life Magazine\" ranked Clapton as number 17 in their list of richest Surrey residents, estimating his fortune at \u00a3120\u00a0million in assets. This was a combination of income, property, a \u00a39\u00a0million yacht, \"Va Bene\" (previously owned by Bernie Ecclestone), his back music catalogue, his touring income, and his holding company Marshbrook Ltd, which had earned him \u00a3110\u00a0million since 1989. In 2003, he purchased a 50% share of gentleman's outfitters Cordings Piccadilly. At the time, owner Noll Uloth was trying to save the shop from closure and contacted Clapton, his \"best client\"; within five minutes, Clapton replied with \"I can't let this happen\".\nCar collection.\nSince the 1970s, Clapton has considered himself a \"car enthusiast\" and has often stated his passion for the Ferrari brand. Clapton currently owns or has owned a range of Ferraris, and when asked about his Ferrari collection in 1989, he said he liked the touring cars the company produces for road use and commented \"if I had more space and if I had been wise I would have a huge collection by now and I would be a multi-multi-millionaire\". In 2010, he explained that for him \"Ferrari has always been the number one car\" to own and drive, and that he always supported Ferrari on the road and in Formula One motor racing.\nIn 2012, Ferrari honoured Clapton with the one-off special project car, the Ferrari SP12 EC. In July 2013 Clapton displayed it at the Goodwood Festival of Speed in England in the Michelin Supercar Run. In 2014, Clapton explained that Ferrari is still his favourite car brand. Among the other vehicles Clapton owns or has owned are a vintage Mini Cooper Radford that was a gift from George Harrison.\nCharitable work.\nIn 1993, Clapton was appointed a director of Clouds House, a UK treatment centre for drug and alcohol dependence, and served on their board until 1997. Clapton also served on the board of directors for The Chemical Dependency Centre from 1994 until 1999. Both charities subsequently merged to become Action on Addiction in 2007.\nIn 1998, he established the Crossroads Centre in Antigua to help others overcome their addictions to drugs and alcohol and is active in its management oversight and fundraising to the present day. Clapton has organised the Crossroads Guitar Festival in 1999, 2004, 2007, 2010, 2013 and 2019 to raise funds for this centre. In 1999, Clapton auctioned off some of his guitar collection to raise more than US$5\u00a0million for continuing support of the Crossroads Centre. A second guitar auction, including the \"Cream\" of Clapton's collection \u2013 as well as guitars donated by famous friends \u2013 was held on 24 June 2004. His Lowden acoustic guitar sold for US$41,825. The revenue garnered by this auction at Christie's was US$7,438,624. In 2011, he auctioned off over 150 items at a New York auction with proceeds going to his Crossroads Centre. Items included his guitar from the Cream reunion tour in 2005, speaker cabinets used in the early 1970s from his days with Derek and the Dominos, and some guitars from Jeff Beck, J. J. Cale, and Joe Bonamassa. In March 2011 he raised more than \u00a31.3\u00a0million when he auctioned off 138 lots, made up of 75 guitars and 55 amps from his personal collection, including a 1984 Gibson hollow body guitar, a Gianni Versace suit from his 1990 concert at the Royal Albert Hall, and a replica of the famous Fender Stratocaster known as \"Blackie\", which fetched more than $30,000. All proceeds again went to Crossroads.\nClapton has performed at the \"Secret Policeman's Ball\", a benefit show co-founded by Monty Python member John Cleese on behalf of Amnesty International. He made his first appearance at the 1981 show held in London's Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, and he subsequently became an activist. Clapton has collaborated with The Prince's Trust, the leading UK youth charity, which provides training, personal development, business start up support, mentoring, and advice. He has performed at the charity's rock concert numerous times since the 1980s, most recently in 2010. In 2008, he donated a song to Aid Still Required's CD to assist with the restoration of the devastation done to Southeast Asia from the 2004 tsunami.\nFootball.\nClapton is a fan of English football club West Bromwich Albion. In 1982, he performed a concert before West Brom player John Wile's testimonial game at The Hawthorns. It has been reported that the club rejected his offer to invest cash in the club around this time. In the late 1970s Clapton positioned a West Brom scarf on the back cover of his album, \"Backless\". In the 1978\u201379 season Clapton sponsored West Brom's UEFA Cup home game against Turkish club Galatasaray.\nClapton's music in film and TV.\nClapton's music has appeared in dozens of movies and television shows as far back as 1973's \"Mean Streets\", which included the Derek and the Dominos song \"I Looked Away\" and a performance of \"Steppin' Out\" by Cream. Other appearances in media include in the \"Miami Vice\" series (\"Wonderful Tonight\", \"Knock on Wood\", \"She's Waiting\", and \"Layla\"), \"Back to the Future\" (\"Heaven Is One Step Away\"), \"The Color of Money\" (\"It's in the Way That You Use It\"), \"Lethal Weapon 2\" (\"Knockin' On Heaven's Door\"), \"Goodfellas\" (\"Layla\" and \"Sunshine of Your Love\"), \"Freaks and Geeks\" episode \"I'm With the Band\" (\"Sunshine of Your Love\", \"White Room\" and \"Crossroads\"), \"Friends\" episodes \"The One with the Proposal, Part 2\" (\"Wonderful Tonight\") and \"The One Where Rachel Has A Baby\" (\"River of Tears\"), \"School Of Rock\" (\"Sunshine Of Your Love)\", \"Men in Black III\" (\"Strange Brew\"), \"Captain Phillips\" (\"Wonderful Tonight\"), \"\" (\"Lay Down Sally\"), \"Good Girls Revolt\" episode \"The Year-Ender\" (\"White Room)\", \"Rick and Morty\" episode \"The Vat of Acid Episode\" (\"It's in the Way That You Use It\") and \"Joker\" (\"White Room\").\nBoth Opel and Vauxhall used the guitar riff from \"Layla\" in their advertising campaigns throughout 1987\u201395. In addition to his music appearing in media, Clapton has contributed to several movies by writing or co-writing the musical scores or contributing original songs. These movies include \"Lethal Weapon\" (co-written with Michael Kamen), \"Communion\", \"Rush\", \"Phenomenon\" (\"Change the World\"), and \"Lethal Weapon 3\" (co-wrote and co-performed \"It's Probably Me\" with Sting and \"Runaway Train\" with Elton John).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "10051", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10051", "title": "Electronic Data Systems Corp.", "text": ""}
{"id": "10053", "revid": "1129373467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10053", "title": "E2", "text": "E2, e2, E02, E.II, e2 or E-2 may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "10055", "revid": "4897226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10055", "title": "Etiology", "text": "Study of causation, or origination\nEtiology (; alternatively spelled aetiology or \u00e6tiology) is the study of causation or origination. The word is derived from the Greek word (), meaning \"giving a reason for\" (from \" ' ()\"\u00a0'cause', and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'study of'). More completely, etiology is the study of the causes, origins, or reasons behind the way that things are, or the way they function, or it can refer to the causes themselves. The word is commonly used in medicine (pertaining to causes of disease) and in philosophy, but also in physics, biology, psychology, government, geography, spatial analysis and theology in reference to the causes or origins of various phenomena.\nIn the past, when many physical phenomena were not well understood or when histories were not recorded, myths often arose to provide etiologies. Thus, an etiological myth, or origin myth, is a myth that has arisen, been told over time or written to explain the origins of various social or natural phenomena. For example, Virgil's \"Aeneid\" is a national myth written to explain and glorify the origins of the Roman Empire. In theology, many religions have creation myths explaining the origins of the world or its relationship to believers.\nMedicine.\nIn medicine, the etiology of an illness or condition refers to the frequent studies to determine one or more factors that come together to cause the illness. Relatedly, when disease is widespread, epidemiological studies investigate what associated factors, such as location, sex, exposure to chemicals, and many others, make a population more or less likely to have an illness, condition, or disease, thus helping determine its etiology. Sometimes determining etiology is an imprecise process. In the past, the etiology of a common sailor's disease, scurvy, was long unknown. When large, ocean-going ships were built, sailors began to put to sea for long periods of time, and often lacked fresh fruit and vegetables. Without knowing the precise cause, Captain James Cook suspected scurvy was caused by the lack of vegetables in the diet. Based on his suspicion, he forced his crew to eat sauerkraut, a cabbage preparation, every day, and based upon the positive outcomes, he inferred that it prevented scurvy, even though he did not know precisely why. It took about another two hundred years to discover the precise etiology; the lack of vitamin C in a sailor's diet.\nThe following are examples of intrinsic factors:\nMythology.\nAn etiological myth, or origin myth, is a myth intended to explain the origins of cult practices, natural phenomena, proper names and the like. For example, the name Delphi and its associated deity, \"Apollon Delphinios\", are explained in the Homeric Hymn which tells of how Apollo, in the shape of a dolphin ('), propelled Cretans over the seas to make them his priests. While Delphi is actually related to the word ' (\"womb\"), many etiological myths are similarly based on folk etymology (the term \"Amazon\", for example). In the \"Aeneid\" (published c.\u200917 BC), Virgil claims the descent of Augustus Caesar's Julian clan from the hero Aeneas through his son Ascanius, also called Iulus. The story of Prometheus' sacrifice trick at Mecone in Hesiod's \"Theogony\" relates how Prometheus tricked Zeus into choosing the bones and fat of the first sacrificial animal rather than the meat to justify why, after a sacrifice, the Greeks offered the bones wrapped in fat to the gods while keeping the meat for themselves. In Ovid's \"Pyramus and Thisbe\", the origin of the color of mulberries is explained, as the white berries become stained red from the blood gushing forth from their double suicide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10057", "revid": "478073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10057", "title": "Ehime-Maru", "text": ""}
{"id": "10058", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10058", "title": "Epistles", "text": ""}
{"id": "10061", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10061", "title": "Epistle to Ephesians", "text": ""}
{"id": "10062", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10062", "title": "Epistle to the Phillipians", "text": ""}
{"id": "10063", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10063", "title": "Epistle to Philippians", "text": ""}
{"id": "10065", "revid": "44918363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10065", "title": "Empirical formula", "text": "Simplest whole number ratio of atoms present in a compound\nIn chemistry, the empirical formula of a chemical compound is the simplest whole number ratio of atoms present in a compound. A simple example of this concept is that the empirical formula of sulfur monoxide, or SO, would simply be SO, as is the empirical formula of disulfur dioxide, S2O2. Thus, sulfur monoxide and disulfur dioxide, both compounds of sulfur and oxygen, have the same empirical formula. However, their molecular formulas, which express the number of atoms in each molecule of a chemical compound, are not the same.\nAn empirical formula makes no mention of the arrangement or number of atoms. It is standard for many ionic compounds, like calcium chloride (CaCl2), and for macromolecules, such as silicon dioxide (SiO2).\nThe molecular formula, on the other hand, shows the number of each type of atom in a molecule. The structural formula shows the arrangement of the molecule. It is also possible for different types of compounds to have equal empirical formulas.\nSamples are analyzed in specific elemental analysis tests to determine what percent of a particular element the sample is composed of.\nCalculation example.\nA chemical analysis of a sample of methyl acetate provides the following elemental data: 48.64% carbon (C), 8.16% hydrogen (H), and 43.20% oxygen (O). For the purposes of determining empirical formulas, it's assumed that we have 100 grams of the compound. If this is the case, the percentages will be equal to the mass of each element in grams.\nStep 1: Change each percentage to an expression of the mass of each element in grams. That is, 48.64% C becomes 48.64 g C, 8.16% H becomes 8.16 g H, and 43.20% O becomes 43.20 g O.\nStep 2: Convert the amount of each element in grams to its amount in moles\nformula_1\nformula_2\nformula_3\nStep 3: Divide each of the resulting values by the smallest of these values (2.7)\nformula_4\nformula_5\nformula_6\nStep 4: If necessary, multiply these numbers by integers in order to get whole numbers; if an operation is done to one of the numbers, it must be done to all of them.\nformula_7\nformula_8\nformula_9\nThus, the empirical formula of methyl acetate is \n. This formula also happens to be methyl acetate's molecular formula.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10066", "revid": "805471158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10066", "title": "Episcopalians", "text": ""}
{"id": "10067", "revid": "4233019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10067", "title": "Episcopal polity", "text": "Hierarchical form of church governance\nAn episcopal polity is a hierarchical form of church governance (\"ecclesiastical polity\") in which the chief local authorities are called bishops. (The word \"bishop\" derives, via the British Latin and Vulgar Latin term \"*ebiscopus\"/\"*biscopus\", from the Ancient Greek \"ep\u00edskopos\" meaning \"overseer\".) It is the structure used by many of the major Christian Churches and denominations, such as the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Church of the East, Anglican, Lutheran and Methodist churches or denominations, and other churches founded independently from these lineages.\nChurches with an episcopal polity are governed by bishops, practising their authorities in the dioceses and conferences or synods. Their leadership is both sacramental and constitutional; as well as performing ordinations, confirmations, and consecrations, the bishop supervises the clergy within a local jurisdiction and is the representative both to secular structures and within the hierarchy of the church. Bishops are considered to derive their authority from an unbroken, personal apostolic succession from the Twelve Apostles of Jesus. Bishops with such authority are said to represent the historical episcopate or historic episcopate. Churches with this type of government usually believe that the Church requires episcopal government as described in the New Testament (see 1 Timothy 3 and 2 Timothy 1). In some systems, bishops may be subject in limited ways to bishops holding a higher office (variously called archbishops, metropolitans, or patriarchs, depending upon the tradition). They also meet in councils or synods. These gatherings, subject to presidency by higher ranking bishops, usually make important decisions, though the synod or council may also be purely advisory.\nFor much of the written history of institutional Christianity, episcopal government was the only known form of church organization. This changed at the Reformation. Many Protestant churches are now organized by either congregational or presbyterian church polities, both descended from the writings of John Calvin, a Protestant reformer working and writing independently following the break with the Catholic Church precipitated by The Ninety-Five Theses of Martin Luther. However some people have disputed the episcopal polity before the reformation, such as Aerius of Sebaste in the 4th century.\nOverview of episcopal churches.\nThe definition of the word \"episcopal\" has variation among Christian traditions. There are subtle differences in governmental principles among episcopal churches at the present time. To some extent the separation of episcopal churches can be traced to these differences in ecclesiology, that is, their theological understanding of church and church governance. For some, \"episcopal churches\" are churches that use a hierarchy of bishops who identify as being in an unbroken, personal apostolic succession.\n\"Episcopal\" is also commonly used to distinguish between the various organizational structures of denominations. For instance, \"Presbyterian\" (, presb\u00fdteros) is used to describe a church governed by a hierarchy of assemblies of elected elders, referred to as presbyterian polity. Similarly, \"episcopal\" is used to describe a church governed by bishops. Self-governed local congregations, governed neither by elders nor bishops, are usually described as \"congregational\".\nMore specifically, the capitalized appellation \"Episcopal\" is applied to several churches historically based within Anglicanism (\"Episcopalianism\"), including those still in communion with the Church of England.\nUsing these definitions, examples of specific episcopal churches include:\nSome Lutheran churches practice congregational polity or a form of presbyterian polity. Others, including the Church of Sweden, practice episcopal polity; the Church of Sweden also counts its bishops among the historic episcopate. This is also the case with some American Lutheran churches, such as the Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church, Lutheran Orthodox Church, Lutheran Church - International, and the Lutheran Episcopal Communion.\nMany Methodist churches (the United Methodist Church, among others) retain the form and function of episcopal polity, although in a modified form, called connexionalism. Since all trace their ordinations to an Anglican priest, John Wesley, it is generally considered that their bishops do not share in apostolic succession. However, United Methodists affirm that their bishops share in the historic episcopate.\nHistory.\nThe Apostle Paul in the letter to Philippians, Clement of Rome and the Didache when talking about the church system of governance, mention \"bishops and deacons\", omitting the word \"presbyter\", which has been argued by some to show that there was no presbyter-bishop distinction yet in the first century.\nIgnatius of Antioch writing in already the early second century makes a clear distinction of bishops and presbyters, meaning that his letters show that an episcopal system was already existing by his time. However Bart Erhman sees it as significant that Ignatius in his letter to the Romans never mentioned a bishop in Rome. Later also Tertullian very clearly distinguishes the presbyters and bishops as a separate office, Irenaeus made lists of the succession of bishops, though bishop succession lists made by early church fathers are highly contradictory. By the second century it appears that the episcopal system had become the majority, universal view among Christians.\nEven schismatic sects such as the Novatians and Donatists would use the episcopal system. Except for Aerius of Sebaste, who contested the episcopal system and started his own sect.\nJerome stated that churches were originally governed by a group of presbyters but only later churches decided to elect bishops to suppress schisms.\nCatholic Church.\nThe Catholic Church has an episcopate, with the Pope, who is the Bishop of Rome, at the top. The Catholic Church considers that juridical oversight over the Church is not a power that derives from human beings, but strictly from the authority of Christ, which was given to his twelve apostles. The See of Rome, as the unbroken line of apostolic authority descending from St. Peter (the \"prince and head of the apostles\"), is a visible sign and instrument of communion among the college of bishops and therefore also of the local churches around the world. In communion with the worldwide college of bishops, the Pope has all legitimate juridical and teaching authority over the whole Church. This authority given by Christ to St. Peter and the apostles is transmitted from one generation to the next by the power of the Holy Spirit, through the laying on of hands from the Apostles to the bishops, in unbroken succession.\nEastern Orthodox Church.\nThe conciliar idea of episcopal government continues in the Eastern Orthodox Church. In Eastern Orthodoxy, all autocephalous primates are seen as collectively gathering around Christ, with other archbishops and bishops gathering around them, and so forth. There is no single primate with exclusive authority comparable to the Pope in Rome. However, the Patriarch of Constantinople (now Istanbul) is seen as the \"primus inter pares\", the \"first among equals\" of the autocephalous churches of Eastern Orthodoxy.\nOriental Orthodox churches.\nThe Oriental Orthodox Churches affirm the ideas of apostolic succession and episcopal government. Within each national Church, the bishops form a holy synod to which even the Patriarch is subject. The Syriac Orthodox Church traces its apostolic succession to St. Peter and recognises Antioch as the original See of St. Peter. The Armenian Apostolic Church traces its lineage to the Apostle Bartholomew. The Indian Orthodox Church traces its lineage to the Apostle Thomas. The Ethiopian Orthodox Church received its lines of succession through the Coptic Orthodox Church in the fifth century.\nBoth the Greek and Coptic Orthodox Churches each recognise their own Pope of Alexandria (Pope and Patriarch of Alexandria and All Africa, and Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria respectively), both of whom trace their apostolic succession back to the figure Mark the Evangelist. There are official, ongoing efforts in recent times to heal this ancient breach. Already, the two recognize each other's baptisms, chrismations, and marriages, making intermarriage much easier.\nChurch of the East.\nHistorically, the Church of the East has traced its episcopal succession to St. Thomas the Apostle. Currently the bishops of the Assyrian Church of the East continue to maintain its apostolic succession.\nAnglican Communion.\nAnglicanism is the most prominent of the Reformation traditions to lay claim to the historic episcopate through apostolic succession in terms comparable to the various Roman Catholic and Orthodox Communions. Anglicans assert unbroken episcopal succession in and through the Church of England back to St. Augustine of Canterbury and to the first century Roman province of Britannia. While some Celtic Christian practices were changed at the Synod of Whitby, the church in the British Isles was under papal authority from earliest times.\nThe legislation of Henry VIII effectively establishing the independence of the Church of England from Rome did not alter its constitutional or pastoral structures. Royal supremacy was exercised through the extant legal structures of the church, whose leaders were bishops. Episcopacy was thus seen as a given of the Reformed \"Ecclesia Anglicana\", and a foundation in the institution's appeal to ancient and apostolic legitimacy. What did change was that bishops were now seen to be ministers of the Crown for the spiritual government of its subjects. The influence of Richard Hooker was crucial to an evolution in this understanding in which bishops came to be seen in their more traditional role as ones who delegate to the presbyterate inherited powers, act as pastors to presbyters, and holding a particular teaching office with respect to the wider church.\nAnglican opinion has differed as to the way in which episcopal government is \"de jure divino\" (by the Divine Right of Kings). On the one hand, the seventeenth century divine, John Cosin, held that episcopal authority is \"jure divino\", but that it stemmed from \"apostolic practice and the customs of the Church ... [not] absolute precept that either Christ or His Apostles gave about it\" (a view maintained also by Hooker). In contrast, Lancelot Andrewes and others held that episcopal government is derived from Christ via the apostles. Regardless, both parties viewed the episcopacy as bearing the apostolic function of oversight which both includes, and derives from, the power of ordination, and is normative for the governance of the church. The practice of apostolic succession both ensures the legitimacy of the church's mission and establishes the unity, communion, and continuity of the local church with the universal church. This formulation, in turn, laid the groundwork for an independent view of the church as a \"sacred society\" distinct from civil society, which was so crucial for the development of local churches as non-established entities outside England, and gave direct rise to the Catholic Revival and disestablishmentarianism within England.\nFunctionally, Anglican episcopal authority is expressed synodically, although individual provinces may accord their primate with more or less authority to act independently. Called variously \"synods,\" \"councils,\" or \"conventions,\" they meet under episcopal chairmanship. In many jurisdictions, conciliar resolutions that have been passed require episcopal assent or consent to take force. Seen in this way, Anglicans often speak of \"the bishop-in-synod\" as the force and authority of episcopal governance. Such conciliar authority extends to the standard areas of doctrine, discipline, and worship, but in these regards is limited by Anglicanism's tradition of the limits of authority. Those limits are expressed in Article XXI of the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion, ratified in 1571 (significantly, just as the Council of Trent was drawing to a close), which held that \"General Councils ... may err, and sometimes have erred ... wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of holy Scripture.\" Hence, Anglican jurisdictions have traditionally been conservative in their approach to either innovative doctrinal development or in encompassing actions of the church as doctrinal (see \"lex orandi, lex credendi\").\nAnglican synodical government, though varied in expression, is characteristically representative. Provinces of the Anglican Communion, their ecclesiastical provinces and dioceses are governed by councils consisting not only of bishops, but also representatives of the presbyterate and laity.\nThere is no international juridical authority in Anglicanism, although the tradition's common experience of episcopacy, symbolised by the historical link with the See of Canterbury, along with a common and complex liturgical tradition, has provided a measure of unity. This has been reinforced by the Lambeth Conferences of Anglican Communion bishops, which first met in 1867. These conferences, though they propose and pass resolutions, are strictly consultative, and the intent of the resolutions is to provide guideposts for Anglican jurisdictions\u2014not direction. The Conferences also express the function of the episcopate to demonstrate the ecumenical and catholic nature of the church.\nThe Scottish Episcopal Church traces its history back to the origins of Christianity in Scotland. Following the 1560 Scottish Reformation the Church of Scotland was initially run by Superintendents, episcopal governance was restored in 1572, but episcopalianism alternated with periods when the Kirk was under presbyterian control until the 1711 Act allowed formation of the independent non-established Scottish Episcopal Church. The Nonjuring schism led to the British Government imposing penal laws against the church. In 1784 the Scottish church appointed Samuel Seabury as first bishop of the American Episcopal Church, beginning the worldwide Anglican Communion of churches, and in 1792 the penal laws were abolished. The church accepted the articles of the Church of England in 1804. \nThe spread of increasingly democratic forms of representative governance has its origin in the formation of the first General Conventions of the American Episcopal Church in the 1780s, which established a \"House of Bishops\" and a \"House of Deputies\". In many jurisdictions, there is also a third, clerical House. Resolutions may be voted on jointly or by each House, in the latter case requiring passage in all Houses to be adopted by the particular council.\nChurches that are members of the Anglican Communion are episcopal churches in polity, and some are named \"Episcopal\". However, some churches that self-identify as Anglican do not belong to the Anglican Communion, and not all episcopally-governed churches are Anglican. The Roman Catholic Church, the Old Catholic Churches (in full communion with, but not members of, the Anglican Communion), and the Eastern Orthodox churches are recognized, and also their bishops, by Anglicans.\nAmerican Methodist churches.\nAs an offshoot of Anglicanism, Methodist churches often use episcopal polity for historical as well as practical reasons, albeit to limited use. Methodists often use the term \"connexionalism\" or \"connexional polity\" in addition to \"episcopal\". Nevertheless, the powers of the Methodist episcopacy can be relatively strong and wide-reaching compared to traditional conceptions of episcopal polity. For example, in the United Methodist Church, bishops are elected for life, can serve up to two terms in a specific conference (three if special permission is given), are responsible for ordaining and appointing clergy to pastor churches, perform many administrative duties, preside at the annual sessions of the regional Conferences and at the quadrennial meeting of the worldwide General Conference, have authority for teaching and leading the church on matters of social and doctrinal import, and serve to represent the denomination in ecumenical gatherings. United Methodist bishops in the United States serve in their appointed conferences, being moved to a new \"Episcopal Area\" after 8 (or 12) years, until their mandated retirement at the end of the quadrennium following their sixty-sixth birthday.\nBritish Methodism holds that all ordained ministers are equal in terms of spirituality. However, for practical management lines are drawn into President of Conference, Chair of District, Superintendent Minister, Minister. However, all are ministers.\nEpiscopal government in other denominations.\nThe Reformed Church of Hungary and the Lutheran churches in continental Europe may sometimes be called \"episcopal\". In these latter cases, the form of government is not radically different from the presbyterian form, except that their councils of bishops have hierarchical jurisdiction over the local ruling bodies to a greater extent than in most Presbyterian and other Reformed churches. As mentioned, the Lutheran Church in Sweden and Finland are exceptions, claiming apostolic succession in a pattern somewhat like the Anglican churches. Otherwise, forms of polity are not mandated in the Lutheran churches, as it is not regarded as having doctrinal significance. Old World Lutheranism, for historical reasons, has tended to adopt Erastian theories of episcopal authority (by which church authority is to a limited extent sanctioned by secular government). In the United States, the Lutheran churches tend to adopt a form of government more comparable to congregationalism. A small minority of Episcopal Baptists exists.\nMost Anabaptist churches of the plain dress tradition follow an episcopal system, at least in name. Congregational governance is strongly emphasized, and each congregation elects its pastor. Bishops enforce inter-congregational unity and may discipline pastors for breaking from traditional norms.\nAlthough it never uses the term, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) is episcopal, rather than presbyterian or congregational, in the sense that it has a strict hierarchy of leadership from the local bishop/branch president up to a single prophet/president, believed to be personally authorized and guided by Jesus Christ. Local congregations (branches, wards, and stakes) have \"de jure\" boundaries by which members are allocated, and membership records are centralized. This system developed gradually from a more presbyterian polity (Joseph Smith's original title in 1830 was \"First Elder\") for pragmatic and doctrinal reasons, reaching a full episcopacy during the Nauvoo period (1839\u20131846).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10068", "revid": "8377723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10068", "title": "Episcopal", "text": "Episcopal may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10070", "revid": "22615369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10070", "title": "East Slavic languages", "text": "Language family\nThe East Slavic languages constitute one of three regional subgroups of the Slavic languages, distinct from the West and South Slavic languages. East Slavic languages are currently spoken natively throughout Eastern Europe, and eastwards to Siberia and the Russian Far East. In part due to the large historical influence of the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union, the Russian language is also spoken as a lingua franca in many regions of Caucasus and Central Asia. Of the three Slavic branches, East Slavic is the most spoken, with the number of native speakers larger than the Western and Southern branches combined.\nThe common consensus is that Belarusian, Russian and Ukrainian are the existent East Slavic languages; Rusyn is mostly considered as a separate language too, but some classify it as a dialect of Ukrainian.\nThe East Slavic languages descend from a common predecessor, the language spoken in the medieval Kievan Rus' (9th to 13th centuries), the Rus' language which later evolved into Ruthenian, the language of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (13th to 18th centuries) in the Dnieper river valley, and into Russian, the language of the Grand Duchy of Moscow (13th to 16th centuries) in the Volga river valley accordingly. All these languages use the Cyrillic script, but with particular modifications. Belarusian and Ukrainian, which are descendants of Ruthenian, have a tradition of using Latin-based alphabets\u2014the Belarusian \u0141acinka and Ukrainian Latin alphabets, respectively (also Rusyn uses Latin in some regions).\nDifferentiation.\nThe East Slavic territory exhibits a linguistic continuum with many transitional dialects. Between Belarusian and Ukrainian there is the Polesian dialect, which shares features from both languages. East Polesian is a transitional variety between Belarusian and Ukrainian on one hand, and between South Russian and Ukrainian on the other hand. At the same time, Belarusian and Southern Russian form a continuous area, making it virtually impossible to draw a line between the two languages. Central or Middle Russian (with its Moscow sub-dialect), the transitional step between the North and the South, became a base for the Russian literary standard. Northern Russian with its predecessor, the Old Novgorod dialect, has many original and archaic features. Due to the influence of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth over many centuries, Belarusian and Ukrainian have been influenced in several respects by Polish, a West Slavic language / Lechitic. Ruthenian, the mixed Belarusian-Ukrainian literary language with a Church Slavonic substratum and Polish adstratum, was, together with Middle Polish, an official language in Belarus and Ukraine until the end of the 18th century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nInfluence of Church Slavonic.\nAfter the conversion of the East Slavic region to Christianity the people used service books borrowed from Bulgaria, which were written in Old Church Slavonic (a South Slavic language). The Church Slavonic language was strictly used only in text, while the colloquial language of the Bulgarians was communicated in its spoken form.\nThroughout the Middle Ages (and in some way up to the present day) there existed a duality between the Church Slavonic language used as some kind of 'higher' register (not only) in religious texts and the popular tongue used as a 'lower' register for secular texts. It has been suggested to describe this situation as \"diglossia\", although there do exist mixed texts where it is sometimes very hard to determine why a given author used a popular or a Church Slavonic form in a given context. Church Slavonic was a major factor in the evolution of modern Russian, where there still exists a \"high stratum\" of words that were imported from this language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10071", "revid": "1223123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10071", "title": "Elizabeth Gracen", "text": "American actress\nElizabeth Ward Gracen (born Elizabeth Grace Ward, April 3, 1961) is an American actress and beauty pageant contestant who won the title of Miss America in 1982.\nEarly life and education.\nElizabeth Grace Ward was born on April 3, 1961, in Ozark, Arkansas, the daughter of Patricia Hampe, a nurse, and Jimmy Young Ward, a poultry worker. She was raised in Booneville, Arkansas. The family later moved to Russellville, Arkansas, where Ward dated University of Arkansas trainer Mike Walker and graduated from Russellville High School in 1979. She was a junior accounting major at Arkansas Tech University at the time she entered the Miss America contest. Instead of returning to Arkansas Tech, she used her Miss America scholarship money to study acting at HB Studios in New York City.\nCareer.\nPageants and modeling.\nGracen won the titles of Miss Arkansas in 1981 and Miss America in 1982. After her yearlong work as Miss America, she enrolled in acting classes then relocated to California to pursue a film and television career.\nGracen posed nude for \"Playboy\" magazine's May 1992 issue.\nActing.\nGracen made her professional feature film debut in \"Three For The Road\" with Charlie Sheen. Her film credits also include a featured role in \"Marked for Death\", opposite Steven Seagal, \"Pass The Ammo\" with Tim Curry, and the CBS feature \"83 Hours Till Dawn\" with Peter Strauss and Robert Urich. Gracen starred in \"Lower Level\" and \"Discretion Assured\" with Michael York.\nOn television, Gracen has appeared in Shelley Duvall's \"Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\", Sidney Sheldon's \"The Sands of Time,\" and \"The\" \"Death of the Incredible Hulk\". She also appeared with a starring role in the series \"Extreme\" for NBC and the syndicated series \"Renegade\" and \"Queen of Swords\".\nGracen's best-known acting role has been as the recurring character Amanda, a 1,200-year-old immortal, in the series ' and its spin-off series '.\nIn December 1999, Gracen filed for bankruptcy protection. After few television guest roles, and a supporting role in the made-for-television movie \"Interceptor Force 2\", she took a long leave of absence from acting, beginning in 2002. Gracen began doing voiceover work for Blue Hours Productions, which has revived the classic radio anthology \"Suspense\", which airs on Sirius XM. In 2012, Gracen did a character voice-over in the Malaysian animated science fiction film \"\".\nDirecting, producing, and writing.\nIn 2012, Gracen formed Flapper Films. In 2014, she starred in \"Coherence\", a sci-fi indie thriller. In January 2016, Gracen established Flapper Press and self-published \"Shalilly\", a young adult fantasy novel.\nGracen made her directorial debut with a documentary short, \"The Damn Deal,\" about three young drag queens from Arkansas who compete in female impersonator beauty pageants.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and family.\nGracen married Jon Birmingham in 1982, and they divorced in 1984.\nIn 1989, while filming \"\", she met actor Brendan Hughes, and they married soon after. They divorced in 1994.\nGracen married Adam Murphy, and they have a daughter.\nAffair with Bill Clinton.\nAccording to Gracen, some time in 1983, she had a one-night stand with future President Bill Clinton when he was Governor of Arkansas. She was married at the time, as was he.\nIn 1992, rumors swirled that Gracen had had an affair with Clinton. At first, Gracen dismissed this claim (as requested by Clinton's campaign manager Mickey Kantor); however, in spring 1998 Gracen recanted her six-year-old denial and stated she had a one-night stand with Clinton in 1983. After her claim, Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr, who was investigating Clinton in the Paula Jones lawsuit, issued a subpoena to have her testify to her claim in court. However, Gracen eluded the subpoena and was at one point able to avoid it because \"\" was being filmed outside of the US. Paula Jones's legal team was also unable to track down Gracen because she had made unscheduled trips to Las Vegas and the Caribbean.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10072", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10072", "title": "Elizabeth Gracen/Filmography", "text": ""}
{"id": "10073", "revid": "41822903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10073", "title": "Epicurus", "text": "Ancient Greek philosopher, founder of Epicureanism\nEpicurus (; Greek: ; 341\u2013270 BC) was an ancient Greek philosopher and sage who founded Epicureanism, a highly influential school of philosophy. He was born on the Greek island of Samos to Athenian parents. Influenced by Democritus, Aristippus, Pyrrho, and possibly the Cynics, he turned against the Platonism of his day and established his own school, known as \"the Garden\", in Athens. Epicurus and his followers were known for eating simple meals and discussing a wide range of philosophical subjects. He openly allowed women and slaves to join the school as a matter of policy. Of the over 300 works said to have been written by Epicurus about various subjects, the vast majority have been destroyed. Only three letters written by him\u2014the letters to \"Menoeceus\", \"Pythocles\", and \"Herodotus\"\u2014and two collections of quotes\u2014the \"Principal Doctrines\" and the \"Vatican Sayings\"\u2014have survived intact, along with a few fragments of his other writings. As a result of his work's destruction, most knowledge about his philosophy is due to later authors, particularly the biographer Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, the Epicurean Roman poet Lucretius and the Epicurean philosopher Philodemus, and with hostile but largely accurate accounts by the Pyrrhonist philosopher Sextus Empiricus, and the Academic Skeptic and statesman Cicero.\nEpicurus asserted that philosophy's purpose is to attain as well as to help others attain happy (\"eudaimonic\"), tranquil lives characterized by \"ataraxia\" (peace and freedom from fear) and \"aponia\" (the absence of pain). He advocated that people were best able to pursue philosophy by living a self-sufficient life surrounded by friends. He taught that the root of all human neurosis is death denial and the tendency for human beings to assume that death will be horrific and painful, which he claimed causes unnecessary anxiety, selfish self-protective behaviors, and hypocrisy. According to Epicurus, death is the end of both the body and the soul and therefore should not be feared. Epicurus taught that although the gods exist, they have no involvement in human affairs. He taught that people should act ethically not because the gods punish or reward them for their actions but because, due to the power of guilt, amoral behavior would inevitably lead to remorse weighing on their consciences and as a result, they would be prevented from attaining \"ataraxia\". \nEpicurus was an empiricist, meaning he believed that only the senses are a reliable source of knowledge about the world. He derived much of his physics and cosmology from the earlier philosopher Democritus (c. 460\u2013c. 370 BC). Like Democritus, Epicurus taught that the universe is infinite and eternal and that all matter is made up of extremely tiny, invisible particles known as \"atoms\". All occurrences in the natural world are ultimately the result of atoms moving and interacting in empty space. Epicurus deviated from Democritus by proposing the idea of atomic \"swerve\", which holds that atoms may deviate from their expected course, thus permitting humans to possess free will in an otherwise deterministic universe.\nThough popular, Epicurean teachings were controversial from the beginning. Epicureanism reached the height of its popularity during the late years of the Roman Republic. It died out in late antiquity, subject to hostility from early Christianity. Throughout the Middle Ages Epicurus was popularly, though inaccurately, remembered as a patron of drunkards, whoremongers, and gluttons. His teachings gradually became more widely known in the fifteenth century with the rediscovery of important texts, but his ideas did not become acceptable until the seventeenth century, when the French Catholic priest Pierre Gassendi revived a modified version of them, which was promoted by other writers, including Walter Charleton and Robert Boyle. His influence grew considerably during and after the Enlightenment, profoundly impacting the ideas of major thinkers, including John Locke, Thomas Jefferson, Jeremy Bentham, and Karl Marx.\nLife.\nUpbringing and influences.\nEpicurus was born in the Athenian settlement on the Aegean island of Samos in February 341\u00a0BC. His parents, Neocles and Chaerestrate, were both Athenian-born, and his father was an Athenian citizen. Epicurus grew up during the final years of the Greek Classical Period. Plato had died seven years before Epicurus was born and Epicurus was seven years old when Alexander the Great crossed the Hellespont into Persia. As a child, Epicurus would have received a typical ancient Greek education. As such, according to Norman Wentworth DeWitt, \"it is inconceivable that he would have escaped the Platonic training in geometry, dialectic, and rhetoric.\" Epicurus is known to have studied under the instruction of a Samian Platonist named Pamphilus, probably for about four years. His \"Letter of Menoeceus\" and surviving fragments of his other writings strongly suggest that he had extensive training in rhetoric. After the death of Alexander the Great, Perdiccas expelled the Athenian settlers on Samos to Colophon, on the coast of what is now Turkey. After the completion of his military service, Epicurus joined his family there. He studied under Nausiphanes, who followed the teachings of Democritus, and later those of Pyrrho, whose way of life Epicurus greatly admired.\nEpicurus's teachings were heavily influenced by those of earlier philosophers, particularly Democritus. Nonetheless, Epicurus differed from his predecessors on several key points of determinism and vehemently denied having been influenced by any previous philosophers, whom he denounced as \"confused\". Instead, he insisted that he had been \"self-taught\". According to DeWitt, Epicurus's teachings also show influences from the contemporary philosophical school of Cynicism. The Cynic philosopher Diogenes of Sinope was still alive when Epicurus would have been in Athens for his required military training and it is possible they may have met. Diogenes's pupil Crates of Thebes (c. 365 \u2013 c. 285 BC) was a close contemporary of Epicurus. Epicurus agreed with the Cynics' quest for honesty, but rejected their \"insolence and vulgarity\", instead teaching that honesty must be coupled with courtesy and kindness. Epicurus shared this view with his contemporary, the comic playwright Menander.\nEpicurus's \"Letter to Menoeceus\", possibly an early work of his, is written in an eloquent style similar to that of the Athenian rhetorician Isocrates (436\u2013338 BC), but, for his later works, he seems to have adopted the bald, intellectual style of the mathematician Euclid. Epicurus's epistemology also bears an unacknowledged debt to the later writings of Aristotle (384\u2013322 BC), who rejected the Platonic idea of hypostatic Reason and instead relied on nature and empirical evidence for knowledge about the universe. During Epicurus's formative years, Greek knowledge about the rest of the world was rapidly expanding due to the Hellenization of the Near East and the rise of Hellenistic kingdoms. Epicurus's philosophy was consequently more universal in its outlook than those of his predecessors, since it took cognizance of non-Greek peoples as well as Greeks. He may have had access to the now-lost writings of the historian and ethnographer Megasthenes, who wrote during the reign of Seleucus I Nicator (ruled 305\u2013281 BC).\nTeaching career.\nDuring Epicurus's lifetime, Platonism was the dominant philosophy in higher education. Epicurus's opposition to Platonism formed a large part of his thought. Over half of the forty Principal Doctrines of Epicureanism are flat contradictions of Platonism. In around 311 BC, Epicurus, when he was around thirty years old, began teaching in Mytilene. Around this time, Zeno of Citium, the founder of Stoicism, arrived in Athens, at the age of about twenty-one, but Zeno did not begin teaching what would become Stoicism for another twenty years. Although later texts, such as the writings of the first-century BC Roman orator Cicero, portray Epicureanism and Stoicism as rivals, this rivalry seems to have only emerged after Epicurus's death.\nEpicurus's teachings caused strife in Mytilene and he was forced to leave. He then founded a school in Lampsacus before returning to Athens in c. 306 BC, where he remained until his death. There he founded The Garden (\u03ba\u1fc6\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2), a school named for the garden he owned that served as the school's meeting place, about halfway between the locations of two other schools of philosophy, the Stoa and the Academy. The Garden was more than just a school; it was \"a community of like-minded and aspiring practitioners of a particular way of life.\" The primary members were Hermarchus, the financier Idomeneus, Leonteus and his wife Themista, the satirist Colotes, the mathematician Polyaenus of Lampsacus, and Metrodorus of Lampsacus, the most famous popularizer of Epicureanism. His school was the first of the ancient Greek philosophical schools to admit women as a rule rather than an exception, and the biography of Epicurus by Diogenes La\u00ebrtius lists female students such as Leontion and Nikidion. An inscription on the gate to The Garden is recorded by Seneca the Younger in epistle XXI of \"Epistulae morales ad Lucilium\": \"Stranger, here you will do well to tarry; here our highest good is pleasure.\"\nAccording to Diskin Clay, Epicurus himself established a custom of celebrating his birthday annually with common meals, befitting his stature as \"heros ktistes\" (\"founding hero\") of the Garden. He ordained in his will annual memorial feasts for himself on the same date (10th of Gamelion month). Epicurean communities continued this tradition, referring to Epicurus as their \"saviour\" (soter) and celebrating him as hero. The hero cult of Epicurus may have operated as a Garden variety civic religion. However, clear evidence of an Epicurean hero cult, as well as the cult itself, seems buried by the weight of posthumous philosophical interpretation. Epicurus never married and had no known children. He was most likely a vegetarian.\nDeath.\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius records that, according to Epicurus's successor Hermarchus, Epicurus died a slow and painful death in 270\u00a0BC at the age of seventy-two from a stone blockage of his urinary tract. Despite being in immense pain, Epicurus is said to have remained cheerful and to have continued to teach until the very end. Possible insights into Epicurus's death may be offered by the extremely brief \"Epistle to Idomeneus\", included by Diogenes La\u00ebrtius in Book X of his \"Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers\". The authenticity of this letter is uncertain and it may be a later pro-Epicurean forgery intended to paint an admirable portrait of the philosopher to counter the large number of forged epistles in Epicurus's name portraying him unfavorably.\nI have written this letter to you on a happy day to me, which is also the last day of my life. For I have been attacked by a painful inability to urinate, and also dysentery, so violent that nothing can be added to the violence of my sufferings. But the cheerfulness of my mind, which comes from the recollection of all my philosophical contemplation, counterbalances all these afflictions. And I beg you to take care of the children of Metrodorus, in a manner worthy of the devotion shown by the young man to me, and to philosophy.\nIf authentic, this letter would support the tradition that Epicurus was able to remain joyful to the end, even in the midst of his suffering. It would also indicate that he maintained a special concern for the wellbeing of children.\nPhilosophy.\nEpistemology.\nEpicurus and his followers had a well-developed epistemology, which developed as a result of their rivalry with other philosophical schools. Epicurus wrote a treatise entitled , or \"Rule\", in which he explained his methods of investigation and theory of knowledge. This book, however, has not survived, nor does any other text that fully and clearly explains Epicurean epistemology, leaving only mentions of this epistemology by several authors to reconstruct it. Epicurus was an ardent Empiricist; believing that the senses are the only reliable sources of information about the world. He rejected the Platonic idea of \"Reason\" as a reliable source of knowledge about the world apart from the senses and was bitterly opposed to the Pyrrhonists and Academic Skeptics, who not only questioned the ability of the senses to provide accurate knowledge about the world, but also whether it is even possible to know anything about the world at all.\nEpicurus maintained that the senses never deceive humans, but that the senses can be misinterpreted. Epicurus held that the purpose of all knowledge is to aid humans in attaining \"ataraxia\". He taught that knowledge is learned through experiences rather than innate and that the acceptance of the fundamental truth of the things a person perceives is essential to a person's moral and spiritual health. In the \"Letter to Pythocles\", he states, \"If a person fights the clear evidence of his senses he will never be able to share in genuine tranquility.\" Epicurus regarded gut feelings as the ultimate authority on matters of morality and held that whether a person feels an action is right or wrong is a far more cogent guide to whether that act really is right or wrong than abstracts maxims, strict codified rules of ethics, or even reason itself.\nEpicurus permitted that any and every statement that is not directly contrary to human perception has the possibility to be true. Nonetheless, anything contrary to a person's experience can be ruled out as false. Epicureans often used analogies to everyday experience to support their argument of so-called \"imperceptibles\", which included anything that a human being cannot perceive, such as the motion of atoms. In line with this principle of non-contradiction, the Epicureans believed that events in the natural world may have multiple causes that are all equally possible and probable. Lucretius writes in \"On the Nature of Things\", as translated by William Ellery Leonard:\n&lt;poem&gt;There be, besides, some thing\nOf which 'tis not enough one only cause\nTo state\u2014but rather several, whereof one\nWill be the true: lo, if thou shouldst espy\nLying afar some fellow's lifeless corse,\n'Twere meet to name all causes of a death,\nThat cause of his death might thereby be named:\nFor prove thou mayst he perished not by steel,\nBy cold, nor even by poison nor disease,\nYet somewhat of this sort hath come to him\nWe know\u2014And thus we have to say the same\nIn divers cases.&lt;/poem&gt;\nEpicurus strongly favored naturalistic explanations over theological ones. In his \"Letter to Pythocles\", he offers four different possible natural explanations for thunder, six different possible natural explanations for lightning, three for snow, three for comets, two for rainbows, two for earthquakes, and so on. Although all of these explanations are now known to be false, they were an important step in the history of science, because Epicurus was trying to explain natural phenomena using natural explanations, rather than resorting to inventing elaborate stories about gods and mythic heroes.\nEthics.\nEpicurus was a hedonist, meaning he taught that what is pleasurable is morally good and what is painful is morally evil. He idiosyncratically defined \"pleasure\" as the absence of suffering and taught that all humans should seek to attain the state of \"ataraxia\", meaning \"untroubledness\", a state in which the person is completely free from all pain or suffering. He argued that most of the suffering which human beings experience is caused by the irrational fears of death, divine retribution, and punishment in the afterlife. In his \"Letter to Menoeceus\", Epicurus explains that people seek wealth and power on account of these fears, believing that having more money, prestige, or political clout will save them from death. He, however, maintains that death is the end of existence, that the terrifying stories of punishment in the afterlife are ridiculous superstitions, and that death is therefore nothing to be feared. He writes in his \"Letter to Menoeceus\": \"Accustom thyself to believe that death is nothing to us, for good and evil imply sentience, and death is the privation of all sentience;... Death, therefore, the most awful of evils, is nothing to us, seeing that, when we are, death is not come, and, when death is come, we are not.\" From this doctrine arose the Epicurean epitaph: \"Non fui, fui, non-sum, non-curo\" (\"I was not; I was; I am not; I do not care\"), which is inscribed on the gravestones of his followers and seen on many ancient gravestones of the Roman Empire. This quotation is often used today at humanist funerals.\nThe Tetrapharmakos presents a summary of the key points of Epicurean ethics:\nAlthough Epicurus has been commonly misunderstood as an advocate of the rampant pursuit of pleasure, he, in fact, maintained that a person can only be happy and free from suffering by living wisely, soberly, and morally. He strongly disapproved of raw, excessive sensuality and warned that a person must take into account whether the consequences of his actions will result in suffering, writing, \"the pleasant life is produced not by a string of drinking bouts and revelries, nor by the enjoyment of boys and women, nor by fish and the other items on an expensive menu, but by sober reasoning.\" He also wrote that a single good piece of cheese could be equally pleasing as an entire feast. Furthermore, Epicurus taught that \"it is not possible to live pleasurably without living sensibly and nobly and justly\", because a person who engages in acts of dishonesty or injustice will be \"loaded with troubles\" on account of his own guilty conscience and will live in constant fear that his wrongdoings will be discovered by others. A person who is kind and just to others, however, will have no fear and will be more likely to attain \"ataraxia\".\nEpicurus distinguished between two different types of pleasure: \"moving\" pleasures (\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u1f70 \u03ba\u03af\u03bd\u03b7\u03c3\u03b9\u03bd \u1f21\u03b4\u03bf\u03bd\u03b1\u03af) and \"static\" pleasures (\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03b7\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03b1\u1f76 \u1f21\u03b4\u03bf\u03bd\u03b1\u03af). \"Moving\" pleasures occur when one is in the process of satisfying a desire and involve an active titillation of the senses. After one's desires have been satisfied (e.g. when one is full after eating), the pleasure quickly goes away and the suffering of wanting to fulfill the desire again returns. For Epicurus, static pleasures are the best pleasures because moving pleasures are always bound up with pain. Epicurus had a low opinion of sex and marriage, regarding both as having dubious value. Instead, he maintained that platonic friendships are essential to living a happy life. One of the \"Principal Doctrines\" states, \"Of the things wisdom acquires for the blessedness of life as a whole, far the greatest is the possession of friendship.\" He also taught that philosophy is itself a pleasure to engage in. One of the quotes from Epicurus recorded in the \"Vatican Sayings\" declares, \"In other pursuits, the hard-won fruit comes at the end. But in philosophy, delight keeps pace with knowledge. It is not after the lesson that enjoyment comes: learning and enjoyment happen at the same time.\"\nEpicurus distinguishes between three types of desires: natural and necessary, natural but unnecessary, and vain and empty. Natural and necessary desires include the desires for food and shelter. These are easy to satisfy, difficult to eliminate, bring pleasure when satisfied, and are naturally limited. Going beyond these limits produces unnecessary desires, such as the desire for luxury foods. Although food is necessary, luxury food is not necessary. Correspondingly, Epicurus advocates a life of hedonistic moderation by reducing desire, thus eliminating the unhappiness caused by unfulfilled desires. Vain desires include desires for power, wealth, and fame. These are difficult to satisfy because no matter how much one gets, one can always want more. These desires are inculcated by society and by false beliefs about what we need. They are not natural and are to be shunned.\nEpicurus' teachings were introduced into medical philosophy and practice by the Epicurean doctor Asclepiades of Bithynia, who was the first physician who introduced Greek medicine in Rome. Asclepiades introduced the friendly, sympathetic, pleasing and painless treatment of patients. He advocated humane treatment of mental disorders, had insane persons freed from confinement and treated them with natural therapy, such as diet and massages. His teachings are surprisingly modern; therefore Asclepiades is considered to be a pioneer physician in psychotherapy, physical therapy and molecular medicine.\nPhysics.\nEpicurus writes in his \"Letter to Herodotus\" (not the historian) that \"nothing ever arises from the nonexistent\", indicating that all events therefore have causes, regardless of whether those causes are known or unknown. Similarly, he also writes that nothing ever passes away into nothingness, because, \"if an object that passes from our view were completely annihilated, everything in the world would have perished, since that into which things were dissipated would be nonexistent.\" He therefore states: \"The totality of things was always just as it is at present and will always remain the same because there is nothing into which it can change, inasmuch as there is nothing outside the totality that could intrude and effect change.\" Like Democritus before him, Epicurus taught that all matter is entirely made of extremely tiny particles called \"atoms\" (Greek: ; \"\", meaning \"indivisible\"). For Epicurus and his followers, the existence of atoms was a matter of empirical observation; Epicurus's devoted follower, the Roman poet Lucretius, cites the gradual wearing down of rings from being worn, statues from being kissed, stones from being dripped on by water, and roads from being walked on in \"On the Nature of Things\" as evidence for the existence of atoms as tiny, imperceptible particles.\nAlso like Democritus, Epicurus was a materialist who taught that the only things that exist are atoms and void. Void occurs in any place where there are no atoms. Epicurus and his followers believed that atoms and void are both infinite and that the universe is therefore boundless. In \"On the Nature of Things\", Lucretius argues this point using the example of a man throwing a javelin at the theoretical boundary of a finite universe. He states that the javelin must either go past the edge of the universe, in which case it is not really a boundary, or it must be blocked by something and prevented from continuing its path, but, if that happens, then the object blocking it must be outside the confines of the universe. As a result of this belief that the universe and the number of atoms in it are infinite, Epicurus and the Epicureans believed that there must also be infinitely many worlds within the universe.\nEpicurus taught that the motion of atoms is constant, eternal, and without beginning or end. He held that there are two kinds of motion: the motion of atoms and the motion of visible objects. Both kinds of motion are real and not illusory. Democritus had described atoms as not only eternally moving, but also eternally flying through space, colliding, coalescing, and separating from each other as necessary. In a rare departure from Democritus's physics, Epicurus posited the idea of atomic \"swerve\" ( \"\"; ), one of his best-known original ideas. According to this idea, atoms, as they are travelling through space, may deviate slightly from the course they would ordinarily be expected to follow. Epicurus's reason for introducing this doctrine was because he wanted to preserve the concepts of free will and ethical responsibility while still maintaining the deterministic physical model of atomism. Lucretius describes it, saying, \"It is this slight deviation of primal bodies, at indeterminate times and places, which keeps the mind as such from experiencing an inner compulsion in doing everything it does and from being forced to endure and suffer like a captive in chains.\"\nEpicurus was first to assert human freedom as a result of the fundamental indeterminism in the motion of atoms. This has led some philosophers to think that, for Epicurus, free will was \"caused directly by chance\". In his \"On the Nature of Things\", Lucretius appears to suggest this in the best-known passage on Epicurus' position. In his \"Letter to Menoeceus\", however, Epicurus follows Aristotle and clearly identifies \"three\" possible causes: \"some things happen of necessity, others by chance, others through our own agency.\" Aristotle said some things \"depend on us\" (\"eph'hemin\"). Epicurus agreed, and said it is to these last things that praise and blame naturally attach. For Epicurus, the \"swerve\" of the atoms simply defeated determinism to leave room for autonomous agency.\nTheology.\nIn his \"Letter to Menoeceus\", a summary of his own moral and theological teachings, the first piece of advice Epicurus himself gives to his student is: \"First, believe that a god is an indestructible and blessed animal, in accordance with the general conception of god commonly held, and do not ascribe to god anything foreign to his indestructibility or repugnant to his blessedness.\" Epicurus maintained that he and his followers knew that the gods exist because \"our knowledge of them is a matter of clear and distinct perception\", meaning that people can empirically sense their presences. He did not mean that people can see the gods as physical objects, but rather that they can see visions of the gods sent from the remote regions of interstellar space in which they actually reside. According to George K. Strodach, Epicurus could have easily dispensed of the gods entirely without greatly altering his materialist worldview, but the gods still play one important function in Epicurus's theology as the paragons of moral virtue to be emulated and admired.\nEpicurus rejected the conventional Greek view of the gods as anthropomorphic beings who walked the earth like ordinary people, fathered illegitimate offspring with mortals, and pursued personal feuds. Instead, he taught that the gods are morally perfect, but detached and immobile beings who live in the remote regions of interstellar space. In line with these teachings, Epicurus adamantly rejected the idea that deities were involved in human affairs in any way. Epicurus maintained that the gods are so utterly perfect and removed from the world that they are incapable of listening to prayers or supplications or doing virtually anything aside from contemplating their own perfections. In his \"Letter to Herodotus\", he specifically denies that the gods have any control over natural phenomena, arguing that this would contradict their fundamental nature, which is perfect, because any kind of worldly involvement would tarnish their perfection. He further warned that believing that the gods control natural phenomena would only mislead people into believing the superstitious view that the gods punish humans for wrongdoing, which only instills fear and prevents people from attaining \"ataraxia\".\nEpicurus himself criticizes popular religion in both his \"Letter to Menoeceus\" and his \"Letter to Herodotus\", but in a restrained and moderate tone. Later Epicureans mainly followed the same ideas as Epicurus, believing in the existence of the gods, but emphatically rejecting the idea of divine providence. Their criticisms of popular religion, however, are often less gentle than those of Epicurus himself. The \"Letter to Pythocles\", written by a later Epicurean, is dismissive and contemptuous towards popular religion and Epicurus's devoted follower, the Roman poet Lucretius (c. 99 BC \u2013 c. 55 BC), passionately assailed popular religion in his philosophical poem \"On the Nature of Things\". In this poem, Lucretius declares that popular religious practices not only do not instill virtue, but rather result in \"misdeeds both wicked and ungodly\", citing the mythical sacrifice of Iphigenia as an example. Lucretius argues that divine creation and providence are illogical, not because the gods do not exist, but rather because these notions are incompatible with the Epicurean principles of the gods' indestructibility and blessedness. The later Pyrrhonist philosopher Sextus Empiricus (c. 160 \u2013 c. 210 AD) rejected the teachings of the Epicureans specifically because he regarded them as theological \"Dogmaticists\".\nEpicurean paradox.\nThe Epicurean paradox or riddle of Epicurus or Epicurus' trilemma is a version of the problem of evil. Lactantius attributes this trilemma to Epicurus in \"De Ira Dei\", 13, 20-21:\nGod, he says, either wishes to take away evils, and is unable; or He is able, and is unwilling; or He is neither willing nor able, or He is both willing and able. If He is willing and is unable, He is feeble, which is not in accordance with the character of God; if He is able and unwilling, He is envious, which is equally at variance with God; if He is neither willing nor able, He is both envious and feeble, and therefore not God; if He is both willing and able, which alone is suitable to God, from what source then are evils? Or why does He not remove them?\nIn \"Dialogues concerning Natural Religion\" (1779), David Hume also attributes the argument to Epicurus:\nEpicurus\u2019s old questions are yet unanswered. Is he willing to prevent evil, but not able? then is he impotent. Is he able, but not willing? then is he malevolent. Is he both able and willing? whence then is evil?\nNo extant writings of Epicurus contain this argument. However, the vast majority of Epicurus's writings have been lost and it is possible that some form of this argument may have been found in his lost treatise \"On the Gods\", which Diogenes La\u00ebrtius describes as one of his greatest works. If Epicurus really did make some form of this argument, it would not have been an argument against the existence of deities, but rather an argument against divine providence. Epicurus's extant writings demonstrate that he did believe in the existence of deities. Furthermore, religion was such an integral part of daily life in Greece during the early Hellenistic Period that it is doubtful anyone during that period could have been an atheist in the modern sense of the word. Instead, the Greek word (\"\u00e1theos\"), meaning \"without a god\", was used as a term of abuse, not as an attempt to describe a person's beliefs.\nPolitics.\nEpicurus promoted an innovative theory of justice as a social contract. Justice, Epicurus said, is an agreement neither to harm nor be harmed, and we need to have such a contract in order to enjoy fully the benefits of living together in a well-ordered society. Laws and punishments are needed to keep misguided fools in line who would otherwise break the contract. But the wise person sees the usefulness of justice, and because of his limited desires, he has no need to engage in the conduct prohibited by the laws in any case. Laws that are useful for promoting happiness are just, but those that are not useful are not just. (\"Principal Doctrines\" 31\u201340)\nEpicurus discouraged participation in politics, as doing so leads to perturbation and status seeking. He instead advocated not drawing attention to oneself. This principle is epitomised by the phrase \"lathe bi\u014dsas\" (), meaning \"live in obscurity\", \"get through life without drawing attention to yourself\", i.e., live without pursuing glory or wealth or power, but anonymously, enjoying little things like food, the company of friends, etc. Plutarch elaborated on this theme in his essay \"Is the Saying \"Live in Obscurity\" Right?\" (, \"An recte dictum sit latenter esse vivendum\") 1128c; cf. Flavius Philostratus, \"Vita Apollonii\" 8.28.12.\nWorks.\nEpicurus was an extremely prolific writer. According to Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, he wrote around 300 treatises on a variety of subjects. Although more original writings of Epicurus have survived to the present day than of any other Hellenistic Greek philosopher, the vast majority of everything he wrote has still been lost, and most of what is known about Epicurus's teachings come from the writings of his later followers, particularly the Roman poet Lucretius. The only surviving complete works by Epicurus are three relatively lengthy letters, which are quoted in their entirety in Book X of Diogenes La\u00ebrtius's \"Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers\", and two groups of quotes: the \"Principal Doctrines\" (\u039a\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03b1\u03b9 \u0394\u03cc\u03be\u03b1\u03b9), which are likewise preserved through quotation by Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, and the \"Vatican Sayings\", preserved in a manuscript from the Vatican Library that was first discovered in 1888. In the \"Letter to Herodotus\" and the \"Letter to Pythocles\", Epicurus summarizes his philosophy on nature and, in the \"Letter to Menoeceus\", he summarizes his moral teachings. Numerous fragments of Epicurus's lost thirty-seven volume treatise \"On Nature\" have been found among the charred papyrus fragments at the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum. Scholars first began attempting to unravel and decipher these scrolls in 1800, but the efforts are painstaking and are still ongoing.\nAccording to Diogenes Laertius (10.27-9), the major works of Epicurus include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLegacy.\nAncient Epicureanism.\nEpicureanism was extremely popular from the very beginning. Diogenes La\u00ebrtius records that the number of Epicureans throughout the world exceeded the populations of entire cities. Nonetheless, Epicurus was not universally admired and, within his own lifetime, he was vilified as an ignorant buffoon and egoistic sybarite. He remained the most simultaneously admired and despised philosopher in the Mediterranean for the next nearly five centuries. Epicureanism rapidly spread beyond the Greek mainland all across the Mediterranean world. By the first century BC, it had established a strong foothold in Italy. The Roman orator Cicero (106 \u2013 43 BC), who deplored Epicurean ethics, lamented, \"the Epicureans have taken Italy by storm.\"\nThe overwhelming majority of surviving Greek and Roman sources are vehemently negative towards Epicureanism and, according to Pamela Gordon, they routinely depict Epicurus himself as \"monstrous or laughable\". Many Romans in particular took a negative view of Epicureanism, seeing its advocacy of the pursuit of \"voluptas\" (\"pleasure\") as contrary to the Roman ideal of \"virtus\" (\"manly virtue\"). The Romans therefore often stereotyped Epicurus and his followers as weak and effeminate. Prominent critics of his philosophy include prominent authors such as the Roman Stoic Seneca the Younger (c. 4 BC \u2013 AD 65) and the Greek Middle Platonist Plutarch (c. 46 \u2013 c. 120), who both derided these stereotypes as immoral and disreputable. Gordon characterizes anti-Epicurean rhetoric as so \"heavy-handed\" and misrepresentative of Epicurus's actual teachings that they sometimes come across as \"comical\". In his \"De vita beata\", Seneca states that the \"sect of Epicurus... has a bad reputation, and yet it does not deserve it.\" and compares it to \"a man in a dress: your chastity remains, your virility is unimpaired, your body has not submitted sexually, but in your hand is a tympanum.\"\nEpicureanism was a notoriously conservative philosophical school; although Epicurus's later followers did expand on his philosophy, they dogmatically retained what he himself had originally taught without modifying it. Epicureans and admirers of Epicureanism revered Epicurus himself as a great teacher of ethics, a savior, and even a god. His image was worn on finger rings, portraits of him were displayed in living rooms, and wealthy followers venerated likenesses of him in marble sculpture. His admirers revered his sayings as divine oracles, carried around copies of his writings, and cherished copies of his letters like the letters of an apostle. On the twentieth day of every month, admirers of his teachings would perform a solemn ritual to honor his memory. At the same time, opponents of his teachings denounced him with vehemence and persistence.\nHowever, in the first and second centuries AD, Epicureanism gradually began to decline as it failed to compete with Stoicism, which had an ethical system more in line with traditional Roman values. Epicureanism also suffered decay in the wake of Christianity, which was also rapidly expanding throughout the Roman Empire. Of all the Greek philosophical schools, Epicureanism was the one most at odds with the new Christian teachings, since Epicureans believed that the soul was mortal, denied the existence of an afterlife, denied that the divine had any active role in human life, and advocated pleasure as the foremost goal of human existence. As such, Christian writers such as Justin Martyr (c. 100\u2013c. 165 AD), Athenagoras of Athens (c. 133\u2013c. 190), Tertullian (c. 155\u2013c. 240), and Clement of Alexandria (c. 150\u2013c. 215), Arnobius (died c. 330), and Lactantius (c. 250-c.325) all singled it out for the most vitriolic criticism.\nIn spite of this, DeWitt argues that Epicureanism and Christianity share much common language, calling Epicureanism \"the first missionary philosophy\" and \"the first world philosophy\". Both Epicureanism and Christianity placed strong emphasis on the importance of love and forgiveness and early Christian portrayals of Jesus are often similar to Epicurean portrayals of Epicurus. DeWitt argues that Epicureanism, in many ways, helped pave the way for the spread of Christianity by \"helping to bridge the gap between Greek intellectualism and a religious way of life\" and \"shunt[ing] the emphasis from the political to the social virtues and offer[ing] what may be called a religion of humanity.\"\nMiddle Ages.\nBy the early fifth century AD, Epicureanism was virtually extinct. The Christian Church Father Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430 AD) declared, \"its ashes are so cold that not a single spark can be struck from them.\" While the ideas of Plato and Aristotle could easily be adapted to suit a Christian worldview, the ideas of Epicurus were not nearly as easily amenable. As such, while Plato and Aristotle enjoyed a privileged place in Christian philosophy throughout the Middle Ages, Epicurus was not held in such esteem. Information about Epicurus's teachings was available, through Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\", quotations of it found in medieval Latin grammars and \"florilegia\", and encyclopedias, such as Isidore of Seville's \"Etymologiae\" (seventh century) and Hrabanus Maurus's \"De universo\" (ninth century), but there is little evidence that these teachings were systematically studied or comprehended.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Epicurus was remembered by the educated as a philosopher, but he frequently appeared in popular culture as a gatekeeper to the Garden of Delights, the \"proprietor of the kitchen, the tavern, and the brothel.\" He appears in this guise in Martianus Capella's \"Marriage of Mercury and Philology\" (fifth century), John of Salisbury's \"Policraticus\" (1159), John Gower's \"Mirour de l'Omme\", and Geoffrey Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\". Epicurus and his followers appear in Dante Alighieri's \"Inferno\" in the Sixth Circle of Hell, where they are imprisoned in flaming coffins for having believed that the soul dies with the body.\nRenaissance.\nIn 1417, a manuscript-hunter named Poggio Bracciolini discovered a copy of Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\" in a monastery near Lake Constance. The discovery of this manuscript was met with immense excitement, because scholars were eager to analyze and study the teachings of classical philosophers and this previously-forgotten text contained the most comprehensive account of Epicurus's teachings known in Latin. The first scholarly dissertation on Epicurus, \"De voluptate\" (\"On Pleasure\") by the Italian Humanist and Catholic priest Lorenzo Valla was published in 1431. Valla made no mention of Lucretius or his poem. Instead, he presented the treatise as a discussion on the nature of the highest good between an Epicurean, a Stoic, and a Christian. Valla's dialogue ultimately rejects Epicureanism, but, by presenting an Epicurean as a member of the dispute, Valla lent Epicureanism credibility as a philosophy that deserved to be taken seriously.\nNone of the Quattrocento Humanists ever clearly endorsed Epicureanism, but scholars such as Francesco Zabarella (1360\u20131417), Francesco Filelfo (1398\u20131481), Cristoforo Landino (1424\u20131498), and Leonardo Bruni (c. 1370\u20131444) did give Epicureanism a fairer analysis than it had traditionally received and provided a less overtly hostile assessment of Epicurus himself. Nonetheless, \"Epicureanism\" remained a pejorative, synonymous with extreme egoistic pleasure-seeking, rather than a name of a philosophical school. This reputation discouraged orthodox Christian scholars from taking what others might regard as an inappropriately keen interest in Epicurean teachings. Epicureanism did not take hold in Italy, France, or England until the seventeenth century. Even the liberal religious skeptics who might have been expected to take an interest in Epicureanism evidently did not; \u00c9tienne Dolet (1509\u20131546) only mentions Epicurus once in all his writings and Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais (between 1483 and 1494\u20131553) never mentions him at all. Michel de Montaigne (1533\u20131592) is the exception to this trend, quoting a full 450 lines of Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\" in his \"Essays\". His interest in Lucretius, however, seems to have been primarily literary and he is ambiguous about his feelings on Lucretius's Epicurean worldview. During the Protestant Reformation, the label \"Epicurean\" was bandied back and forth as an insult between Protestants and Catholics.\nRevival.\nIn the seventeenth century, the French Catholic priest and scholar Pierre Gassendi (1592\u20131655) sought to dislodge Aristotelianism from its position of the highest dogma by presenting Epicureanism as a better and more rational alternative. In 1647, Gassendi published his book \"De vita et moribus Epicuri\" (\"The Life and Morals of Epicurus\"), a passionate defense of Epicureanism. In 1649, he published a commentary on Diogenes La\u00ebrtius's \"Life of Epicurus\". He left \"Syntagma philosophicum\" (\"Philosophical Compendium\"), a synthesis of Epicurean doctrines, unfinished at the time of his death in 1655. It was finally published in 1658, after undergoing revision by his editors. Gassendi modified Epicurus's teachings to make them palatable for a Christian audience. For instance, he argued that atoms were not eternal, uncreated, and infinite in number, instead contending that an extremely large but finite number of atoms were created by God at creation.\nAs a result of Gassendi's modifications, his books were never censored by the Catholic Church. They came to exert profound influence on later writings about Epicurus. Gassendi's version of Epicurus's teachings became popular among some members of English scientific circles. For these scholars, however, Epicurean atomism was merely a starting point for their own idiosyncratic adaptations of it. To orthodox thinkers, Epicureanism was still regarded as immoral and heretical. For instance, Lucy Hutchinson (1620\u20131681), the first translator of Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\" into English, railed against Epicurus as \"a lunatic dog\" who formulated \"ridiculous, impious, execrable doctrines\".\nEpicurus's teachings were made respectable in England by the natural philosopher Walter Charleton (1619\u20131707), whose first Epicurean work, \"The Darkness of Atheism Dispelled by the Light of Nature\" (1652), advanced Epicureanism as a \"new\" atomism. His next work \"Physiologia Epicuro-Gassendo-Charletoniana, or a Fabrick of Science Natural, upon a Hypothesis of Atoms, Founded by Epicurus, Repaired by Petrus Gassendus, and Augmented by Walter Charleton\" (1654) emphasized this idea. These works, together with Charleton's \"Epicurus's Morals\" (1658), provided the English public with readily available descriptions of Epicurus's philosophy and assured orthodox Christians that Epicureanism was no threat to their beliefs. The Royal Society, chartered in 1662, advanced Epicurean atomism. One of the most prolific defenders of atomism was the chemist Robert Boyle (1627\u20131691), who argued for it in publications such as \"The Origins of Forms and Qualities\" (1666), \"Experiments, Notes, etc. about the Mechanical Origin and Production of Divers Particular Qualities\" (1675), and \"Of the Excellency and Grounds of the Mechanical Hypothesis\" (1674). By the end of the seventeenth century, Epicurean atomism was widely accepted by members of the English scientific community as the best model for explaining the physical world, but it had been modified so greatly that Epicurus was no longer seen as its original parent.\nEnlightenment and after.\nThe Anglican bishop Joseph Butler's anti-Epicurean polemics in his \"Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel\" (1726) and \"Analogy of Religion\" (1736) set the tune for what most orthodox Christians believed about Epicureanism for the remainder of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Nonetheless, there are a few indications from this time period of Epicurus's improving reputation. Epicureanism was beginning to lose its associations with indiscriminate and insatiable gluttony, which had been characteristic of its reputation ever since antiquity. Instead, the word \"epicure\" began to refer to a person with extremely refined taste in food. Examples of this usage include \"Epicurean cooks / sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite\" from William Shakespeare's \"Antony and Cleopatra\" (Act II. scene i; c. 1607) and \"such an epicure was Potiphar\u2014to please his tooth and pamper his flesh with delicacies\" from William Whately's \"Prototypes\" (1646).\nAround the same time, the Epicurean injunction to \"live in obscurity\" was beginning to gain popularity as well. In 1685, Sir William Temple (1628\u20131699) abandoned a promising career as a diplomat and instead retired to his garden, devoting himself to writing essays on Epicurus's moral teachings. That same year, John Dryden translated the celebrated lines from Book II of Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\": \"'Tis pleasant, safely to behold from shore / The rowling ship, and hear the Tempest roar.\" Meanwhile, John Locke (1632\u20131704) adapted Gassendi's modified version of Epicurus's epistemology, which became highly influential on English empiricism. Many thinkers with sympathies towards the Enlightenment endorsed Epicureanism as an admirable moral philosophy. Thomas Jefferson (1743\u20131826), one of the Founding Fathers of the United States, declared in 1819, \"I too am an Epicurean. I consider the genuine (not imputed) doctrines of Epicurus as containing everything rational in moral philosophy which Greece and Rome have left us.\"\nThe German philosopher Karl Marx (1818\u20131883), whose ideas are the basis of Marxism, was profoundly influenced as a young man by the teachings of Epicurus and his doctoral thesis was a Hegelian dialectical analysis of the differences between the natural philosophies of Democritus and Epicurus. Marx viewed Democritus as a rationalist skeptic, whose epistemology was inherently contradictory, but saw Epicurus as a dogmatic empiricist, whose worldview is internally consistent and practically applicable. The British poet Alfred Tennyson (1809\u20131892) praised \"the sober majesties / of settled, sweet, Epicurean life\" in his 1868 poem \"Lucretius\". Epicurus's ethical teachings also had an indirect impact on the philosophy of Utilitarianism in England during the nineteenth century. Soviet politician Joseph Stalin (1878\u20131953) lauded Epicurus by stating: \"He was the greatest philosopher of all time. He was the one who recommended practicing virtue to derive the greatest joy from life\".\nFriedrich Nietzsche once noted: \"Even today many educated people think that the victory of Christianity over Greek philosophy is a proof of the superior truth of the former \u2013 although in this case it was only the coarser and more violent that conquered the more spiritual and delicate. So far as superior truth is concerned, it is enough to observe that the awakening sciences have allied themselves point by point with the philosophy of Epicurus, but point by point rejected Christianity.\"\nAcademic interest in Epicurus and other Hellenistic philosophers increased over the course of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, with an unprecedented number of monographs, articles, abstracts, and conference papers being published on the subject. The texts from the library of Philodemus of Gadara in the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum, first discovered between 1750 and 1765, are being deciphered, translated, and published by scholars part of the Philodemus Translation Project, funded by the United States National Endowment for the Humanities, and part of the Centro per lo Studio dei Papiri Ercolanesi in Naples. Epicurus's popular appeal among non-scholars is difficult to gauge, but it seems to be relatively comparable to the appeal of more traditionally popular ancient Greek philosophical subjects such as Stoicism, Aristotle, and Plato.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10074", "revid": "45382375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10074", "title": "Epitaph", "text": "Inscription on a tombstone\nAn epitaph (from grc \" ' (epit\u00e1phios)\"\u00a0'a funeral oration'; from \" ' (epi-)\"\u00a0'at, over', and \" \"\" (t\u00e1phos)\"\u00a0'tomb') is a short text honoring a deceased person. Strictly speaking, it refers to text that is inscribed on a tombstone or plaque, but it may also be used in a figurative sense. Some epitaphs are specified by the person themselves before their death, while others are chosen by those responsible for the burial. An epitaph may be written in prose or in poem verse.\nMost epitaphs are brief records of the family, and perhaps the career, of the deceased, often with a common expression of love or respect\u2014for example, \"beloved father of ...\"\u2014but others are more ambitious. From the Renaissance to the 19th century in Western culture, epitaphs for notable people became increasingly lengthy and pompous descriptions of their family origins, career, virtues and immediate family, often in Latin. Notably, the Laudatio Turiae, the longest known Ancient Roman epitaph, exceeds almost all of these at 180 lines; it celebrates the virtues of an honored wife, probably of a consul.\nSome are quotes from holy texts, or aphorisms. One approach of many epitaphs is to \"speak\" to the reader and warn them about their own mortality. A wry trick of others is to request the reader to get off their resting place, inasmuch as the reader would have to be standing on the ground above the coffin to read the inscription. Some record achievements (e.g., past politicians note the years of their terms of office). Nearly all (excepting those where this is impossible by definition, such as the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier) note name, year or date of birth, and date of death. Many list family members and the relationship of the deceased to them (for example, \"Father / Mother / Son / Daughter of\").\nHistory.\nThe history of epitaphs extends as far back as the ancient Egyptians and have differed in delivery. The ancient Greeks utilised emotive expression, written in elegiac verse, later in prose. Ancient Romans' use of epitaphs was more blunt and uniform, typically detailing facts of the deceased \u2013 as did the earliest epitaphs in English churches. \"May the earth lie light upon thee\" was a common inscription for them. Due to the influence of Roman occupiers, the dominant language of epitaphs was Latin, evidenced by the oldest existing epitaphs in Britain. French and English came into fashion around the 13th and 14th centuries, respectively.\nBy the 16th century, epitaphs had become more literary in nature and those written in verse were involved in trade. In America and Britain, comedic epitaphs are common in the form of acrostics, palindromes, riddles, and puns on names and professions \u2013 Robert Burns, the most prolific pre-Romantic epitaphist, wrote 35 pieces, them being largely satirical. The rate of literary epitaphs has been historically overshadowed by \"popular sepulchral inscriptions which are produced in countless numbers at all time\"; \"strictly literary\" epitaphs were most present during the start of the Romantic period. \nThe Lake Poets have been credited with providing success to epitaph-writing adjacent to that of poetry significance \u2013 Robert Southey, in focusing simultaneously upon transience and eternity, contributed substantially. General interest for epitaphs was waning at the cusp of the 19th century, in contrast to a considerable burgeoning intellectual interest. Critical essays had been published before on the matter, possibly contributing towards its flourishing in the latter half of the 18th century. Epitaphs never became a major poetic form and, according to Romantic scholar Ernest Bernhardt-Kabisch, they had \"virtually disappeared\" by 1810. \"The art of the epitaph was largely lost in the 20th century\", wrote Encyclopedia Britannica.\nFormat.\nSarcophagi and coffins were the choice of ancient Egyptians for epitaphs; brasses was the prominent format for a significant period of time. Epitaphs upon stone monuments became a common feature by the Elizabethan era.\nIn England.\nMedieval era.\nStock phrases or standard elements present in epitaphs on mediaeval church monuments and ledger stones in England include:\nNotable examples.\nPoets, playwrights and other writers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is my father's crime against me, which I myself committed against none.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here lies One whose Name was writ in Water\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014\u2009Joseph Conrad\n, in \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Homo sum! the adventurer\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Against you I will fling myself, unvanquished and unyielding, O Death!\nStatesmen.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oh God (Devanagari: \"\u0939\u0947 \u0930\u093e\u092e\")\nMathematicians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSoldiers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEntertainers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And the beat goes on.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That's all folks!\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nActivists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Free at last, Free at last,&lt;br&gt;Thank God Almighty&lt;br&gt;I'm Free at last.\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn music.\nIn a more figurative sense, the term may be used for music composed in memory of the deceased. Igor Stravinsky composed in 1958 \"Epitaphium\" for flute, clarinet and harp. In 1967 Krzysztof Meyer called his Symphony No. 2 for choir and orchestra \"Epitaphium Stanis\u0142aw Wiechowicz in memoriam\". Jeffrey Lewis composed \"Epitaphium \u2013 Children of the Sun\" for narrator, chamber choir, piano, flute, clarinet and percussion. In 1969, King Crimson released the song \"Epitaph\", giving a reference to epitaphs within the song. Bronius Kutavi\u010dius composed in 1998 \"Epitaphium temporum pereunti\". Valentin Silvestrov composed in 1999 \"Epitaph L.B.\" (\u0415\u043f\u0456\u0442\u0430\u0444\u0456\u044f \u041b.\u0411.) for viola (or cello) and piano. In 2007 Graham Waterhouse composed \"Epitaphium\" for string trio as a tribute to the memory of his father William Waterhouse. The South African poet Gert Vlok Nel wrote an (originally) untitled song, which appeared on his first music album \"Beaufort-Wes se Beautiful Woorde\" as \"Epitaph\", because his producer Eckard Potgieter told him that the song sounded like an epitaph. David Bowie's final album, \"Blackstar\", released in 2016, is generally seen as his musical epitaph, with singles \"Blackstar\" and \"Lazarus\" often singled out.\nIn space.\nIn the late 1990s, a unique epitaph was flown to the Moon along with the ashes of geologist and planetary scientist Eugene Shoemaker. At the suggestion of colleague Carolyn Porco, Shoemaker's ashes were launched aboard the \"Lunar Prospector\" spacecraft on January 6, 1998. The ashes were accompanied by a laser-engraved epitaph on a small piece of foil. The spacecraft, along with the ashes and epitaph, crashed on command into the south polar region of the Moon on July 31, 1999.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10075", "revid": "42850097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10075", "title": "Epigram", "text": "Brief memorable statement\n \nAn epigram is a brief, interesting, memorable, and sometimes surprising or satirical statement. The word is derived from the Greek \"inscription\" from \"to write on, to inscribe\", and the literary device has been employed for over two millennia.\nThe presence of wit or sarcasm tends to distinguish non-poetic epigrams from aphorisms and adages, which tend to lack those qualities.\nAncient Greek.\nThe Greek tradition of epigrams began as poems inscribed on votive offerings at sanctuaries\u00a0\u2013 including statues of athletes\u00a0\u2013 and on funerary monuments, for example \"Go tell it to the Spartans, passersby...\". These original epigrams did the same job as a short prose text might have done, but in verse. Epigram became a literary genre in the Hellenistic period, probably developing out of scholarly collections of inscriptional epigrams.\nThough modern epigrams are usually thought of as very short, Greek literary epigram was not always as short as later examples, and the divide between \"epigram\" and \"elegy\" is sometimes indistinct (they share a characteristic metre, elegiac couplets). In the classical period, the clear distinction between them was that epigrams were inscribed and meant to be read, while elegies were recited and meant to be heard. Some elegies could be quite short, but only public epigrams were longer than ten lines. All the same, the origin of epigram in inscription exerted a residual pressure to keep things concise, even when they were recited in Hellenistic times. Many of the characteristic types of literary epigram look back to inscriptional contexts, particularly funerary epigram, which in the Hellenistic era becomes a literary exercise. Many \"sympotic\" epigrams combine sympotic and funerary elements\u00a0\u2013 they tell their readers (or listeners) to drink and live for today because life is short. Generally, any theme found in classical elegies could be and were adapted for later literary epigrams.\nHellenistic epigrams are also thought of as having a \"point\"\u00a0\u2013 that is, the poem ends in a punchline or satirical twist. By no means do all Greek epigrams behave this way; many are simply descriptive, but Meleager of Gadara and Philippus of Thessalonica, the first comprehensive anthologists, preferred the short and witty epigram. Since their collections helped form knowledge of the genre in Rome and then later throughout Europe, Epigram came to be associated with 'point', especially because the European epigram tradition takes the Latin poet Martial as its principal model; he copied and adapted Greek models (particularly the contemporary poets Lucillius and Nicarchus) selectively and in the process redefined the genre, aligning it with the indigenous Roman tradition of \"satura\", hexameter satire, as practised by (among others) his contemporary Juvenal. Greek epigram was actually much more diverse, as the Milan Papyrus now indicates.\nA major source for Greek literary epigram is the \"Greek Anthology\", a compilation from the 10th century AD based on older collections, including those of Meleager and Philippus. It contains epigrams ranging from the Hellenistic period through the Imperial period and Late Antiquity into the compiler's own Byzantine era\u00a0\u2013 a thousand years of short elegiac texts on every topic under the sun. The \"Anthology\" includes one book of Christian epigrams as well as one book of erotic and amorous homosexual epigrams called the (, \"The Boyish Muse\").\nAncient Roman.\nRoman epigrams owe much to their Greek predecessors and contemporaries. Roman epigrams, however, were often more satirical than Greek ones, and at times used obscene language for effect. Latin epigrams could be composed as inscriptions or graffiti, such as this one from Pompeii, which exists in several versions and seems from its inexact meter to have been composed by a less educated person. Its content makes it clear how popular such poems were:\n\"\nI'm astonished, wall, that you haven't collapsed into ruins,\nsince you're holding up the weary verse of so many poets.\nHowever, in the literary world, epigrams were most often gifts to patrons or entertaining verse to be published, not inscriptions. Many Roman writers seem to have composed epigrams, including Domitius Marsus, whose collection \"Cicuta\" (now lost) was named after the poisonous plant \"Cicuta\" for its biting wit, and Lucan, more famous for his epic \"Pharsalia\". Authors whose epigrams survive include Catullus, who wrote both invectives and love epigrams \u2013 his poem 85 is one of the latter.\n\"\n I hate and I love. Maybe you'd like to know why I do?\n I don't know, but I feel it happening, and I am tormented.\nMartial, however, is considered to be the master of the Latin epigram. His technique relies heavily on the satirical poem with a joke in the last line, thus drawing him closer to the modern idea of epigram as a genre. Here he defines his genre against a (probably fictional) critic (in the latter half of 2.77):\n\"\n\"\nLearn what you don't know: one work of (Domitius) Marsus or learned Pedo\noften stretches out over a doublesided page.\nA work isn't long if you can't take anything out of it,\nbut you, Cosconius, write even a couplet too long.\nPoets known for their epigrams whose work has been lost include Cornificia.\nEnglish.\nIn early English literature the short couplet poem was dominated by the poetic epigram and proverb, especially in the translations of the Bible and the Greek and Roman poets.\nTwo successive lines of verse that rhyme with each other are known as a couplet. Since 1600, the couplet has been featured as a part of the longer sonnet form, most notably in William Shakespeare's sonnets. Sonnet 76 is an example. The two-line poetic form as a closed couplet was also used by William Blake in his poem \"Auguries of Innocence\", and also by Byron in his poem \"Don Juan\", by John Gay in his fables, and by Alexander Pope in his \"An Essay on Man\".\nThe first work of English literature penned in North America was Robert Hayman's \"Quodlibets, Lately Come Over from New Britaniola, Old Newfoundland\", which is a collection of over 300 epigrams, many of which do not conform to the two-line rule or trend. While the collection was written between 1618 and 1628 in what is now Harbour Grace, Newfoundland, it was published shortly after his return to Britain. \nIn Victorian times the epigram couplet was often used by the prolific American poet Emily Dickinson. Her poem No. 1534 is a typical example of her eleven poetic epigrams. The novelist George Eliot also included couplets throughout her writings. Her best example is in her sequenced sonnet poem entitled \"Brother and Sister\" in which each of the eleven sequenced sonnet ends with a couplet. In her sonnets, the preceding lead-in-line, to the couplet ending of each, could be thought of as a title for the couplet, as is shown in Sonnet VIII of the sequence.\nDuring the early 20th century, the rhymed epigram couplet form developed into a fixed verse image form, with an integral title as the third line. Adelaide Crapsey codified the couplet form into a two-line rhymed verse of ten syllables per line with her image couplet poem \"On Seeing Weather-Beaten Trees\", first published in 1915.\nBy the 1930s, the five-line cinquain verse form became widely known in the poetry of the Scottish poet William Soutar. These were originally labelled epigrams but later identified as image cinquains in the style of Adelaide Crapsey.\nJ. V. Cunningham was also a noted writer of epigrams (a medium suited to a \"short-breathed\" person).\nWhat is an Epigram? a dwarfish whole,\nIts body brevity, and wit its soul. \n\u2014 Samuel Taylor Coleridge (\"Epigram\", 1809)\nSome can gaze and not be sick\nBut I could never learn the trick.\nThere's this to say for blood and breath;\nThey give a man a taste for death.\n\u2014 A. E. Housman\nLittle strokes\nFell great oaks.\n\u2014 Benjamin Franklin\nHere lies my wife: here let her lie!\nNow she's at rest\u00a0\u2013 and so am I.\n\u2014 John Dryden\nThree Poets, in three distant Ages born,\nGreece, Italy, and England did adorn.\nThe First in loftiness of thought surpassed;\nThe Next in Majesty; in both the Last.\nThe force of Nature could no farther go:\nTo make a third she joined the former two.\n\u2014 John Dryden (\"Epigram on Milton\", 1688 (Epigram about John Milton: many poets commented on Milton, including Dryden\nWe have a pretty witty king,\nWhose word no man relies on.\nHe never said a foolish thing,\nAnd never did a wise one.\n\u2014 John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester (epigram about Charles II of England)\nI am His Highness' dog at Kew;\nPray tell me, sir, whose dog are you?\n\u2014 Alexander Pope\nI'm tired of Love: I'm still more tired of Rhyme.\nBut Money gives me pleasure all the time.\n\u2014 Hilaire Belloc\nI hope for nothing. I fear nothing. I am free.\n\u2014 Nikos Kazantzakis\nTo define the beautiful is to misunderstand it.\n\u2014 Charles Robert Anon (Fernando Pessoa)\nThis Humanist whom no belief constrained\nGrew so broad-minded he was scatter-brained.\n\u2014 J.V. Cunningham\nAll things pass\nLove and mankind is grass.\n\u2014 Stevie Smith\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10076", "revid": "1156927302", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10076", "title": "El Cid", "text": "Castilian warlord and Prince of Valencia from 1094 to 1099\nRodrigo D\u00edaz de Vivar (c. 1043 \u2013 10 July 1099) was a Castilian knight and warlord in medieval Spain. Fighting with both Christian and Muslim armies during his lifetime, he earned the Arabic honorific \"al-s\u012bd\", which would evolve into El Cid (\"the lord\"), and the Spanish honorific El Campeador (\"the valiant\"). He was born in Vivar, a village near the city of Burgos. As the head of his loyal knights, he came to dominate the Levante of the Iberian Peninsula at the end of the 11th century. He reclaimed the Taifa of Valencia from Moorish control for a brief period during the \"Reconquista\", ruling the principality as its Prince (Se\u00f1or\u00edo de Valencia) from 17 June 1094 until his death in 1099. His wife, Jimena D\u00edaz, inherited the city and maintained it until 1102 when it was reconquered by the Moors.\nD\u00edaz de Vivar became well known for his service in the armies of both Christian and Muslim rulers. After his death, El Cid became Spain's celebrated national hero and the protagonist of the most significant medieval Spanish epic poem, \"El Cantar de mio Cid\", which presents him as the ideal medieval knight: strong, valiant, loyal, just, and pious.\nThere are various theories on his family history, which remains uncertain; however, he was the grandfather of Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez de Pamplona, King of Navarre, the first son of his daughter Cristina Rodr\u00edguez. To this day, El Cid remains a popular Spanish folk hero and national icon, with his life and deeds remembered in popular culture.\nEtymology: \"Cid\" and \"Campeador\".\nRodrigo D\u00edaz was recognized with the honorary title of \"Campeador\" during his lifetime, as is evidenced by a document that he signed in 1098, which he signed in the Latinized expression, \"Ego Rudericus Campidoctor\" or \"I Rodrigo Campeador.\" The title \"Campeador\" comes from the Latin \"Campidoctor,\" literally meaning \"Teacher of the Field\" but can be translated as \"Master of the Battlefield.\" Arabic sources from the late 11th century and early 12th century call him \u0627\u0644\u0643\u0646\u0628\u064a\u0637\u0648\u0631 (alkanb\u012b\u1e6d\u016br), \u0627\u0644\u0642\u0646\u0628\u064a\u0637\u0648\u0631 (alqanb\u012b\u1e6d\u016br), and also Rudriq or Ludriq al-Kanbiyatur or al-Qanbiyatur, which are Arabized forms of Rodrigo Campidoctor.\nThe epithet of \"El Cid\" (]), meant \"the lord\" probably from the original Arabic, () and was a title given to other Christian leaders. It has been conjectured that Rodrigo D\u00edaz received the honorific title and respectful treatment of contemporaries in Zaragoza because of his victories in the service of the King of the Taifa of Zaragoza between 1081 and 1086; however, he more likely received the epithet after his conquest of Valencia in 1094. This title appears for the first time, as \"Meo \u00c7idi,\" in the \"Poema de Almer\u00eda\", composed between 1147 and 1149.\nThe combination of \"Cid Campeador\" is documented from 1195 in \"Linaje de Rodrigo D\u00edaz\" (The Lineage of Rodrigo D\u00edaz) in Navarro-Aragonese which form part of the \"Liber regum\" written as \"mio Cit el Campiador\"; and in \"El Cantar de mio Cid.\"\nSummary.\nBorn a member of the minor nobility, El Cid was brought up at the court of Ferdinand the Great and served Ferdinand's son, Sancho II of Le\u00f3n and Castile. He rose to become the commander and royal standard-bearer (\"armiger regis\") of Castile upon Sancho's ascension in 1065. El Cid went on to lead the Castilian military campaigns against Sancho's brothers, Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Garc\u00eda II of Galicia, as well as in the Muslim kingdoms in al-Andalus. He became renowned for his military prowess in these campaigns, which helped expand the territory of the Crown of Castile at the expense of the Muslims and Sancho's brothers' kingdoms. When conspirators murdered Sancho in 1072, El Cid found himself in a difficult situation. Since Sancho was childless, the throne passed to his brother Alfonso, whom El Cid had helped remove from power. Although El Cid continued to serve the sovereign, he lost his ranking in the new court, which treated him suspiciously and kept him at arm's length. Finally, in 1081, he was exiled.\nEl Cid found work fighting for the Muslim rulers of Zaragoza, whom he defended from its traditional enemy, Aragon. While in exile, he regained his reputation as a strategist and formidable military leader. He was repeatedly victorious in battle against the Muslim rulers of L\u00e9rida and their Christian allies, as well as against a large Christian army under King Sancho Ram\u00edrez of Aragon. In 1086, an expeditionary army of North African Almoravids inflicted a severe defeat to Castile, compelling Alfonso to overcome the resentment he harboured against El Cid. The terms for El Cid's return to Christian service must have been attractive enough since El Cid soon found himself fighting for his former lord. Over the next several years, however, El Cid set his sights on the kingdom-city of Valencia, operating more or less independently of Alfonso, while politically supporting the Banu Hud and other Muslim dynasties opposed to the Almoravids. He gradually increased his control over Valencia; the Islamic ruler, Yahya al-Qadir, became his tributary in 1092. When the Almoravids instigated an uprising that resulted in the death of Al-C\u00e1dir, El Cid responded by laying siege to the city. Valencia finally fell in 1094, and El Cid established an independent principality on the Mediterranean coast of Iberia. He ruled over a pluralistic society with the popular support of Christians and Muslims alike.\nEl Cid's final years were spent fighting the Almoravid Berbers. He inflicted upon them their first major defeat in 1094, on the plains of Caurte, outside Valencia, and continued opposing them until his death. Although El Cid remained undefeated in Valencia, Diego Rodr\u00edguez, his only son and heir, died fighting against the Almoravids in the service of Alfonso in 1097. After El Cid's death in 1099, his wife, Jimena D\u00edaz, succeeded him as ruler of Valencia, but she was eventually forced to surrender the principality to the Almoravids in 1102.\nTitle.\nThe name \"El Cid\" (]) is a modern Spanish denomination composed of the article \"el\" meaning \"the\" and \"Cid\", which derives from the Old Castilian loan word \"\u00c7id\" borrowed from the dialectal Arabic word \u0633\u064a\u062f \"s\u00eedi\" or sayyid, which means \"lord\" or \"master\". The Mozarabs or the Arabs that served in his ranks may have addressed him in this way, which the Christians may have transliterated and adopted. Historians, however, have not yet found contemporary records referring to Rodrigo as \"Cid.\" Arab sources use instead \"Rudriq\", \"Ludriq al-Kanbiyatur\" or \"al-Qanbiyatur\" (\"Rodrigo el Campeador\"). The cognomen \"Campeador\" derives from Latin \"campi doctor,\" which means \"battlefield master\". He probably gained it during the campaigns of King Sancho II of Castile against his brothers, kings Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Garc\u00eda II of Galicia. While his contemporaries left no historical sources that would have addressed him as \"Cid\", they left plenty of Christian and Arab records, some even signed documents with his autograph, addressing him as \"Campeador\", which prove that he used the Christian cognomen himself. The whole combination \"Cid Campeador\" is first documented c. 1195 in the Navarro-Aragonese \"Linage de Rodric D\u00edaz\" included in the \"Liber Regum\" under the formula \"mio Cid el Campeador\".\nLife and career.\nOrigins.\nEl Cid was born Rodrigo D\u00edaz circa 1043 in Vivar, also known as Castillona de Bivar, a small town about ten kilometers (or six miles) north of Burgos, the capital of Castile. His father, Diego La\u00ednez, was a courtier, bureaucrat, and cavalryman who had fought in several battles. Despite the fact that El Cid's mother's family was aristocratic, in later years the peasants would consider him one of their own. However, his relatives were not major court officials; documents show that El Cid's paternal grandfather, La\u00edn, confirmed only five documents of Ferdinand I's; his maternal grandfather, Rodrigo \u00c1lvarez, certified only two of Sancho II's; and El Cid's father confirmed only one.\nService under Sancho II.\nAs a young man in 1057, El Cid fought against the Moorish stronghold of Zaragoza, making its emir al-Muqtadir a vassal of Sancho. In the spring of 1063, El Cid fought in the Battle of Graus, where Ferdinand's half-brother, Ramiro I of Aragon, was laying siege to the Moorish town of Graus, which was fought on Zaragozan lands in the valley of the river Cinca. Al-Muqtadir, accompanied by Castilian troops including El Cid, fought against the Aragonese. The party slew Ramiro I, setting the Aragonese army on the run, and emerged victorious. One legend has said that during the conflict, El Cid killed an Aragonese knight in single combat, thereby receiving the honorific title \"Campeador\".\nWhen Ferdinand died, Sancho continued to enlarge his territory, conquering both Christian strongholds and the Moorish cities of Zamora and Badajoz. When Sancho learned that Alfonso was planning on overthrowing him in order to gain his territory, Sancho sent Cid to bring Alfonso back so that Sancho could speak to him.\nService under Alfonso VI.\nSancho was assassinated in 1072, during a siege of his sister's town of Zamora. Since Sancho died unmarried and childless, all of his power passed to his brother Alfonso who, almost immediately, returned from exile in Toledo and took his seat as king of Castile and Le\u00f3n. He was, however, deeply suspected of having been involved in Sancho's murder. According to the 11th century epic poem \"Cantar de mio Cid\", the Castilian nobility led by El Cid and a dozen \"oath-helpers\" forced Alfonso to swear publicly on holy relics multiple times in front of Santa Gadea (Saint Agatha) Church in Burgos that he did not participate in the plot to kill his brother. This is not mentioned in the more reliable 12th century chronicle \"Historia Roderici\", however. El Cid's position as \"armiger regis\" was taken away and given to his enemy, Count Garc\u00eda Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez.\nIn 1079, El Cid was sent by Alfonso VI to Seville to the court of al-Mutamid to collect the \"parias\" owed by that \"taifa\" to Le\u00f3n\u2013Castile. While he was there Granada, assisted by other Castilian knights, attacked Seville, and El Cid and his forces repulsed the Christian and Grenadine attackers at the Battle of Cabra, in the (probably mistaken) belief that he was defending the king's tributary. During the aftermath of this battle the Muslim troops under El Cid's command would hail him as Sayyidi. Count Garc\u00eda Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez and the other Castilian leaders were taken captive and held for three days before being released.\nExile.\nIn the Battle of Cabra (1079), El Cid rallied his troops and turned the battle into a rout of Emir Abdullah of Granada and his ally Garc\u00eda Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez. This unauthorized expedition into Granada, however, greatly angered Alfonso and May 8, 1080 was the last time El Cid confirmed a document in King Alfonso's court. The most likely reason was El Cid's incursion into Toledo, which happened to be under the control of Alfonso\u2019s vassal, Yahya Al-Qadir. Alfonso's anger over El Cid's unsanctioned incursion into his vassal's territory would lead him to exile the knight.\nThis is the generally accepted reason for the exile of El Cid, although several others are plausible and indeed may have been contributing factors to the exile: jealous nobles turning Alfonso against El Cid through court intrigue, and Alfonso's own personal animosity towards El Cid. The song of El Cid and subsequent tales state that Alfonso\u2019s and his courts animosity toward Rodrigo was the primary reason the expulsion of the knights from Le\u00f3n, as well as a possible misappropriation of some of the tribute from Seville by El Cid.\nAt first he went to Barcelona, where Ramon Berenguer II refused his offer of service.\nMoorish service.\nThe exile was not the end of El Cid, either physically or as an important figure. After being rejected by Ramon Berenguer II, El Cid journeyed to the Taifa of Zaragoza, where he received a warmer welcome. In 1081, El Cid went on to offer his services to the Moorish king of the northeast al-Andalus city of Zaragoza, Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud, and served both him and his successor, al-Musta'in II. He was given the title \"El Cid\" (\"The Master\") and served as a leading figure in a diverse Moorish force consisting of Muwallads, Berbers, Arabs and Malians within the respective Taifa.\nAccording to Moorish accounts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Andalusi Knights found El Cid their foe ill, thirsty and exiled from the court of Alfonso, he was presented before the elderly Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud and accepted command of the forces of the Taifa of Zaragoza as their Master.\nIn his \"History of Medieval Spain\" (Cornell University Press, 1975), Joseph F. O'Callaghan writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That kingdom was divided between al-Mutamin (1081\u20131085) who ruled Zaragoza proper, and his brother al-Mundhir, who ruled L\u00e9rida and Tortosa. El Cid entered al-Mutamin's service and successfully defended Zaragoza against the assaults of al-Mundhir, Sancho I of Arag\u00f3n, and Ramon Berenguer II, whom he held captive briefly in 1082.\nIn 1084, the army of the Taifa of Zaragoza under El Cid defeated the Aragonese at the Battle of Morella near Tortosa, but in autumn the Castilians started a loose siege of Toledo and later the next year the Christians captured Salamanca, a stronghold of the Taifa of Toledo.\nIn 1086, the Almoravid invasion of the Iberian Peninsula, through and around Gibraltar, began. The Almoravids, a Berber dynasty from North Africa, led by Yusuf ibn Tashfin, were asked to help defend the divided Moors from Alfonso. The Almoravid army, joined by that of several Taifas, including Badajoz, M\u00e1laga, Granada, Tortosa and Seville, defeated a combined army of Le\u00f3n, Arag\u00f3n and Castile at the Battle of Sagrajas.\nIn 1087, Raymond of Burgundy and his Christian allies attempted to weaken the Taifa of Zaragoza's northernmost stronghold by initiating the Siege of Tudela and Alfonso captured Aledo, Murcia, blocking the route between the Taifas in the eastern and western Iberian Peninsula.\nRecall from exile.\nTerrified after his crushing defeat, Alfonso recalled El Cid, rewarding him lavishly with lands and lordships, such as the fortress of Gormaz. In the year 1087 Alfonso sent him to negotiate with the emboldened Taifa kingdoms.\nEl Cid returned to Alfonso, but now he had his own plans. He only stayed a short while and then returned to Zaragoza. El Cid was content to let the Almoravid armies and the armies of Alfonso fight without his help, even when there was a chance that the Almoravids might defeat Alfonso and take over all of Alfonso's lands. El Cid chose not to fight because he was hoping that both armies would weaken themselves. \nConquest of Valencia.\nAround this time, El Cid, with a combined Christian and Moorish army, began maneuvering in order to create his own fief in the Moorish Mediterranean coastal city of Valencia. Several obstacles lay in his way. First was Berenguer Ramon II, who ruled nearby Barcelona. In May 1090, El Cid defeated and captured Berenguer in the Battle of T\u00e9bar (nowadays Pinar de T\u00e9var, near Monroyo, Teruel). Berenguer was later released and his nephew Ramon Berenguer III married El Cid's youngest daughter Maria to ward against future conflicts.\nAlong the way to Valencia, El Cid also conquered other towns, many of which were near Valencia, such as El Puig and Quart de Poblet.\nEl Cid gradually came to have more influence in Valencia, then ruled by Yahya al-Qadir, of the Hawwara Berber Dhulnunid dynasty. In October 1092 an uprising occurred in Valencia, inspired by the city's chief judge Ibn Jahhaf and the Almoravids. El Cid began a siege of Valencia. A December 1093 attempt to break the siege failed. By the time the siege ended in May 1094, El Cid had carved out his own principality on the coast of the Mediterranean. Officially, El Cid ruled in the name of Alfonso; in practice, El Cid was fully independent. The city was both Christian and Muslim, and both Moors and Christians served in the army and as administrators. Jerome of P\u00e9rigord was made bishop.\nDeath.\nEl Cid and his wife Jimena D\u00edaz lived peacefully in Valencia until the Almoravids besieged the city. \nBut he defeated them and died 5 years later, on July 10, 1099.\nAfterward Valencia was captured by Mazdali on May 5, 1102. Jimena fled to Burgos, Castile, in 1101. She rode into the town with her retinue and the body of El Cid. Originally buried in Castile in the monastery of San Pedro de Carde\u00f1a, his body now lies at the center of Burgos Cathedral.\nLegend of posthumous victory.\nAfter his demise, but still during the siege of Valencia, legend holds that Jimena ordered that the corpse of El Cid be fitted with his armor and set on his horse, Babieca, to bolster the morale of his troops. In several variations of the story, the dead Rodrigo and his knights win a thundering charge against Valencia's besiegers, resulting in a war-is-lost-but-battle-is-won catharsis for generations of Christian Spaniards to follow. It is believed that the legend originated shortly after Jimena entered Burgos, and that it is derived from the manner in which Jimena's procession rode into the city, i.e. alongside her deceased husband.\nWarrior and general.\nBattle tactics.\nDuring his campaigns, El Cid often ordered that books by classic Roman and Greek authors on military themes be read aloud to him and his troops, for both entertainment and inspiration before battle. El Cid's army had a novel approach to planning strategy as well, holding what might be called \"brainstorming\" sessions before each battle to discuss tactics. They frequently used unexpected strategies, engaging in what modern generals would call psychological warfare\u2014waiting for the enemy to be paralyzed with terror and then attacking them suddenly; distracting the enemy with a small group of soldiers, etc. (El Cid used this distraction in capturing the town of Castej\u00f3n as depicted in \"Cantar de mio Cid\" (\"The Song of my Cid\").) El Cid accepted or included suggestions from his troops. In \"The Song\" the man who served him as his closest adviser was his vassal and kinsman \u00c1lvar F\u00e1\u00f1ez \"Minaya\" (meaning \"My brother\", a compound word of Spanish possessive \"Mi\" (My) and \"Anaia\", the basque word for \"brother\"), although the historical \u00c1lvar F\u00e1\u00f1ez remained in Castile with Alfonso VI.\nBabieca.\nBabieca, or Bavieca, was El Cid's warhorse. Several stories exist about El Cid and Babieca. One well-known legend about El Cid describes how he acquired the stallion. According to this story, Rodrigo's godfather, Pedro El Grande, was a monk at a Carthusian monastery. Pedro's coming-of-age gift to El Cid was his pick of a horse from an Andalusian herd. El Cid picked a horse that his godfather thought was a weak, poor choice, causing the monk to exclaim \"Babieca!\" (stupid!). Hence, it became the name of El Cid's horse. Another legend states that in a competition of battle to become King Sancho's \"Campeador\", or champion, a knight on horseback wished to challenge El Cid. The King wished a fair fight and gave El Cid his finest horse, Babieca, or Bavieca. This version says Babieca was raised in the royal stables of Seville and was a highly trained and loyal war horse, not a foolish stallion. The name in this instance could suggest that the horse came from the Babia region in Le\u00f3n, Spain. In the poem \"Carmen Campidoctoris\", Babieca appears as a gift from \"a barbarian\" to El Cid, so its name could also be derived from \"Barbieca\", or \"horse of the barbarian\".\nRegardless, Babieca became a great warhorse, famous to the Christians, feared by El Cid's enemies, and loved by El Cid, who allegedly requested that Babieca be buried with him in the monastery of San Pedro de Carde\u00f1a. Babieca is mentioned in several tales and historical documents about El Cid, including \"The Lay of El Cid\".\nSwords.\nA weapon traditionally identified as El Cid's sword, Tizona, used to be displayed in the Army Museum (Museo del Ej\u00e9rcito) in Toledo. In 1999, a small sample of the blade underwent metallurgical analysis which confirmed that the blade was made in Moorish C\u00f3rdoba in the eleventh century and contained amounts of Damascus steel.\nIn 2007, the Autonomous Community of Castile and Le\u00f3n bought the sword for \u20ac1.6 million, and it is currently on display at the Museum of Burgos.\nEl Cid also had a sword called Colada.\nWife and children.\nEl Cid married Jimena D\u00edaz, who was said to be part of an aristocratic family from Asturias, in the mid-1070s. The \"Historia Roderici\" calls her a daughter of a Count Diego Fern\u00e1ndez de Oviedo. Tradition states that when El Cid first laid eyes on her, he was enamoured of her great beauty. El Cid and Jimena had two daughters, Cristina and Mar\u00eda, and a son. The latter, Diego Rodr\u00edguez, was killed while fighting against the invading Muslim Almoravids from North Africa at the Battle of Consuegra in 1097. El Cid's daughters Cristina Rodr\u00edguez and Mar\u00eda both married into noble families. Cristina married Ramiro, Lord of Monz\u00f3n and grandson of Garc\u00eda S\u00e1nchez III of Navarre. Her own son, El Cid's grandson, would be elevated to the throne of Navarre as King Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez. The other daughter, Mar\u00eda (also known as Sol), is said first to have married a prince of Aragon, presumably the son of Peter I, and she later married Ramon Berenguer III, count of Barcelona. Both the poem and the chronicle may state a previous marriage to the infantes de Carri\u00f3n; however, these marriages are not a historical fact and are an important element in the construction of the poem.\nIn literature, music, video games, and film.\nThe figure of El Cid has been the source for many literary works, beginning with the \"Cantar de mio Cid\", an epic poem from the 12th century which gives a partly-fictionalized account of his life, and was one of the early chivalric romances. This poem, along with similar later works such as the \"Mocedades de Rodrigo\", contributed to portray El Cid as a chivalric hero of the Reconquista, making him a legendary figure in Spain. In the early 17th century, the Spanish writer Guill\u00e9n de Castro wrote a play called \"Las Mocedades del Cid\", on which French playwright Pierre Corneille based one of his most famous tragicomedies, \"Le Cid\". He was also a popular source of inspiration for Spanish writers of the Romantic period, such as Juan Eugenio Hartzenbusch, who wrote \"La Jura de Santa Gadea\", or Jos\u00e9 Zorrilla, who wrote a long poem called \"La Leyenda del Cid\". In 2019, Arturo P\u00e9rez-Reverte published the novel entitled \"Sidi: Un relato de frontera\".\nHerman Melville references El Cid when introducing the character of Samoa in Chapter 21 of \"Mardi\" (1849): \"He alighted about six paces from where we stood, and balancing his weapon, eyed us bravely as the Cid\".\nGeorges Bizet worked on \"Don Rodrigue\" in 1873 that was set aside and never completed. Jules Massenet wrote an opera, \"Le Cid\", in 1885, based on Corneille's play of the same name. Claude Debussy began work in 1890 on an opera, \"Rodrigue et Chim\u00e8ne\", which he abandoned as unsuitable for his temperament; it was orchestrated for performance by Edison Denisov circa 1993.\nEl Cid is portrayed by American actor Charlton Heston in a 1961 epic film of the same name directed by Anthony Mann, where the character of Do\u00f1a Ximena is portrayed by Italian actress Sophia Loren. In 2020, Amazon Prime Video premiered a Spanish TV series with Jaime Lorente starring as \"El Cid\".\nIn 1979, Crack, one of the most prominent progressive rock bands from Spain, released their first and only album \"Si Todo Hiciera Crack\" including \"Marchando una del Cid\", a song based on the epic legend of El Cid.\nIn 1980, \"Ruy, the Little Cid\" was an animated series based on El Cid's childhood made by Nippon Animation.\nEl Cid was described to inspire Ferny about his Spanish heritage in \"The Legend of Raloo\", episode 16 of season 1 of \"Jakers! The Adventures of Piggley Winks\" in 2004.\nIn the second \"Age of Empires\" video game installment, \" expansion pack, there is a campaign starring El Cid Campeador.\nIn both the first and second \" games, El Cid appears as a powerful independent general in the castle of Valencia.\nIn 2003, the Spanish animated film \"\" was released.\n\"The Ministry of Time\", a Spanish science fiction television series, portrayed El Cid in season 2, episode 1.\nEl Cid is a playable character in the Mobile/PC Game Rise of Kingdoms.\nEl Cid is a playable character in \"Crusader Kings II\" in start dates corresponding to his historical rule over Valencia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10078", "revid": "45382375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10078", "title": "Enjambment", "text": "Incomplete syntax at the end of a line in poetry\nIn poetry, enjambment ( or ; from the French \"enjamber\") is incomplete syntax at the end of a line; the meaning 'runs over' or 'steps over' from one poetic line to the next, without punctuation. Lines without enjambment are end-stopped. The origin of the word is credited to the French word \"enjamber\", which means 'to straddle or encroach'.\nIn reading, the delay of meaning creates a tension that is released when the word or phrase that completes the syntax is encountered (called the rejet); the tension arises from the \"mixed message\" produced both by the pause of the line-end, and the suggestion to continue provided by the incomplete meaning. In spite of the apparent contradiction between rhyme, which heightens closure, and enjambment, which delays it, the technique is compatible with rhymed verse. Even in couplets, the closed or heroic couplet was a late development; older is the open couplet, where rhyme and enjambed lines co-exist.\nEnjambment has a long history in poetry. Homer used the technique, and it is the norm for alliterative verse where rhyme is unknown. In the 32nd Psalm of the Hebrew Bible enjambment is unusually conspicuous. It was used extensively in England by Elizabethan poets for dramatic and narrative verses, before giving way to closed couplets. The example of John Milton in \"Paradise Lost\" laid the foundation for its subsequent use by the English Romantic poets; in its preface he identified it as one of the chief features of his verse: \"sense variously drawn out from one verse into another\".\nExamples.\nThe start of \"The Waste Land\" by T. S. Eliot, with only lines 4 and 7 end-stopped:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;April is the cruellest month, breeding\nLilacs out of the dead land, mixing\nMemory and desire, stirring\nDull roots with spring rain.\nWinter kept us warm, covering\nEarth in forgetful snow, feeding\nA little life with dried tubers.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThese lines from Shakespeare's \"The Winter's Tale\" (\"c.\" 1611) are heavily enjambed (meaning enjambment is used):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;I am not prone to weeping, as our sex\nCommonly are; the want of which vain dew\nPerchance shall dry your pities; but I have\nThat honourable grief lodged here which burns\nWorse than tears drown.&lt;/poem&gt;\nMeaning flows as the lines progress, and the reader's eye is forced to go on to the next sentence. It can also make the reader feel uncomfortable or the poem feel like \"flow-of-thought\" with a sensation of urgency or disorder. In contrast, the following lines from \"Romeo and Juliet\" (\"c.\" 1595) are completely end-stopped:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;A glooming peace this morning with it brings.\nThe sun for sorrow will not show his head.\nGo hence, to have more talk of these sad things.\nSome shall be pardon'd, and some punish\u00e8d.&lt;/poem&gt;\nEach line is formally correspondent with a unit of thought\u2014in this case, a clause of a sentence. End-stopping is more frequent in early Shakespeare: as his style developed, the proportion of enjambment in his plays increased. Scholars such as Goswin K\u00f6nig and A. C. Bradley have estimated approximate dates of undated works of Shakespeare by studying the frequency of enjambment.\n\"Endymion\" by John Keats, lines 2\u20134:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Its loveliness increases; it will never\nPass into nothingness; but still will keep\nA bower quiet for us...&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe song \"One Night In Bangkok\", from the musical \"Chess\", written by Tim Rice and Bj\u00f6rn Ulvaeus, includes examples such as :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;The creme de la creme of the chess world in a\nShow with everything but Yul Brynner\nThis grips me more than would a\nMuddy old river or reclining Buddha&lt;/poem&gt;\nClosely related to enjambment is the technique of \"broken rhyme\" or \"split rhyme\" which involves the splitting of an individual word, typically to allow a rhyme with one or more syllables of the split word. In English verse, broken rhyme is used almost exclusively in light verse, such as to form a word that rhymes with \"orange\", as in this example by Willard Espy, in his poem \"The Unrhymable Word: Orange\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;The four eng-\nineers\nWore orange\nbrassieres.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe clapping game \"Miss Susie\" uses the break \"... Hell / -o operator\" to allude to the taboo word \"Hell\", then replaces it with the innocuous \"Hello\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10080", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10080", "title": "European Convention on Nationality", "text": "1997 Council of Europe treaty\nThe European Convention on Nationality (E.T.S. No. 166) was signed in Strasbourg on 6 November 1997. It is a comprehensive convention of the Council of Europe dealing with the law of nationality. The convention is open for signature by the member States of the Council of Europe and the non-member States which have participated in its elaboration and for accession by other non-member States. The Convention came into force on 1 March 2000 after ratification by 3 countries. As of 2021[ [update]], the convention has been signed by 29 countries and ratified by 21 of those countries.\nProvisions.\nArticle 4(d) provides that neither marriage nor dissolution of marriage shall automatically affect the nationality of either spouse, nor shall a change of nationality by one spouse during marriage automatically affect the nationality of their spouse. Common practice among states at the beginning of the 20th century was that a woman was to have the nationality of her husband; i.e., upon marrying a foreigner the wife would automatically acquire the nationality of her husband, and lose her previous nationality. Even after the nationality of a married woman was no longer dependent on the nationality of her husband, legal provisions were still retained which automatically naturalised married women, and sometimes married men as well. This led to a number of problems, such as loss of the spouses' original nationality, the spouse losing the right to consular assistance (since consular assistance cannot be provided to nationals under the jurisdiction of a foreign state of which they are also nationals), and becoming subject to military service obligations. Article 4d addresses this situation.\nArticle 5 provides that no discrimination shall exist in a state's internal nationality law on the grounds of \"sex, religion, race, colour or national or ethnic origin\". It also provides that a state shall not discriminate amongst its nationals on the basis of whether they hold their nationality by birth or acquired it subsequently.\nArticle 6 relates to the acquisition of nationality. It provides for nationality to be acquired at birth by descent from either parent to those born within the territory of the state. (States may exclude partially or fully children born abroad). It also provides for nationality by virtue of birth in the territory of state; however, states may limit this to only children who would be otherwise stateless. It requires the possibility of naturalisation, and provides that the period of residence required for eligibility cannot be more than ten years lawful and habitual residence. It also requires to \"facilitate\" the acquisition of nationality by certain persons, including spouses of nationals, children of its nationals born abroad, children one of whose parents has acquired the nationality, children adopted by a national, persons lawfully and habitually resident for a period before the age of eighteen, and stateless persons and refugees lawfully and habitually resident on its territory.\nArticle 7 regulates the involuntary loss of nationality. It provides that states may deprive their nationals of their nationality in only the cases of voluntary acquisition of another nationality, fraud or failure to provide relevant information when acquiring nationality, voluntary military service in a foreign military force, or adoption as a child by foreign nationals. It also provides for the possibility of loss of nationality for nationals habitually residing abroad. Finally, it provides loss of nationality for \"conduct seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the State Party\".\nArticle 8 provides nationals with the right to renounce their nationality, providing they do not thereby become stateless. States may however restrict this right with respect to nationals residing abroad.\nStatus.\nAs of 14\u00a0March\u00a02014[ [update]], the following countries have signed or ratified the convention:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10081", "revid": "43475265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10081", "title": "English orthography", "text": "English spelling and punctuating rules\nEnglish orthography is the writing system used to represent spoken English, allowing readers to connect the graphemes to sound and to meaning. It includes English's norms of spelling, hyphenation, capitalisation, word breaks, emphasis, and punctuation.\nLike the orthography of most world languages, English orthography has a broad degree of standardisation. This standardisation began to develop when movable type spread to England in the late 15th century. However, unlike with most languages, there are multiple ways to spell every phoneme, and most letters also represent multiple pronunciations depending on their position in a word and the context.\nThis is partly due to the large number of words that have been borrowed from a large number of other languages throughout the history of English, without successful attempts at complete spelling reforms, and partly due to accidents of history, such as some of the earliest mass-produced English publications being typeset by highly trained, multilingual printing compositors, who occasionally used a spelling pattern more typical for another language. For example, the word \"ghost\" was spelled \"gost\" in Middle English, until the Flemish spelling pattern was unintentionally substituted, and happened to be accepted. Most of the spelling conventions in Modern English were derived from the phonemic spelling of a variety of Middle English, and generally do not reflect the sound changes that have occurred since the late 15th century (such as the Great Vowel Shift). As a result of this, many words are spelled the way that they were pronounced more than 600 years ago, instead of being spelled like they are pronounced in the 21st century.\nDespite the various English dialects spoken from country to country and within different regions of the same country, there are only slight regional variations in English orthography, the two most recognised variations being British and American spelling, and its overall uniformity helps facilitate international communication. On the other hand, it also adds to the discrepancy between the way English is written and spoken in any given location.\nFunction of the letters.\nPhonemic representation.\nLetters in English orthography usually represent a particular phoneme. For example, \"at\" consists of 2 letters \u27e8a\u27e9 and \u27e8t\u27e9, which represent and , respectively.\nSequences of letters may perform this role as well as single letters. Thus, in \"thrash\" , the digraph \u27e8th\u27e9 (two letters) represents /\u03b8/. In \"hatch\" , the trigraph \u27e8tch\u27e9 represents /t\u0283/.\nLess commonly, a single letter can represent multiple successive sounds. The most common example is \u27e8x\u27e9, which normally represents the consonant cluster /ks/ (for example, in \"tax\" ).\nThe same letter (or sequence of letters) may be pronounced differently when occurring in different positions within a word. For instance, \u27e8gh\u27e9 represents /f/ at the end of some words (\"tough\" ) but not in others (\"plough\" ). At the beginning of syllables, \u27e8gh\u27e9 is pronounced /\u0261/, as in \"ghost\" . Conversely, \u27e8gh\u27e9 is never pronounced /f/ in syllable onsets other than in inflected forms, and is almost never pronounced /\u0261/ in syllable codas (the proper name \"Pittsburgh\" is an exception).\nSome words contain silent letters, which do not represent any sound in modern English pronunciation. Examples include the \u27e8l\u27e9 in \"talk\", \"half\", \"calf\", etc., the \u27e8w\u27e9 in \"two\" and \"sword\", \u27e8gh\u27e9 as mentioned above in numerous words such as \"though\", \"daughter\", \"night\", \"brought\", and the commonly encountered silent \u27e8e\u27e9 (discussed further below).\nWord origin.\nAnother type of spelling characteristic is related to word origin. For example, when representing a vowel, \u27e8y\u27e9 represents the sound in some words borrowed from Greek (reflecting an original upsilon), whereas the letter usually representing this sound in non-Greek words is the letter \u27e8i\u27e9. Thus, \"myth\" is of Greek origin, while \"pith\" is a Germanic word. However a large number of Germanic words have \u27e8y\u27e9 in word-final position.\nSome other examples are \u27e8ph\u27e9 pronounced (which is most commonly \u27e8f\u27e9), and \u27e8ch\u27e9 pronounced (which is most commonly \u27e8c\u27e9 or \u27e8k\u27e9). The use of these spellings for these sounds often marks words that have been borrowed from Greek.\nSome researchers, such as Brengelman (1970), have suggested that, in addition to this marking of word origin, these spellings indicate a more formal level of style or register in a given text, although Rollings (2004) finds this point to be exaggerated as there would be many exceptions where a word with one of these spellings, such as \u27e8ph\u27e9 for (like \"telephone\"), could occur in an informal text.\nHomophone differentiation.\nSpelling may also be useful to distinguish between homophones (words with the same pronunciation but different meanings), although in most cases the reason for the difference is historical and was not introduced for the purpose of making a distinction.\nFor example, \"heir\" and \"air\" are pronounced identically in most dialects, but, in writing, they are distinguished from each other by their different spellings.\nAnother example is the pair of homophones \"pain\" and \"pane\", where both are pronounced but have two different spellings of the vowel /e\u026a/. Often, this is because of the historical pronunciation of each word where, over time, two separate sounds became the same but the different spellings remained: \"pain\" used to be pronounced as /pain/, with a diphthong, and \"pane\" as /pe\u02d0n/, but the diphthong /ai/ merged with the long vowel /e\u02d0/ in \"pane\", making \"pain\" and \"pane\" homophones (\"pane\"\u2013\"pain\" merger). Later /e\u02d0/ became a diphthong /e\u026a/.\nIn written language, this may help to resolve potential ambiguities that would arise otherwise (cf. \"He's breaking the car\" vs. \"He's braking the car\").\nNevertheless, many homophones remain that are unresolved by spelling (for example, the word \"bay\" has at least five fundamentally different meanings).\nMarking sound changes in other letters.\nSome letters in English provide information about the pronunciation of other letters in the word. Rollings (2004) uses the term \"markers\" for such letters. Letters may mark different types of information.\nFor instance, \u27e8e\u27e9 in \"once\" indicates that the preceding \u27e8c\u27e9 is pronounced , rather than the more common value of \u27e8c\u27e9 in word-final position as the sound , such as in \"attic\" .\n\u27e8e\u27e9 also often marks an altered pronunciation of a preceding vowel. In the pair \"mat\" and \"mate\", the \u27e8a\u27e9 of \"mat\" has the value , whereas the \u27e8a\u27e9 of \"mate\" is marked by the \u27e8e\u27e9 as having the value /e\u026a/. In this context, the \u27e8e\u27e9 is not pronounced, and is referred to as a \"silent e\".\nA single letter may even fill multiple pronunciation-marking roles simultaneously. For example, in the word \"ace\", \u27e8e\u27e9 marks not only the change of \u27e8a\u27e9 from to /e\u026a/, but also of \u27e8c\u27e9 from to . In the word \"vague\", \u27e8e\u27e9 marks the long \u27e8a\u27e9 sound, but \u27e8u\u27e9 keeps the \u27e8g\u27e9 hard rather than soft.\nDoubled consonants usually indicate that the preceding vowel is pronounced short. For example, the doubled \u27e8t\u27e9 in \"batted\" indicates that the \u27e8a\u27e9 is pronounced , while the single \u27e8t\u27e9 of \"bated\" gives /e\u026a/. Doubled consonants only indicate any lengthening or gemination of the consonant sound itself when they come from different morphemes, as with the \u27e8nn\u27e9 in \"unnamed\" (\"un\"+\"named\").\nMultiple functionality.\nAny given letters may have dual functions. For example, \u27e8u\u27e9 in \"statue\" has a sound-representing function (representing the sound ) and a pronunciation-marking function (marking the \u27e8t\u27e9 as having the value opposed to the value ).\nUnderlying representation.\nLike many other alphabetic orthographies, English spelling does not represent non-contrastive phonetic sounds (that is, minor differences in pronunciation which are not used to distinguish between different words).\nAlthough the letter \u27e8t\u27e9 is pronounced by most speakers with aspiration [t\u02b0] at the beginning of words, this is never indicated in the spelling, and, indeed, this phonetic detail is probably not noticeable to the average native speaker not trained in phonetics.\nHowever, unlike some orthographies, English orthography often represents a very abstract underlying representation (or morphophonemic form) of English words.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; [T]he postulated underlying forms are systematically related to the conventional orthography ... and are, as is well known, related to the underlying forms of a much earlier historical stage of the language. There has, in other words, been little change in lexical representation since Middle English, and, consequently, we would expect ... that lexical representation would differ very little from dialect to dialect in Modern English ... [and] that conventional orthography is probably fairly close to optimal for all modern English dialects, as well as for the attested dialects of the past several hundred years.\nIn these cases, a given morpheme (i.e., a component of a word) has a fixed spelling even though it is pronounced differently in different words. An example is the past tense suffix -\u27e8ed\u27e9, which may be pronounced variously as /t/, /d/, or /\u1d7bd/ (for example, \"pay\" , \"payed\" , \"hate\" , \"hated\" ). As it happens, these different pronunciations of -\u27e8ed\u27e9 can be predicted by a few phonological rules, but that is not the reason why its spelling is fixed.\nAnother example involves the vowel differences (with accompanying stress pattern changes) in several related words. For instance, \"photographer\" is derived from \"photograph\" by adding the derivational suffix -\u27e8er\u27e9. When this suffix is added, the vowel pronunciations change largely owing to the moveable stress:\nOther examples of this type are the -\u27e8ity\u27e9 suffix (as in \"agile\" vs. \"agility\", \"acid\" vs. \"acidity\", \"divine\" vs. \"divinity\", \"sane\" vs. \"sanity\"). See also: Trisyllabic laxing.\nAnother example includes words like \"mean\" and \"meant\" , where \u27e8ea\u27e9 is pronounced differently in the two related words. Thus, again, the orthography uses only a single spelling that corresponds to the single morphemic form rather than to the surface phonological form.\nEnglish orthography does not always provide an underlying representation; sometimes it provides an intermediate representation between the underlying form and the surface pronunciation. This is the case with the spelling of the regular plural morpheme, which is written as either -\u27e8s\u27e9 (as in \"tat, tats\" and \"hat, hats\") or -\u27e8es\u27e9 (as in \"glass, glasses\"). Here, the spelling -\u27e8s\u27e9 is pronounced either or (depending on the environment, e.g., \"tats\" and \"tails\" ) while -\u27e8es\u27e9 is usually pronounced /\u1d7bz/ (e.g. \"classes\" /\u02c8kl\u00e6s\u1d7bz/). Thus, there are two different spellings that correspond to the single underlying representation |z| of the plural suffix and the three surface forms. The spelling indicates the insertion of /\u1d7b/ before the /z/ in the spelling -\u27e8es\u27e9, but does not indicate the devoiced /s/ distinctly from the unaffected /z/ in the spelling -\u27e8s\u27e9.\nThe abstract representation of words as indicated by the orthography can be considered advantageous since it makes etymological relationships more apparent to English readers. This makes writing English more complex, but arguably makes reading English more efficient. However, very abstract underlying representations, such as that of Chomsky &amp; Halle (1968) or of underspecification theories, are sometimes considered too abstract to accurately reflect the communicative competence of native speakers. Followers of these arguments believe the less abstract surface forms are more \"psychologically real\" and thus more useful in terms of pedagogy.\nDiacritics.\nEnglish has some words that can be written with accents. These words are mostly loanwords, usually from French. As they become increasingly naturalised, there is an increasing tendency to omit the accent marks, even in formal writing. For example, \"r\u00f4le\" and \"h\u00f4tel\" originally had accents when they were borrowed into English, but now the accents are almost never used. The words were originally considered foreign\u2014and some people considered that English alternatives were preferable\u2014but today their foreign origin is largely forgotten. Words most likely to retain the accent are those atypical of English morphology and therefore still perceived as slightly foreign. For example, \"caf\u00e9\" and \"p\u00e2t\u00e9\" both have a pronounced final \u27e8e\u27e9, which would otherwise be silent under the normal English pronunciation rules. However, \"caf\u00e9\" is now sometimes facetiously pronounced , while in \"p\u00e2t\u00e9\", the acute accent is helpful to distinguish it from \"pate\".\nFurther examples of words sometimes retaining diacritics when used in English are: \"\u00e5ngstr\u00f6m\" (partly because the scientific symbol for this unit of measurement is \"\u00c5\"), \"appliqu\u00e9\", \"attach\u00e9\", \"blas\u00e9\", \"bric-\u00e0-brac\", \"Br\u00f6tchen\", \"clich\u00e9\", \"cr\u00e8me\", \"cr\u00eape\", \"fa\u00e7ade\", \"fianc\u00e9(e)\", \"flamb\u00e9\", \"jalape\u00f1o\", \"na\u00efve\", \"na\u00efvet\u00e9\", \"n\u00e9(e)\", \"papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9\", \"pass\u00e9\", \"pi\u00f1ata\", \"prot\u00e9g\u00e9\", \"r\u00e9sum\u00e9\", \"risqu\u00e9\", and \"voil\u00e0\". Italics, with appropriate accents, are generally applied to foreign terms that are uncommonly used in or have not been assimilated into English: for example, \"adi\u00f3s, cr\u00e8me br\u00fbl\u00e9e, pi\u00e8ce de r\u00e9sistance, raison d'\u00eatre, vis-\u00e0-vis,\" and \"belles-lettres.\"\nIt was formerly common in American English to use a diaeresis to indicate a hiatus, e.g. \"co\u00f6perate\", \"da\u00efs\", and \"re\u00eblect\". \"The New Yorker\" and \"Technology Review\" magazines still use it for this purpose, even though it is increasingly rare in modern English. Nowadays, the diaeresis is normally left out (\"cooperate\"), or a hyphen is used (\"co-operate\") if the hiatus is between two morphemes in a compound word. It is, however, still common in monomorphemic loanwords such as \"na\u00efve\" and \"No\u00ebl\".\nWritten accents are also used occasionally in poetry and scripts for dramatic performances to indicate that a certain normally unstressed syllable in a word should be stressed for dramatic effect, or to keep with the metre of the poetry. This use is frequently seen in archaic and pseudoarchaic writings with the \"-ed\" suffix, to indicate that the \u27e8e\u27e9 should be fully pronounced, as with \"curs\u00e8d\".\nThe acute and grave accents are occasionally used in poetry and lyrics: the acute to indicate stress overtly where it might be ambiguous (r\u00e9bel vs. reb\u00e9l) or nonstandard for metrical reasons (cal\u00e9ndar); the grave to indicate that an ordinarily silent or elided syllable is pronounced (warn\u00e8d, parl\u00ecament).\nLigatures.\nIn certain older texts (typically British), the use of the ligatures \u27e8\u00e6\u27e9 and \u27e8\u0153\u27e9 is common in words such as \"arch\u00e6ology\", \"diarrh\u0153a\", and \"encyclop\u00e6dia\", all of Latin or Greek origin. Nowadays, the ligatures have been generally replaced by the digraphs \u27e8ae\u27e9 and \u27e8oe\u27e9 (\"encyclopaedia\", \"diarrhoea\") in British English or just \u27e8e\u27e9 (\"encyclopedia\", \"diarrhea\") in American English, though both spell some words with only \u27e8e\u27e9 (\"economy\", \"ecology\") and others with \u27e8ae\u27e9 and \u27e8oe\u27e9 (\"paean\", \"amoeba\", \"oedipal\", \"Caesar\"). In some cases, usage may vary; for instance, both \"encyclopedia\" and \"encyclopaedia\" are current in the UK.\nPhonic irregularities.\nPartly because English has never had any official regulating authority for spelling, such as the Spanish \"Real Academia Espa\u00f1ola\", the French \"Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise\", and the German \"Rat f\u00fcr deutsche Rechtschreibung\", English spelling, compared to many other languages, is quite irregular and complex. Although French, among other languages, presents a similar degree of difficulty when \"encoding\" (writing), English is more difficult when \"decoding\" (reading), as there are clearly many more possible pronunciations of a group of letters. For example, in French, /u/ (as in \"true\", but short), can be spelled \u27e8ou, ous, out, oux\u27e9 (\"ou\", \"nous\", \"tout\", \"choux\"), but the pronunciation of each of those sequences is always the same. In English, /u\u02d0/ can be spelled in up to 24 different ways, including \u27e8oo, u, ui, ue, o, oe, ou, ough, ew\u27e9 (\"spook\", \"truth\", \"suit\", \"blues\", \"to\", \"shoe\", \"group\", \"through\", \"few\") (see Sound-to-spelling correspondences below), but all of these have other pronunciations as well (e.g., as in \"foot\", \"us\", \"build\", \"bluest\", \"so\", \"toe\", \"grout\", \"plough\", \"sew\") (See the Spelling-to-sound correspondences below). Thus, in unfamiliar words and proper nouns, the pronunciation of some sequences, \u27e8ough\u27e9 being the prime example, is unpredictable to even educated native English speakers.\nSpelling irregularities.\nAttempts to regularise or reform the spelling of English have usually failed. However, Noah Webster popularised more phonetic spellings in the United States, such as \"flavor\" for British \"flavour\", \"fiber\" for \"fibre\", \"defense\" for \"defence\", \"analyze\" for \"analyse\", \"catalog\" for \"catalogue\", and so forth. These spellings already existed as alternatives, but Webster's dictionaries helped standardise them in the US. (See American and British English spelling differences for details.)\nBesides the quirks the English spelling system has inherited from its past, there are other irregularities in spelling that make it tricky to learn. English contains, depending on dialect, 24\u201327 consonant phonemes and 13\u201320 vowels. However, there are only 26 letters in the modern English alphabet, so there is not a one-to-one correspondence between letters and sounds. Many sounds are spelled using different letters or multiple letters, and for those words whose pronunciation is predictable from the spelling, the sounds denoted by the letters depend on the surrounding letters. For example, \u27e8th\u27e9 represents two different sounds (the voiced and voiceless dental fricatives) (see Pronunciation of English \"th\"), and the voiceless alveolar sibilant can be represented by \u27e8s\u27e9 or \u27e8c\u27e9.\nIt is, however, not (solely) the shortage of letters which makes English spelling irregular. Its irregularities are caused mainly by the use of many different spellings for some of its sounds, such as /u\u02d0/, /i\u02d0/ and /o\u028a/ (\"too, \"true, \"shoe, \"flew, \"through; \"sleeve\", \"leave\", even\", \"seize\", \"siege\"; \"stole, \"coal\", \"bowl\", \"roll\", old\", \"mould\"), and the use of identical sequences for spelling different sounds (over\", oven\", \"move\").\nFurthermore, English no longer makes any attempt to anglicise the spellings of loanwords, but preserves the foreign spellings, even when they do not follow English spelling conventions like the Polish \u27e8cz\u27e9 in \"Czech\" (rather than \"*Check\") or the Norwegian \u27e8fj\u27e9 in \"fjord\" (although \"fiord\" was formerly the most common spelling). In early Middle English, until roughly 1400, most imports from French were respelled according to English rules (e.g. \"bataille\"\u2013\"battle\", \"bouton\"\u2013\"button\", but not \"double\", or \"trouble\"). Instead of loans being respelled to conform to English spelling standards, sometimes the pronunciation changes as a result of pressure from the spelling, e.g. \"ski\", adopted from Norwegian in the mid-18th century. It used to be pronounced /\u0283i\u02d0/, similar to the Norwegian pronunciation, but the increasing popularity of the sport after the mid-20th century helped the /ski\u02d0/ pronunciation replace it.\nThere was also a period when the spelling of a small number of words was altered to make them conform to their perceived etymological origins. For example, \u27e8b\u27e9 was added to \"debt\" (originally \"dette\") to link it to the Latin , and \u27e8s\u27e9 in \"island\" to link it to Latin instead of its true origin, the Old English word \"\u012b\u0121land\". \u27e8p\u27e9 in \"ptarmigan\" has no etymological justification whatsoever, only seeking to show Greek origin despite being a Gaelic word.\nThe spelling of English continues to evolve. Many loanwords come from languages where the pronunciation of vowels corresponds to the way they were pronounced in Old English, which is similar to the Italian or Spanish pronunciation of the vowels, and is the value the vowel symbols \u27e8a, e, i, o, u\u27e9 have in the International Phonetic Alphabet. As a result, there is a somewhat regular system of pronouncing \"foreign\" words in English, and some borrowed words have had their spelling changed to conform to this system. For example, \"Hindu\" used to be spelled \"Hindoo\", and the name \"Maria\" used to be pronounced like the name \"Mariah\", but was changed to conform to this system. This only further complicates the spelling, however. On the one hand, words that retained anglicised spellings may be misread in a hyperforeign way. On the other hand, words that are respelled in a 'foreign' way may be misread as if they are English words, e.g. \"Muslim\" was formerly spelled \"Mooslim\" because of its original pronunciation.\nCommercial advertisers have also had an effect on English spelling. They introduced new or simplified spellings like \"lite\" instead of \"light\", \"thru\" instead of \"through\", and \"rucsac\" instead of \"rucksack\". The spellings of personal names have also been a source of spelling innovations: diminutive versions of women's names that sound the same as men's names have been spelled differently: \"Nikki\" and \"Nicky\", \"Toni\" and \"Tony\", \"Jo\" and \"Joe\". The differentiation in between names that are spelled differently but have the same phonetic sound may come from modernisation or different countries of origin. For example, \"Isabelle\" and \"Isabel\" sound the same but are spelled differently; these versions are from France and Spain respectively.\nAs an example of the irregular nature of English spelling, \u27e8ou\u27e9 can be pronounced at least nine different ways: /a\u028a/ in \"out\", /o\u028a/ in \"soul\", in \"soup\", in \"touch\", in \"could\", in \"four\", in \"journal\", in \"cough\", and in \"famous\" (See Spelling-to-sound correspondences). In the other direction, can be spelled in at least 18~21 different ways: \"be (\"cede), \"ski (\"machine), \"bologna\u00a0, \"algae, \"quay, \"beach\", \"bee, \"deceit\", \"people\", \"key, \"keyed\", \"field\" (\"hygiene), \"amoeba\", \"chamois\"\u00a0, \"dengue\u00a0, \"beguine\", \"guyot\", and ynambu\" (See Sound-to-spelling correspondences). (These examples assume a more-or-less standard non-regional British English accent. Other accents will vary.)\nSometimes everyday speakers of English change a counterintuitive pronunciation simply because it is counterintuitive. Changes like this are not usually seen as \"standard\", but can become standard if used enough. An example is the word \"miniscule\", which still competes with its original spelling of \"minuscule\", though this might also be because of analogy with the word \"mini\".\nHistory.\nInconsistencies and irregularities in English pronunciation and spelling have gradually increased in number throughout the history of the English language. There are a number of contributing factors. First, gradual changes in pronunciation, such as the Great Vowel Shift, account for a tremendous number of irregularities. Second, relatively recent loan words generally carry their original spellings, which are often not phonetic in English. The Romanization of languages (e.g., Chinese) has further complicated this problem, for example when pronouncing Chinese proper names (of people or places).\nThe regular spelling system of Old English was swept away by the Norman Conquest, and English itself was supplanted in some spheres by Norman French for three centuries, eventually emerging with its spelling much influenced by French. English had also borrowed large numbers of words from French, and kept their French spellings. The spelling of Middle English is very irregular and inconsistent, with the same word being spelled in different ways, sometimes even in the same sentence. However, these were generally much better guides to the then-pronunciation than modern English spelling is.\nFor example, , normally written \u27e8u\u27e9, is spelled with an \u27e8o\u27e9 in \"one\", \"some\", \"love\", etc., due to Norman spelling conventions which prohibited writing \u27e8u\u27e9 before \u27e8m, n, v\u27e9 due to the graphical confusion that would result. (\u27e8n, u, v\u27e9 were written identically with two minims in Norman handwriting; \u27e8w\u27e9 was written as two \u27e8u\u27e9 letters; \u27e8m\u27e9 was written with three minims, hence \u27e8mm\u27e9 looked like \u27e8vun, nvu, uvu\u27e9, etc.). Similarly, spelling conventions also prohibited final \u27e8v\u27e9. Hence the identical spellings of the three different vowel sounds in \"love\", \"move\", and \"cove\" are due to ambiguity in the Middle English spelling system, not sound change.\nIn 1417, Henry V began using English, which had no standardised spelling, for official correspondence instead of Latin or French which had standardised spelling, e.g. Latin had one spelling for \"right\" (\"rectus\"), Old French as used in English law had six and Middle English had 77. This motivated writers to standardise English spelling, an effort which lasted about 500 years.\nThere was also a series of linguistic sound changes towards the end of this period, including the Great Vowel Shift, which resulted in the \u27e8a\u27e9 in \"ate\", for example, changing from a pure vowel to a diphthong. These changes for the most part did not detract from the rule-governed nature of the spelling system; but, in some cases, they introduced confusing inconsistencies, like the well-known example of the many pronunciations of \u27e8ough\u27e9 (\"tough\", \"through\", \"though\", \"cough\", \"plough\", etc.). Most of these changes happened before the arrival of printing in England. However, the arrival of the modern printing press in 1476 froze the current system, rather than providing the impetus for a realignment of spelling with pronunciation. Furthermore, it introduced further inconsistencies, partly because of the use of typesetters trained abroad, particularly in the Low Countries. For example, the \u27e8h\u27e9 in \"ghost\" was influenced by Flemish. The addition and deletion of a silent \"e\" at the ends of words was also sometimes used to make the right-hand margin line up more neatly.\nBy the time dictionaries were introduced in the mid-17th century, the spelling system of English had started to stabilise. By the 19th century, most words had set spellings, though it took some time before they diffused throughout the English-speaking world. In \"The Mill on the Floss\" (1860), English novelist George Eliot satirised the attitude of the English rural gentry of the 1820s towards orthography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Tulliver did not willingly write a letter, and found the relation between spoken and written language, briefly known as spelling, one of the most puzzling things in this puzzling world. Nevertheless, like all fervid writing, the task was done in less time than usual, and if the spelling differed from Mrs. Glegg's,\u2013why, she belonged, like himself, to a generation with whom spelling was a matter of private judgment.\nThe modern English spelling system, with its national variants, spread together with the expansion of public education later in the 19th century.\n\"Ough\" words.\nThe most notorious multigraph in the English language is the tetragraph \u27e8ough\u27e9, which can be pronounced in at least ten different ways, six of which are illustrated in the construct, \"Though the tough cough and hiccough plough him through\", which is quoted by Robert A. Heinlein in \"The Door into Summer\" to illustrate the difficulties facing automated speech transcription and reading. \"Ough\" itself is a word, an exclamation of disgust similar to \"ugh\", though rarely known or used. The following are typical pronunciations of this string of letters:\nThe following pronunciations are found in uncommon single words:\nThe place name Loughborough uses two different pronunciations of \u27e8ough\u27e9: the first \u27e8ough\u27e9 has the sound as in \"cuff\" and the second rhymes with \"thorough\".\nSpelling-to-sound correspondences.\nNotes:\nVowels.\nIn a generative approach to English spelling, Rollings (2004) identifies twenty main orthographic vowels of stressed syllables that are grouped into four main categories: \"Lax\", \"Tense\", \"Heavy\", \"Tense-R\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor instance, \u27e8a\u27e9 can represent the lax vowel , tense /e\u026a/, heavy , or tense-r /\u025b\u0259/. Heavy and tense-r vowels are the respective lax and tense counterparts followed by \u27e8r\u27e9.\nTense vowels are distinguished from lax vowels with a \"silent\" \u27e8e\u27e9 that is added at the end of words. Thus, \u27e8a\u27e9 in \"hat\" is lax /\u00e6/, but when \u27e8e\u27e9 is added in the word \"hate\" \u27e8a\u27e9 is tense /e\u026a/. Heavy and tense-r vowels follow a similar pattern, e.g. \u27e8ar\u27e9 in \"car\" is heavy /\u0251\u02d0r/, \u27e8ar\u27e9 followed by silent \u27e8e\u27e9 in \"care\" is /\u025b\u0259r/. \u27e8u\u27e9 represents two different vowel patterns, one being /\u028c/, /u\u02d0/, /\u0259/, /\u028a/, the other /\u028a/, /ju\u02d0/, /j\u028a/. There is no distinction between heavy and tense-r \u27e8o\u27e9 and \u27e8u\u27e9 in the /\u028a/, /ju\u02d0/, /j\u028a/ pattern does not have a heavy vowel.\nBesides silent \u27e8e\u27e9, another strategy for indicating tense and tense-r vowels is the addition of another orthographic vowel forming a digraph. In this case, the first vowel is usually the main vowel while the second vowel is the \"marking\" vowel. For example, \"man\" has a lax \u27e8a\u27e9 (/\u00e6/), but the addition of \u27e8i\u27e9 (as the digraph \u27e8ai\u27e9) in \"main\" marks the \u27e8a\u27e9 as tense (/e\u026a/). These two strategies produce words that are spelled differently but pronounced identically, which helps differentiate words that would otherwise be homonyms, as in \"mane\" (silent \u27e8e\u27e9 strategy), \"main\" (digraph strategy) and \"Maine\" (both strategies).\nBesides the 20 basic vowel spellings, has a reduced vowel category (representing the sounds /\u0259, \u026a/) and a miscellaneous category (representing the sounds /\u0254\u026a, a\u028a, a\u026a/ and /j/+V, /w/+V, V+V).\nCombinations of vowel letters.\nTo reduce dialectal difficulties, the sound values given here correspond to the conventions at . This table includes \u27e8h, w, y\u27e9 when they represent vowel sounds. If no information is given, it is assumed that the vowel is in a stressed syllable.\nDeriving the pronunciation of an English word from its spelling requires not only a careful knowledge of the rules given below (many of which are not explicitly known even by native speakers: speakers merely learn the spelling of a word along with its pronunciation) and their many exceptions, but also:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConsonants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCombinations of other consonant and vowel letters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSound-to-spelling correspondences.\nThe following table shows for each sound the various spelling patterns used to denote it, starting with the prototypical pattern(s) followed by others in alphabetical order. Some of these patterns are very rare or unique (such as \u27e8gh\u27e9 for /p/, \u27e8ph\u27e9 for /v/, \u27e8i\u27e9 for /\u0251\u02d0/). An ellipsis (\u27e8\u2026\u27e9) stands for an intervening consonant.\nConsonants.\nArranged in the order of the IPA consonant tables.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVowels.\nSorted more or less from close to open sounds in the vowel diagram. Nasal vowels used by some speakers in words of French origin such as \"enceinte\" (), are not included.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrthographies of English-related languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10083", "revid": "14604687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10083", "title": "\u00c6thelred the Unready", "text": "10th and 11th-century King of England\n\u00c6thelred II (Old English: , ];, c.\u00a0966\u00a0\u2013 23 April 1016), known as \u00c6thelred the Unready, was King of the English from 978 to 1013 and again from 1014 until his death in 1016. His epithet does not derive from the modern word \"unready\", but rather from the Old English meaning \"poorly advised\"; it is a pun on his name, which means \"well advised\".\n\u00c6thelred was the son of King Edgar the Peaceful and Queen \u00c6lfthryth. He came to the throne at about the age of 12, following the assassination of his older half-brother, King Edward the Martyr. \nThe chief problem of \u00c6thelred's reign was conflict with the Danes. After several decades of relative peace, Danish raids on English territory began again in earnest in the 980s, becoming markedly more serious in the early 990s. Following the Battle of Maldon in 991, \u00c6thelred paid tribute, or Danegeld, to the Danish king. In 1002, \u00c6thelred ordered what became known as the St. Brice's Day massacre of Danish settlers. In 1013, King Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark invaded England, as a result of which \u00c6thelred fled to Normandy in 1013 and was replaced by Sweyn. After Sweyn died in 1014, \u00c6thelred returned to the throne, but he died just two years later. \u00c6thelred's 37-year combined reign was the longest of any Anglo-Saxon English king, and was only surpassed in the 13th century, by Henry III. \u00c6thelred was briefly succeeded by his son, Edmund Ironside, but he died after a few months and was replaced by Sweyn's son Cnut.\nName.\n\u00c6thelred's first name, composed of the elements , \"noble\", and , \"counsel, advice\", is typical of the compound names of those who belonged to the royal House of Wessex, and it characteristically alliterates with the names of his ancestors, like (\"noble-wolf\"), (\"elf-counsel\"), (\"rich-protection\"), and (\"rich-spear\").\n\u00c6thelred's notorious nickname, Old English , is commonly translated into present-day English as \"The Unready\" (less often, though less inaccurately, as \"The Redeless\"). The Anglo-Saxon noun means \"evil counsel\", \"bad plan\", or \"folly\". It was most often used in reference to decisions and deeds, but once in reference to the ill-advised disobedience of Adam and Eve. The element in is the same element in \u00c6thelred's name that means \"counsel\" (compare the cognate in the German word and Dutch \"raad\"). Thus is an oxymoron: \"Noble counsel, No counsel\". The nickname has also been translated as \"ill-advised\", \"ill-prepared\", thus \"\u00c6thelred the ill-advised\".\nBecause the nickname was first recorded in the 1180s, more than 150 years after \u00c6thelred's death, it is doubtful that it carries any implications as to the reputation of the king in the eyes of his contemporaries or near contemporaries.\nEarly life.\nSir Frank Stenton remarked that \"much that has brought condemnation of historians on King \u00c6thelred may well be due in the last resort to the circumstances under which he became king.\" \u00c6thelred's father, King Edgar, had died suddenly in July 975, leaving two young sons behind. The elder, Edward (later Edward the Martyr), was probably illegitimate, and was \"still a youth on the verge of manhood\" in 975. The younger son was \u00c6thelred, whose mother, \u00c6lfthryth, Edgar had married in 964. \u00c6lfthryth was the daughter of Ordgar, ealdorman of Devon, and widow of \u00c6thelwald, Ealdorman of East Anglia. At the time of his father's death, \u00c6thelred could have been no more than 10 years old. As the elder of Edgar's sons, Edward \u2013 reportedly a young man given to frequent violent outbursts \u2013 probably would have naturally succeeded to the throne of England despite his young age, had he not \"offended many important persons by his intolerable violence of speech and behaviour.\" In any case, a number of English nobles took to opposing Edward's succession and to defending \u00c6thelred's claim to the throne; \u00c6thelred was, after all, the son of Edgar's last, living wife, and no rumour of illegitimacy is known to have plagued \u00c6thelred's birth, as it might have his elder brother's.\nBoth boys, \u00c6thelred certainly, were too young to have played any significant part in the political manoeuvring which followed Edgar's death. It was the brothers' supporters, and not the brothers themselves, who were responsible for the turmoil which accompanied the choice of a successor to the throne. \u00c6thelred's cause was led by his mother and included \u00c6lfhere, Ealdorman of Mercia and Bishop \u00c6thelwold of Winchester, while Edward's claim was supported by Dunstan, the Archbishop of Canterbury and Oswald, the Archbishop of York among other noblemen, notably \u00c6thelwine, Ealdorman of East Anglia, and Byrhtnoth, ealdorman of Essex. In the end, Edward's supporters proved the more powerful and persuasive, and he was crowned king at Kingston upon Thames before the year was out.\nEdward reigned for only three years before he was murdered by members of his brother's household. Though little is known about Edward's short reign, it is known that it was marked by political turmoil. Edgar had made extensive grants of land to monasteries which pursued the new monastic ideals of ecclesiastical reform, but these disrupted aristocratic families' traditional patronage. The end of his firm rule saw a reversal of this policy, with aristocrats recovering their lost properties or seizing new ones. This was opposed by Dunstan, but according to Cyril Hart, \"The presence of supporters of church reform on both sides indicates that the conflict between them depended as much on issues of land ownership and local power as on ecclesiastical legitimacy. Adherents of both Edward and \u00c6thelred can be seen appropriating, or recovering, monastic lands.\" Nevertheless, favour for Edward must have been strong among the monastic communities. When Edward was killed at \u00c6thelred's estate at Corfe Castle in Dorset in March 978, the job of recording the event, as well as reactions to it, fell to monastic writers. Stenton offers a summary of the earliest account of Edward's murder, which comes from a work praising the life of St Oswald:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the surface his [Edward's] relations with \u00c6thelred his half-brother and \u00c6lfthryth his stepmother were friendly, and he was visiting them informally when he was killed. [\u00c6thelred's] retainers came out to meet him with ostentatious signs of respect, and then, before he had dismounted, surrounded him, seized his hands, and stabbed him ... So far as can be seen the murder was planned and carried out by \u00c6thelred's household men in order that their young master might become king. There is nothing to support the allegation, which first appears in writing more than a century later, that Queen \u00c6lfthryth had plotted her stepson's death. No one was punished for a part in the crime, and \u00c6thelred, who was crowned a month after the murder, began to reign in an atmosphere of suspicion which destroyed the prestige of the crown. It was never fully restored in his lifetime.\nKingship.\nNevertheless, at first, the outlook of the new king's officers and counsellors seems in no way to have been bleak. According to one chronicler, the coronation of \u00c6thelred took place with much rejoicing by the councillors of the English people. Simon Keynes notes that \"Byrhtferth of Ramsey states similarly that when \u00c6thelred was consecrated king, by Archbishop Dunstan and Archbishop Oswald, 'there was great joy at his consecration', and describes the king in this connection as 'a young man in respect of years, elegant in his manners, with an attractive face and handsome appearance'.\"\n\u00c6thelred was between nine and twelve years old when he became king and affairs were initially managed by leading councillors such as \u00c6thelwold, bishop of Winchester, Queen \u00c6lfthryth and Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury. \u00c6thelwold was especially influential and when he died, on 1 August 984, \u00c6thelred abandoned his early councillors and launched on policies which involved encroachment on church privileges, to his later regret. In a charter of 993 he stated that \u00c6thelwold's death had deprived the country of one \"whose industry and pastoral care administered not only to my interest but also to that of all inhabitants of the country.\"\n\u00c6lfthryth enjoyed renewed status in the 990s, when she brought up his heirs and her brother Ordulf became one of \u00c6thelred's leading advisers. She died between 1000 and 1002.\nDespite conflicts with the Danes throughout his reign, \u00c6thelred's reign of England saw expansion in England's population, trade and wealth.\nConflict with the Danes.\nEngland had experienced a period of peace after the reconquest of the Danelaw in the mid-10th century by King Edgar, \u00c6thelred's father. However, beginning in 980, when \u00c6thelred could not have been more than 14 years old, small companies of Danish adventurers carried out a series of coastline raids against England. Hampshire, Thanet and Cheshire were attacked in 980, Devon and Cornwall in 981, and Dorset in 982. A period of six years then passed before, in 988, another coastal attack is recorded as having taken place to the south-west, though here a famous battle was fought between the invaders and the thegns of Devon. Stenton notes that, though this series of isolated raids had no lasting effect on England itself, \"their chief historical importance is that they brought England for the first time into diplomatic contact with Normandy.\"\nDanish attacks started becoming more serious in the early 990s, with highly devastating assaults in 1006\u20131007 and 1009\u20131012. Tribute payments by \u00c6thelred did not successfully temper the Danish attacks. \u00c6thelred's forces were primarily composed of infantry, with substantial numbers of foreign mercenaries. He did not have substantial numbers of trained cavalry forces.\nDuring this period, the Normans offered shelter to Danes returning from raids on England. This led to tension between the English and Norman courts, and word of their enmity eventually reached Pope John XV. The pope was disposed to dissolve their hostility towards each other, and took steps to engineer a peace between England and Normandy, which was ratified in Rouen in 991.\nBattle of Maldon.\nIn August 991, a sizeable Danish fleet began a sustained campaign in the south-east of England. It arrived off Folkestone, in Kent, and made its way around the south-east coast and up the River Blackwater, coming eventually to its estuary and occupying Northey Island. About west of Northey lies the coastal town of Maldon, where Byrhtnoth, ealdorman of Essex, was stationed with a company of thegns. The battle that followed between English and Danes is immortalised by the Old English poem \"The Battle of Maldon\", which describes the doomed but heroic attempt of Byrhtnoth to defend the coast of Essex against overwhelming odds. This was the first of a series of crushing defeats felt by the English: beaten first by Danish raiders, and later by organised Danish armies. Stenton summarises the events of the poem:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For access to the mainland they (the Danes) depended on a causeway, flooded at high tide, which led from Northey to the flats along the southern margin of the estuary. Before they (the Danes) had left their camp on the island[,] Byrhtnoth, with his retainers and a force of local militia, had taken possession of the landward end of the causeway. Refusing a demand for tribute, shouted across the water while the tide was high, Byrhtnoth drew up his men along the bank, and waited for the ebb. As the water fell the raiders began to stream out along the causeway. But three of Byrhtnoth's retainers held it against them, and at last they asked to be allowed to cross unhindered and fight on equal terms on the mainland. With what even those who admired him most called 'over-courage', Byrhtnoth agreed to this; the pirates rushed through the falling tide, and battle was joined. Its issue was decided by Byrhtnoth's fall. Many even of his own men immediately took to flight and the English ranks were broken. What gives enduring interest to the battle is the superb courage with which a group of Byrhtnoth's thegns, knowing that the fight was lost, deliberately gave themselves to death in order that they might avenge their lord.\"\nEngland begins tributes.\nIn the aftermath of Maldon, it was decided that the English should grant the tribute to the Danes that they desired, and so a \"gafol\" of \u00a310,000 was paid them for their peace. Yet it was presumably the Danish fleet that had beaten Byrhtnoth at Maldon that continued to ravage the English coast from 991 to 993. In 994, the Danish fleet, which had swollen in ranks since 991, turned up the Thames estuary and headed toward London. The battle fought there was inconclusive.\nIt was about this time that \u00c6thelred met with the leaders of the Danish fleet and arranged an uneasy accord. A treaty was signed that provided for seemingly civilised arrangements between the then-settled Danish companies and the English government, such as regulation of settlement disputes and trade. But the treaty also stipulated that the ravaging and slaughter of the previous year would be forgotten, and ended abruptly by stating that \u00a322,000 of gold and silver had been paid to the raiders as the price of peace. In 994, Olaf Tryggvason, a Norwegian prince and already a baptised Christian, was confirmed as Christian in a ceremony at Andover; King \u00c6thelred stood as his sponsor. After receiving gifts, Olaf promised \"that he would never come back to England in hostility.\" Olaf then left England for Norway and never returned, though \"other component parts of the Viking force appear to have decided to stay in England, for it is apparent from the treaty that some had chosen to enter into King \u00c6thelred's service as mercenaries, based presumably on the Isle of Wight.\"\nRenewed Danish raids.\nIn 997, Danish raids began again. According to Keynes, \"there is no suggestion that this was a new fleet or army, and presumably the mercenary force created in 994 from the residue of the raiding army of 991 had turned on those whom it had been hired to protect.\" It harried Cornwall, Devon, western Somerset and south Wales in 997, Dorset, Hampshire and Sussex in 998. In 999, it raided Kent, and, in 1000, it left England for Normandy, perhaps because the English had refused in this latest wave of attacks to acquiesce to the Danish demands for \"gafol\" or tribute, which would come to be known as Danegeld, 'Dane-payment'. This sudden relief from attack \u00c6thelred used to gather his thoughts, resources, and armies: the fleet's departure in 1000 \"allowed \u00c6thelred to carry out a devastation of Strathclyde, the motive for which is part of the lost history of the north.\"\nIn 1001, a Danish fleet \u2013 perhaps the same fleet from 1000 \u2013 returned and ravaged west Sussex. During its movements, the fleet regularly returned to its base in the Isle of Wight. There was later an attempted attack in the south of Devon, though the English mounted a successful defence at Exeter. Nevertheless, \u00c6thelred must have felt at a loss, and, in the Spring of 1002, the English bought a truce for \u00a324,000. \u00c6thelred's frequent payments of immense Danegelds are often held up as exemplary of the incompetency of his government and his own short-sightedness. However, Keynes points out that such payments had been practice for at least a century, and had been adopted by Alfred the Great, Charles the Bald and many others. Indeed, in some cases it \"may have seemed the best available way of protecting the people against loss of life, shelter, livestock and crops. Though undeniably burdensome, it constituted a measure for which the king could rely on widespread support.\"\nSt. Brice's Day massacre of 1002.\n\u00c6thelred ordered the massacre of all Danish men in England to take place on 13 November 1002, St Brice's Day. Gunhilde, sister of Sweyn Forkbeard, King of Denmark, was said to have been among the victims. It is likely that a wish to avenge her was a principal motive for Sweyn's invasion of western England the following year. By 1004 Sweyn was in East Anglia, where he sacked Norwich. In this year, a nobleman of East Anglia, Ulfcytel Snillingr met Sweyn in force, and made an impression on the until-then rampant Danish expedition. Though Ulfcytel was eventually defeated, outside Thetford, he caused the Danes heavy losses and was nearly able to destroy their ships. The Danish army left England for Denmark in 1005, perhaps because of the losses they sustained in East Anglia, perhaps from the very severe famine which afflicted the continent and the British Isles in that year.\nAn expedition the following year was bought off in early 1007 by tribute money of \u00a336,000, and for the next two years England was free from attack. In 1008, the government created a new fleet of warships, organised on a national scale, but this was weakened when one of its commanders took to piracy, and the king and his council decided not to risk it in a general action. In Stenton's view: \"The history of England in the next generation was really determined between 1009 and 1012...the ignominious collapse of the English defence caused a loss of morale which was irreparable.\" The Danish army of 1009, led by Thorkell the Tall and his brother Hemming, was the most formidable force to invade England since \u00c6thelred became king. It harried England until it was bought off by \u00a348,000 in April 1012.\nInvasion of 1013.\nSweyn then launched an invasion in 1013 intending to crown himself king of England, during which he proved himself to be a general greater than any other Viking leader of his generation. By the end of 1013 English resistance had collapsed and Sweyn had conquered the country, forcing \u00c6thelred into exile in Normandy. But the situation changed suddenly when Sweyn died on 3 February 1014. The crews of the Danish ships in the Trent that had supported Sweyn immediately swore their allegiance to Sweyn's son Cnut the Great, but leading English noblemen sent a deputation to \u00c6thelred to negotiate his restoration to the throne. He was required to declare his loyalty to them, to bring in reforms regarding everything that they disliked and to forgive all that had been said and done against him in his previous reign. The terms of this agreement are of great constitutional interest in early English History as they are the first recorded pact between a King and his subjects and are also widely regarded as showing that many English noblemen had submitted to Sweyn simply because of their distrust of \u00c6thelred. According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;they [the counsellors] said that no lord was dearer to them than their natural (\"gecynde\") lord, if he would govern them more justly than he did before. Then the king sent his son Edward hither with his messengers and bade them greet all his people and said that he would be a gracious (\"hold\") lord to them, and reform all the things which they hated; and all the things which had been said and done against him should be forgiven on condition that they all unanimously turned to him (\"to him gecyrdon\") without treachery. And complete friendship was then established with oath and pledge (\"mid worde and mid w\u00e6dde\") on both sides, and they pronounced every Danish king an exile from England forever.\n\u00c6thelred then launched an expedition against Cnut and his allies. It was only the people of the Kingdom of Lindsey (modern North Lincolnshire) who supported Cnut. \u00c6thelred first set out to recapture London apparently with the help of the Norwegian Olaf Haraldsson. According to the Icelandic historian, Snorri Sturluson, \u00d3laf led a successful attack on London bridge with a fleet of ships. He then went on to help \u00c6thelred retake London and other parts of the country. Cnut and his army decided to withdraw from England, in April 1014, leaving his Lindsey allies to suffer \u00c6thelred's revenge. In about 1016 it is thought that \u00d3laf left to concentrate on raiding western Europe. In the same year, Cnut returned to find a complex and volatile situation unfolding in England. \u00c6thelred's son, Edmund Ironside, had revolted against his father and established himself in the North, which was angry at Cnut and \u00c6thelred for the ravaging of Lindsey and was prepared to support Edmund in any uprising against both of them.\nDeath and burial.\nOver the next few months Cnut conquered most of England, while Edmund rejoined \u00c6thelred to defend London when \u00c6thelred died on 23 April 1016. The subsequent war between Edmund and Cnut ended in a decisive victory for Cnut at the Battle of Assandun on 18 October 1016. Edmund's reputation as a warrior was such that Cnut nevertheless agreed to divide England, Edmund taking Wessex and Cnut the whole of the country beyond the Thames. However, Edmund died on 30 November, and Cnut became king of the whole country.\n\u00c6thelred was buried in Old St Paul's Cathedral, London. The tomb and his monument in the quire at Old St Paul's Cathedral were destroyed along with the cathedral in the Great Fire of London in 1666. A modern monument in the crypt lists his among the important graves lost.\nLegislation.\n\u00c6thelred's government produced extensive legislation, which he \"ruthlessly enforced\". Records of at least six legal codes survive from his reign, covering a range of topics. Notably, one of the members of his council (known as the \"Witan\") was Wulfstan II, Archbishop of York, a well-known homilist. The three latest codes from \u00c6thelred's reign seemed to have been drafted by Wulfstan. These codes are extensively concerned with ecclesiastical affairs. They also exhibit the characteristics of Wulfstan's highly rhetorical style. Wulfstan went on to draft codes for King Cnut, and recycled there many of the laws which were used in \u00c6thelred's codes.\nDespite the failure of his government in the face of the Danish threat, \u00c6thelred's reign was not without some important institutional achievements. The quality of the coinage, a good indicator of the prevailing economic conditions, significantly improved during his reign due to his numerous coinage reform laws.\nLegacy.\nLater perspectives of \u00c6thelred have been less than flattering. Numerous legends and anecdotes have sprung up to explain his shortcomings, often elaborating abusively on his character and failures. One such anecdote is given by William of Malmesbury (lived c.\u00a01080 \u2013 c.\u00a01143), who reports that \u00c6thelred had defecated in the baptismal font as a child, which led St Dunstan to prophesy that the English monarchy would be overthrown during his reign. This story is, however, a fabrication, and a similar story is told of the Byzantine Emperor Constantine Copronymus (the epithet means 'dung-named'), another medieval monarch who was unpopular among certain of his subjects.\nEfforts to rehabilitate \u00c6thelred's reputation have gained momentum since about 1980. Chief among the rehabilitators has been Simon Keynes, who has often argued that our poor impression of \u00c6thelred is almost entirely based upon after-the-fact accounts of, and later accretions to, the narrative of events during \u00c6thelred's long and complex reign. Chief among the culprits is in fact one of the most important sources for the history of the period, the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", which, as it reports events with a retrospect of 15 years, cannot help but interpret events with the eventual English defeat a foregone conclusion.\nYet, as virtually no strictly contemporary narrative account of the events of \u00c6thelred's reign exists, historians are forced to rely on what evidence there is. Keynes and others thus draw attention to some of the inevitable snares of investigating the history of a man whom later popular opinion has utterly damned. Recent cautious assessments of \u00c6thelred's reign have more often uncovered reasons to doubt, rather than uphold, \u00c6thelred's later infamy. Though the failures of his government will always put \u00c6thelred's reign in the shadow of the reigns of kings Edgar, \u00c6thelstan, and Alfred, historians' current impression of \u00c6thelred's personal character is certainly not as unflattering as it once was: \"\u00c6thelred's misfortune as a ruler was owed not so much to any supposed defects of his imagined character, as to a combination of circumstances which anyone would have found difficult to control.\"\nOrigin of the jury.\n\u00c6thelred has been credited with the formation of a local investigative body made up of twelve thegns who were charged with publishing the names of any notorious or wicked men in their respective districts. Because the members of these bodies were under solemn oath to act in accordance with the law and their own good consciences, they have been seen by some legal historians as the prototype for the English grand jury. \u00c6thelred makes provision for such a body in a law code he enacted at Wantage in 997, which states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"\u00fe\u00e6t man habbe gemot on \u00e6lcum w\u00e6pentace; &amp; gan ut \u00fea yldestan XII \u00feegnas &amp; se gerefa mid, &amp; swerian on \u00feam haligdome, \u00fee heom man on hand sylle, \u00fe\u00e6t hig nellan n\u00e6nne sacleasan man forsecgean ne n\u00e6nne sacne forhelan. &amp; niman \u00feonne \u00fea tihtbysian men, \u00fee mid \u00feam gerefan habba\u00f0, &amp; heora \u00e6lc sylle VI healfmarc wedd, healf landrican &amp; healf w\u00e6pentake.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBut the wording here suggests that \u00c6thelred was perhaps revamping or re-confirming a custom which had already existed. He may actually have been expanding an established English custom for use among the Danish citizens in the North (the Danelaw). Previously, King Edgar had legislated along similar lines in his Whitbordesstan code:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"ic wille, \u00fe\u00e6t \u00e6lc mon sy under borge ge binnan burgum ge buton burgum. &amp; gewitnes sy geset to \u00e6lcere byrig &amp; to \u00e6lcum hundrode. To \u00e6lcere byrig XXXVI syn gecorone to gewitnesse; to smalum burgum &amp; to \u00e6lcum hundrode XII, buton ge ma willan. &amp; \u00e6lc mon mid heora gewitnysse bigcge &amp; sylle \u00e6lc \u00feara ceapa, \u00fee he bigcge o\u00f0\u00f0e sylle a\u00feer o\u00f0\u00f0e burge o\u00f0\u00f0e on w\u00e6pengetace. &amp; heora \u00e6lc, \u00feonne hine man \u00e6rest to gewitnysse gecys\u00f0, sylle \u00fe\u00e6ne a\u00f0, \u00fe\u00e6t he n\u00e6fre, ne for feo ne for lufe ne for ege, ne \u00e6tsace nanes \u00feara \u00feinga, \u00fee he to gewitnysse w\u00e6s, &amp; nan o\u00f0er \u00feingc on gewitnysse ne cy\u00f0e buton \u00fe\u00e6t an, \u00fe\u00e6t he geseah o\u00f0\u00f0e gehyrde. &amp; swa ge\u00e6\u00federa manna syn on \u00e6lcum ceape twegen o\u00f0\u00f0e \u00fery to gewitnysse.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is my wish that each person be in surety, both within settled areas and without. And 'witnessing' shall be established in each city and each hundred. To each city let there be 36 chosen for witnessing; to small towns and to each hundred let there be 12, unless they desire more. And everybody shall purchase and sell their goods in the presence a witness, whether he is buying or selling something, whether in a city or a wapentake. And each of them, when they first choose to become a witness, shall give an oath that he will never, neither for wealth nor love nor fear, deny any of those things which he will be a witness to, and will not, in his capacity as a witness, make known any thing except that which he saw and heard. And let there be either two or three of these sworn witnesses at every sale of goods.\nThe 'legend' of an Anglo-Saxon origin to the jury was first challenged seriously by Heinrich Brunner in 1872, who claimed that evidence of the jury was only seen for the first time during the reign of Henry II, some 200 years after the end of the Anglo-Saxon period, and that the practice had originated with the Franks, who in turn had influenced the Normans, who thence introduced it to England. Since Brunner's thesis, the origin of the English jury has been much disputed. Throughout the 20th century, legal historians disagreed about whether the practice was English in origin, or was introduced, directly or indirectly, from either Scandinavia or Francia. Recently, the legal historians Patrick Wormald and Michael Macnair have reasserted arguments in favour of finding in practices current during the Anglo-Saxon period traces of the Angevin practice of conducting inquests using bodies of sworn, private witnesses. Wormald has gone as far as to present evidence suggesting that the English practice outlined in \u00c6thelred's Wantage code is at least as old as, if not older than, 975, and ultimately traces it back to a Carolingian model (something Brunner had done). However, no scholarly consensus has yet been reached.\nAppearance and character.\n\u00c6thelred has been described as \"a youth of graceful manners, handsome countenance and fine person...\" as well as \"a tall, handsome man, elegant in manners, beautiful in countenance and interesting in his deportment.\"\nMarriages and issue.\n\u00c6thelred married first \u00c6lfgifu, daughter of Thored, earl of Northumbria, in about 985. Their known children are:\nIn 1002 \u00c6thelred married Emma of Normandy, sister of Richard II, Duke of Normandy. Their children were:\nAll of \u00c6thelred's sons were named after English kings.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10085", "revid": "19426539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10085", "title": "Edward Elgar", "text": "English composer (1857\u20131934)\nSir Edward William Elgar, 1st Baronet, (; 2 June 1857 \u2013 23 February 1934) was an English composer, many of whose works have entered the British and international classical concert repertoire. Among his best-known compositions are orchestral works including the \"Enigma Variations\", the \"Pomp and Circumstance Marches\", concertos for violin and cello, and two symphonies. He also composed choral works, including \"The Dream of Gerontius\", chamber music and songs. He was appointed Master of the King's Musick in 1924.\nAlthough Elgar is often regarded as a typically English composer, most of his musical influences were not from England but from continental Europe. He felt himself to be an outsider, not only musically, but socially. In musical circles dominated by academics, he was a self-taught composer; in Protestant Britain, his Roman Catholicism was regarded with suspicion in some quarters; and in the class-conscious society of Victorian and Edwardian Britain, he was acutely sensitive about his humble origins even after he achieved recognition. He nevertheless married the daughter of a senior British Army officer. She inspired him both musically and socially, but he struggled to achieve success until his forties, when after a series of moderately successful works his \"Enigma Variations\" (1899) became immediately popular in Britain and overseas. He followed the Variations with a choral work, \"The Dream of Gerontius\" (1900), based on a Roman Catholic text that caused some disquiet in the Anglican establishment in Britain, but it became, and has remained, a core repertory work in Britain and elsewhere. His later full-length religious choral works were well received but have not entered the regular repertory.\nIn his fifties, Elgar composed a symphony and a violin concerto that were immensely successful. His second symphony and his cello concerto did not gain immediate public popularity and took many years to achieve a regular place in the concert repertory of British orchestras. Elgar's music came, in his later years, to be seen as appealing chiefly to British audiences. His stock remained low for a generation after his death. It began to revive significantly in the 1960s, helped by new recordings of his works. Some of his works have, in recent years, been taken up again internationally, but the music continues to be played more in Britain than elsewhere.\nElgar has been described as the first composer to take the gramophone seriously. Between 1914 and 1925, he conducted a series of acoustic recordings of his works. The introduction of the moving-coil microphone in 1923 made far more accurate sound reproduction possible, and Elgar made new recordings of most of his major orchestral works and excerpts from \"The Dream of Gerontius\".\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nEdward Elgar was born in the small village of Lower Broadheath, outside Worcester, England, on 2 June 1857. His father, William Henry Elgar (1821\u20131906), was raised in Dover and had been apprenticed to a London music publisher. In 1841 William moved to Worcester, where he worked as a piano tuner and set up a shop selling sheet music and musical instruments. In 1848 he married Ann Greening (1822\u20131902), daughter of a farm worker. \nEdward was the fourth of their seven children. Ann Elgar had converted to Roman Catholicism shortly before Edward's birth, and he was baptised and brought up as a Roman Catholic, to the disapproval of his father. William Elgar was a violinist of professional standard and held the post of organist of St George's Roman Catholic Church, Worcester, from 1846 to 1885. At his instigation, masses by Cherubini and Hummel were first heard at the Three Choirs Festival by the orchestra in which he played the violin. \nAll the Elgar children received a musical upbringing. By the age of eight, Elgar was taking piano and violin lessons, and his father, who tuned the pianos at many grand houses in Worcestershire, would sometimes take him along, giving him the chance to display his skill to important local figures.\nElgar's mother was interested in the arts and encouraged his musical development. He inherited from her a discerning taste for literature and a passionate love of the countryside. His friend and biographer W. H. \"Billy\" Reed wrote that Elgar's early surroundings had an influence that \"permeated all his work and gave to his whole life that subtle but none the less true and sturdy English quality\". He began composing at an early age; for a play written and acted by the Elgar children when he was about ten, he wrote music that forty years later he rearranged with only minor changes and orchestrated as the suites titled \"The Wand of Youth\".\nUntil he was fifteen, Elgar received a general education at Littleton (now Lyttleton) House school, near Worcester. His only formal musical training beyond piano and violin lessons from local teachers consisted of more advanced violin studies with Adolf Pollitzer, during brief visits to London in 1877\u201378. Elgar said, \"my first music was learnt in the Cathedral\u00a0... from books borrowed from the music library, when I was eight, nine or ten.\" He worked through manuals of instruction on organ playing and read every book he could find on the theory of music. He later said that he had been most helped by Hubert Parry's articles in the \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\". \nElgar began to learn German, in the hope of going to the Leipzig Conservatory for further musical studies, but his father could not afford to send him. Years later, a profile in \"The Musical Times\" considered that his failure to get to Leipzig was fortunate for Elgar's musical development: \"Thus the budding composer escaped the dogmatism of the schools.\" However, it was a disappointment to Elgar that on leaving school in 1872 he went not to Leipzig but to the office of a local solicitor as a clerk. He did not find an office career congenial, and for fulfilment he turned not only to music but to literature, becoming a voracious reader. Around this time, he made his first public appearances as a violinist and organist.\nAfter a few months, Elgar left the solicitor to embark on a musical career, giving piano and violin lessons and working occasionally in his father's shop. He was an active member of the Worcester Glee club, along with his father, and he accompanied singers, played the violin, composed and arranged works, and conducted for the first time. Pollitzer believed that, as a violinist, Elgar had the potential to be one of the leading soloists in the country, but Elgar himself, having heard leading virtuosi at London concerts, felt his own violin playing lacked a full enough tone, and he abandoned his ambitions to be a soloist. At twenty-two he took up the post of conductor of the attendants' band at the Worcester and County Lunatic Asylum in Powick, from Worcester. The band consisted of: piccolo, flute, clarinet, two cornets, euphonium, three or four first and a similar number of second violins, occasional viola, cello, double bass and piano. Elgar coached the players and wrote and arranged their music, including quadrilles and polkas, for the unusual combination of instruments. \"The Musical Times\" wrote, \"This practical experience proved to be of the greatest value to the young musician.\u00a0... He acquired a practical knowledge of the capabilities of these different instruments.\u00a0... He thereby got to know intimately the tone colour, the ins and outs of these and many other instruments.\" He held the post for five years, from 1879, travelling to Powick once a week. Another post he held in his early days was professor of the violin at the Worcester College for the Blind Sons of Gentlemen.\nAlthough rather solitary and introspective by nature, Elgar thrived in Worcester's musical circles. He played in the violins at the Worcester and Birmingham Festivals, and one great experience was to play Dvo\u0159\u00e1k's Symphony No. 6 and \"Stabat Mater\" under the composer's baton. Elgar regularly played the bassoon in a wind quintet, alongside his brother Frank, an oboist (and conductor who ran his own wind band). Elgar arranged numerous pieces by Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, and others for the quintet, honing his arranging and compositional skills.\nIn his first trips abroad, Elgar visited Paris in 1880 and Leipzig in 1882. He heard Saint-Sa\u00ebns play the organ at the Madeleine and attended concerts by first-rate orchestras. In 1882 he wrote, \"I got pretty well dosed with Schumann (my ideal!), Brahms, Rubinstein &amp; Wagner, so had no cause to complain.\" In Leipzig he visited a friend, Helen Weaver, who was a student at the Conservatoire. They became engaged in the summer of 1883, but for unknown reasons the engagement was broken off the next year. Elgar was greatly distressed, and some of his later cryptic dedications of romantic music may have alluded to Helen and his feelings for her. Throughout his life, Elgar was often inspired by close women friends; Helen Weaver was succeeded by Mary Lygon, Dora Penny, Julia Worthington, Alice Stuart Wortley and finally Vera Hockman, who enlivened his old age.\nIn 1882, seeking more professional orchestral experience, Elgar was employed as a violinist in Birmingham in William Stockley's Orchestra, for whom he played every concert for the next seven years and where he later said he \"learned all the music I know\". On 13 December 1883 he took part with Stockley in a performance at Birmingham Town Hall of one of his first works for full orchestra, the \"S\u00e9r\u00e9nade mauresque\" \u2013 the first time one of his compositions had been performed by a professional orchestra. Stockley had invited him to conduct the piece but later recalled \"he declined, and, further, insisted upon playing in his place in the orchestra. The consequence was that he had to appear, fiddle in hand, to acknowledge the genuine and hearty applause of the audience.\" Elgar often went to London in an attempt to get his works published, but this period in his life found him frequently despondent and low on money. He wrote to a friend in April 1884, \"My prospects are about as hopeless as ever\u00a0... I am not wanting in energy I think, so sometimes I conclude that 'tis want of ability.\u00a0... I have no money\u00a0\u2013 not a cent.\"\nMarriage.\nWhen Elgar was 29, he took on a new pupil, Caroline Alice Roberts, known as Alice, daughter of the late Major-General Sir Henry Roberts, and published author of verse and prose fiction. Eight years older than Elgar, Alice became his wife three years later. Elgar's biographer Michael Kennedy writes, \"Alice's family was horrified by her intention to marry an unknown musician who worked in a shop and was a Roman Catholic. She was disinherited.\" They were married on 8 May 1889, at Brompton Oratory. From then until her death, she acted as his business manager and social secretary, dealt with his mood swings, and was a perceptive musical critic. She did her best to gain him the attention of influential society, though with limited success. In time, he would learn to accept the honours given him, realising that they mattered more to her and her social class and recognising what she had given up to further his career. In her diary, she wrote, \"The care of a genius is enough of a life work for any woman.\" As an engagement present, Elgar dedicated his short violin-and-piano piece \"Salut d'Amour\" to her. With Alice's encouragement, the Elgars moved to London to be closer to the centre of British musical life, and Elgar started devoting his time to composition. Their only child, Carice Irene, was born at their home in West Kensington on 14 August 1890. Her name, revealed in Elgar's dedication of \"Salut d'Amour\", was a contraction of her mother's names Caroline and Alice.\nElgar took full advantage of the opportunity to hear unfamiliar music. In the days before miniature scores and recordings were available, it was not easy for young composers to get to know new music. Elgar took every chance to do so at the Crystal Palace Concerts. He and Alice attended day after day, hearing music by a wide range of composers. Among these were masters of orchestration from whom he learned much, such as Berlioz and Richard Wagner. His own compositions made little impact on London's musical scene. August Manns conducted Elgar's orchestral version of \"Salut d'amour\" and the Suite in D at the Crystal Palace, and two publishers accepted some of Elgar's violin pieces, organ voluntaries, and part songs. Some tantalising opportunities seemed to be within reach but vanished unexpectedly. For example, an offer from the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, to run through some of his works was withdrawn at the last second when Sir Arthur Sullivan arrived unannounced to rehearse some of his own music. Sullivan was horrified when Elgar later told him what had happened. Elgar's only important commission while in London came from his home city: the Worcester Festival Committee invited him to compose a short orchestral work for the 1890 Three Choirs Festival. The result is described by Diana McVeagh in the \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\", as \"his first major work, the assured and uninhibited \"Froissart\".\" Elgar conducted the first performance in Worcester in September 1890. For lack of other work, he was obliged to leave London in 1891 and return with his wife and child to Worcestershire, where he could earn a living conducting local musical ensembles and teaching. They settled in Alice's former home town, Great Malvern.\nGrowing reputation.\nDuring the 1890s, Elgar gradually built up a reputation as a composer, chiefly of works for the great choral festivals of the English Midlands. \"The Black Knight\" (1892) and \"King Olaf\" (1896), both inspired by Longfellow, \"The Light of Life\" (1896) and \"Caractacus\" (1898) were all modestly successful, and he obtained a long-standing publisher in Novello and Co. Other works of this decade included the \"Serenade for Strings\" (1892) and \"Three Bavarian Dances\" (1897). Elgar was of enough consequence locally to recommend the young composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor to the Three Choirs Festival for a concert piece, which helped establish the younger man's career. Elgar was catching the attention of prominent critics, but their reviews were polite rather than enthusiastic. Although he was in demand as a festival composer, he was only just getting by financially and felt unappreciated. In 1898, he said he was \"very sick at heart over music\" and hoped to find a way to succeed with a larger work. His friend August Jaeger tried to lift his spirits: \"A day's attack of the blues\u00a0... will not drive away your desire, your necessity, which is to exercise those creative faculties which a kind providence has given you. Your time of universal recognition will come.\"\nIn 1899, that prediction suddenly came true. At the age of forty-two, Elgar produced the \"Enigma Variations\", which were premiered in London under the baton of the eminent German conductor Hans Richter. In Elgar's own words, \"I have sketched a set of Variations on an original theme. The Variations have amused me because I've labelled them with the nicknames of my particular friends\u00a0... that is to say I've written the variations each one to represent the mood of the 'party' (the person)\u00a0... and have written what I think they would have written \u2013 if they were asses enough to compose\". He dedicated the work \"To my friends pictured within\". Probably the best known variation is \"Nimrod\", depicting Jaeger. Purely musical considerations led Elgar to omit variations depicting Arthur Sullivan and Hubert Parry, whose styles he tried but failed to incorporate in the variations. The large-scale work was received with general acclaim for its originality, charm and craftsmanship, and it established Elgar as the pre-eminent British composer of his generation.\nThe work is formally titled \"Variations on an Original Theme\"; the word \"Enigma\" appears over the first six bars of music, which led to the familiar version of the title. The enigma is that, although there are fourteen variations on the \"original theme\", there is another overarching theme, never identified by Elgar, which he said \"runs through and over the whole set\" but is never heard. Later commentators have observed that although Elgar is today regarded as a characteristically English composer, his orchestral music and this work in particular share much with the Central European tradition typified at the time by the work of Richard Strauss. The \"Enigma Variations\" were well received in Germany and Italy, and remain to the present day a worldwide concert staple.\nNational and international fame.\nElgar's biographer Basil Maine commented, \"When Sir Arthur Sullivan died in 1900 it became apparent to many that Elgar, although a composer of another build, was his true successor as first musician of the land.\" Elgar's next major work was eagerly awaited. For the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival of 1900, he set Cardinal John Henry Newman's poem \"The Dream of Gerontius\" for soloists, chorus and orchestra. Richter conducted the premiere, which was marred by a poorly prepared chorus, which sang badly. Critics recognised the mastery of the piece despite the defects in performance. It was performed in D\u00fcsseldorf, Germany, in 1901 and again in 1902, conducted by Julius Buths, who also conducted the European premiere of the \"Enigma Variations\" in 1901. The German press was enthusiastic. \"The Cologne Gazette\" said, \"In both parts we meet with beauties of imperishable value.\u00a0... Elgar stands on the shoulders of Berlioz, Wagner, and Liszt, from whose influences he has freed himself until he has become an important individuality. He is one of the leaders of musical art of modern times.\" \"The D\u00fcsseldorfer Volksblatt\" wrote, \"A memorable and epoch-making first performance! Since the days of Liszt nothing has been produced in the way of oratorio\u00a0... which reaches the greatness and importance of this sacred cantata.\" Richard Strauss, then widely viewed as the leading composer of his day, was so impressed that in Elgar's presence he proposed a toast to the success of \"the first English progressive musician, Meister Elgar.\" Performances in Vienna, Paris and New York followed, and \"The Dream of Gerontius\" soon became equally admired in Britain. According to Kennedy, \"It is unquestionably the greatest British work in the oratorio form\u00a0... [it] opened a new chapter in the English choral tradition and liberated it from its Handelian preoccupation.\" Elgar, as a Roman Catholic, was much moved by Newman's poem about the death and redemption of a sinner, but some influential members of the Anglican establishment disagreed. His colleague, Charles Villiers Stanford complained that the work \"stinks of incense\". The Dean of Gloucester banned \"Gerontius\" from his cathedral in 1901, and at Worcester the following year, the Dean insisted on expurgations before allowing a performance.\nElgar is probably best known for the first of the five \"Pomp and Circumstance Marches\", which were composed between 1901 and 1930. It is familiar to millions of television viewers all over the world every year who watch the Last Night of the Proms, where it is traditionally performed. When the theme of the slower middle section (technically called the \"trio\") of the first march came into his head, he told his friend Dora Penny, \"I've got a tune that will knock 'em\u00a0\u2013 will knock 'em flat\". When the first march was played in 1901 at a London Promenade Concert, it was conducted by Henry Wood, who later wrote that the audience \"rose and yelled\u00a0... the one and only time in the history of the Promenade concerts that an orchestral item was accorded a double encore.\" To mark the coronation of Edward VII, Elgar was commissioned to set A. C. Benson's \"Coronation Ode\" for a gala concert at the Royal Opera House on 30 June 1902. The approval of the king was confirmed, and Elgar began work. The contralto Clara Butt had persuaded him that the trio of the first \"Pomp and Circumstance\" march could have words fitted to it, and Elgar invited Benson to do so. Elgar incorporated the new vocal version into the Ode. The publishers of the score recognised the potential of the vocal piece, \"Land of Hope and Glory\", and asked Benson and Elgar to make a further revision for publication as a separate song. It was immensely popular and is now considered an unofficial British national anthem. In the United States, the trio, known simply as \"Pomp and Circumstance\" or \"The Graduation March\", has been adopted since 1905 for virtually all high school and university graduations.\nIn March 1904 a three-day festival of Elgar's works was presented at Covent Garden, an honour never before given to any English composer. \"The Times\" commented, \"Four or five years ago if any one had predicted that the Opera-house would be full from floor to ceiling for the performance of an oratorio by an English composer he would probably have been supposed to be out of his mind.\" The king and queen attended the first concert, at which Richter conducted \"The Dream of Gerontius\", and returned the next evening for the second, the London premiere of \"The Apostles\" (first heard the previous year at the Birmingham Festival). The final concert of the festival, conducted by Elgar, was primarily orchestral, apart for an excerpt from \"Caractacus\" and the complete \"Sea Pictures\" (sung by Clara Butt). The orchestral items were \"Froissart\", the \"Enigma Variations\", \"Cockaigne\", the first two (at that time the only two) \"Pomp and Circumstance\" marches, and the premiere of a new orchestral work, \"In the South\", inspired by a holiday in Italy.\nElgar was knighted at Buckingham Palace on 5 July 1904. The following month, he and his family moved to Pl\u00e2s Gwyn, a large house on the outskirts of Hereford, overlooking the River Wye, where they lived until 1911. Between 1902 and 1914, Elgar was, in Kennedy's words, at the zenith of popularity. He made four visits to the US, including one conducting tour, and earned considerable fees from the performance of his music. Between 1905 and 1908, he held the post of Peyton Professor of Music at the University of Birmingham. He had accepted the post reluctantly, feeling that a composer should not head a school of music. He was not at ease in the role, and his lectures caused controversy, with his attacks on the critics and on English music in general: \"Vulgarity in the course of time may be refined. Vulgarity often goes with inventiveness\u00a0... but the commonplace mind can never be anything but commonplace. An Englishman will take you into a large room, beautifully proportioned, and will point out to you that it is white \u2013 all over white \u2013 and somebody will say, 'What exquisite taste'. You know in your own mind, in your own soul, that it is not taste at all, that it is the want of taste, that is mere evasion. English music is white, and evades everything.\" He regretted the controversy and was glad to hand on the post to his friend Granville Bantock in 1908. His new life as a celebrity was a mixed blessing to the highly strung Elgar, as it interrupted his privacy, and he often was in ill-health. He complained to Jaeger in 1903, \"My life is one continual giving up of little things which I love.\" Both W. S. Gilbert and Thomas Hardy sought to collaborate with Elgar in this decade. Elgar refused, but would have collaborated with Bernard Shaw had Shaw been willing.\nElgar paid three visits to the USA between 1905 and 1911. His first was to conduct his music and to accept a doctorate from Yale University. His principal composition in 1905 was the \"Introduction and Allegro for Strings\", dedicated to Samuel Sanford. It was well received but did not catch the public imagination as \"The Dream of Gerontius\" had done and continued to do. Among keen Elgarians, however, \"The Kingdom\" was sometimes preferred to the earlier work: Elgar's friend Frank Schuster told the young Adrian Boult: \"compared with \"The Kingdom\", \"Gerontius\" is the work of a raw amateur.\" \nAs Elgar approached his fiftieth birthday, he began work on his first symphony, a project that had been in his mind in various forms for nearly ten years. His First Symphony (1908) was a national and international triumph. Within weeks of the premiere it was performed in New York under Walter Damrosch, Vienna under Ferdinand L\u00f6we, St Petersburg under Alexander Siloti, and Leipzig under Arthur Nikisch. There were performances in Rome, Chicago, Boston, Toronto and fifteen British towns and cities. In just over a year, it received a hundred performances in Britain, America and continental Europe.\nThe Violin Concerto (1910) was commissioned by Fritz Kreisler, one of the leading international violinists of the time. Elgar wrote it during the summer of 1910, with occasional help from W. H. Reed, the leader of the London Symphony Orchestra (LSO), who helped the composer with advice on technical points. Elgar and Reed formed a firm friendship, which lasted for the rest of Elgar's life. Reed's biography, \"Elgar As I Knew Him\" (1936), records many details of Elgar's methods of composition. The work was presented by the Royal Philharmonic Society, with Kreisler and the LSO, conducted by the composer. Reed recalled, \"the Concerto proved to be a complete triumph, the concert a brilliant and unforgettable occasion.\" So great was the impact of the concerto that Kreisler's rival Eug\u00e8ne Ysa\u00ffe spent much time with Elgar going through the work. There was great disappointment when contractual difficulties prevented Ysa\u00ffe from playing it in London.\nThe Violin Concerto was Elgar's last popular triumph. The following year he presented his Second Symphony in London, but was disappointed at its reception. Unlike the First Symphony, it ends not in a blaze of orchestral splendour but quietly and contemplatively. Reed, who played at the premiere, later wrote that Elgar was recalled to the platform several times to acknowledge the applause, \"but missed that unmistakable note perceived when an audience, even an English audience, is thoroughly roused or worked up, as it was after the Violin Concerto or the First Symphony.\" Elgar asked Reed, \"What is the matter with them, Billy? They sit there like a lot of stuffed pigs.\" The work was, by normal standards, a success, with twenty-seven performances within three years of its premiere, but it did not achieve the international \"furore\" of the First Symphony.\nLast major works.\nIn June 1911, as part of the celebrations surrounding the coronation of King George V, Elgar was appointed to the Order of Merit, an honour limited to twenty-four holders at any time. The following year, the Elgars moved back to London, to a large house in Netherhall Gardens, Hampstead, designed by Norman Shaw. There Elgar composed his last two large-scale works of the pre-war era, the choral ode, \"The Music Makers\" (for the Birmingham Festival, 1912) and the symphonic study \"Falstaff\" (for the Leeds Festival, 1913). Both were received politely but without enthusiasm. Even the dedicatee of \"Falstaff\", the conductor Landon Ronald, confessed privately that he could not \"make head or tail of the piece,\" while the musical scholar Percy Scholes wrote of \"Falstaff\" that it was a \"great work\" but, \"so far as public appreciation goes, a comparative failure.\"\nWhen World War I broke out, Elgar was horrified at the prospect of the carnage, but his patriotic feelings were nonetheless aroused. He composed \"A Song for Soldiers\", which he later withdrew. He signed up as a special constable in the local police and later joined the Hampstead Volunteer Reserve of the army. He composed patriotic works, \"Carillon\", a recitation for speaker and orchestra in honour of Belgium, and \"Polonia\", an orchestral piece in honour of Poland. \"Land of Hope and Glory\", already popular, became still more so, and Elgar wished in vain to have new, less nationalistic, words sung to the tune.\nElgar's other compositions during the war included incidental music for a children's play, \"The Starlight Express\" (1915); a ballet, \"The Sanguine Fan\" (1917); and \"The Spirit of England\" (1915\u201317, to poems by Laurence Binyon), three choral settings very different in character from the romantic patriotism of his earlier years. His last large-scale composition of the war years was \"The Fringes of the Fleet\", settings of verses by Rudyard Kipling, performed with great popular success around the country, until Kipling for unexplained reasons objected to their performance in theatres. Elgar conducted a recording of the work for the Gramophone Company.\nTowards the end of the war, Elgar was in poor health. His wife thought it best for him to move to the countryside, and she rented \"Brinkwells\", a house near Fittleworth in Sussex, from the painter Rex Vicat Cole. There Elgar recovered his strength and, in 1918 and 1919, he produced four large-scale works. The first three of these were chamber pieces: the Violin Sonata in E\u00a0minor, the Piano Quintet in A minor, and the String Quartet in E minor. On hearing the work in progress, Alice Elgar wrote in her diary, \"E. writing wonderful new music\". All three works were well received. \"The Times\" wrote, \"Elgar's sonata contains much that we have heard before in other forms, but as we do not at all want him to change and be somebody else, that is as it should be.\" The quartet and quintet were premiered at the Wigmore Hall on 21 May 1919. \"The Manchester Guardian\" wrote, \"This quartet, with its tremendous climaxes, curious refinements of dance-rhythms, and its perfect symmetry, and the quintet, more lyrical and passionate, are as perfect examples of chamber music as the great oratorios were of their type.\"\nBy contrast, the remaining work, the Cello Concerto in E minor, had a disastrous premiere, at the opening concert of the LSO's 1919\u201320 season in October 1919. Apart from the Elgar work, which the composer conducted, the rest of the programme was conducted by Albert Coates, who overran his rehearsal time at the expense of Elgar's. Lady Elgar wrote, \"that brutal selfish ill-mannered bounder\u00a0... that brute Coates went on rehearsing.\" The critic of \"The Observer\", Ernest Newman, wrote, \"There have been rumours about during the week of inadequate rehearsal. Whatever the explanation, the sad fact remains that never, in all probability, has so great an orchestra made so lamentable an exhibition of itself.\u00a0... The work itself is lovely stuff, very simple \u2013 that pregnant simplicity that has come upon Elgar's music in the last couple of years \u2013 but with a profound wisdom and beauty underlying its simplicity.\" Elgar attached no blame to his soloist, Felix Salmond, who played the work for him again later. In contrast with the First Symphony and its hundred performances in just over a year, the Cello Concerto did not have a second performance in London for more than a year.\nLast years.\nAlthough in the 1920s Elgar's music was no longer in fashion, his admirers continued to present his works when possible. Reed singles out a performance of the Second Symphony in March 1920 conducted by \"a young man almost unknown to the public\", Adrian Boult, for bringing \"the grandeur and nobility of the work\" to a wider public. Also in 1920, Landon Ronald presented an all-Elgar concert at the Queen's Hall. Alice Elgar wrote with enthusiasm about the reception of the symphony, but this was one of the last times she heard Elgar's music played in public. After a short illness, she died of lung cancer on 7 April 1920, at the age of seventy-two.\nElgar was devastated by the loss of his wife. With no public demand for new works, and deprived of Alice's constant support and inspiration, he allowed himself to be deflected from composition. His daughter later wrote that Elgar inherited from his father a reluctance to \"settle down to work on hand but could cheerfully spend hours over some perfectly unnecessary and entirely unremunerative undertaking\", a trait that became stronger after Alice's death. For much of the rest of his life, Elgar indulged himself in his several hobbies. Throughout his life he was a keen amateur chemist, sometimes using a laboratory in his back garden. He even patented the \"Elgar Sulphuretted Hydrogen Apparatus\" in 1908. He enjoyed football, supporting Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C., for whom he composed an anthem, \"He Banged the Leather for Goal\", and in his later years he frequently attended horseraces. His prot\u00e9g\u00e9s, the conductor Malcolm Sargent and violinist Yehudi Menuhin, both recalled rehearsals with Elgar at which he swiftly satisfied himself that all was well and then went off to the races. In his younger days, Elgar had been an enthusiastic cyclist, buying Royal Sunbeam bicycles for himself and his wife in 1903 (he named his \"Mr. Phoebus\"). As an elderly widower, he enjoyed being driven about the countryside by his chauffeur. In November and December 1923, he took a voyage to Brazil, journeying up the Amazon to Manaus, where he was impressed by its opera house, the Teatro Amazonas. Almost nothing is recorded about Elgar's activities or the events that he encountered during the trip, which gave the novelist James Hamilton-Paterson considerable latitude when writing \"Gerontius\", a fictional account of the journey.\nAfter Alice's death, Elgar sold the Hampstead house, and after living for a short time in a flat in St James's in the heart of London, he moved back to Worcestershire, to the village of Kempsey, where he lived from 1923 to 1927. He did not wholly abandon composition in these years. He made large-scale symphonic arrangements of works by Bach and Handel and wrote his \"Empire March\" and eight songs \"Pageant of Empire\" for the 1924 British Empire Exhibition. Shortly after these were published, he was appointed Master of the King's Musick on 13 May 1924, following the death of Sir Walter Parratt.\nFrom 1926 onwards, Elgar made a series of recordings of his own works. Described by the music writer Robert Philip as \"the first composer to take the gramophone seriously\", he had already recorded much of his music by the early acoustic-recording process for His Master's Voice (HMV) from 1914 onwards, but the introduction of electrical microphones in 1925 transformed the gramophone from a novelty into a realistic medium for reproducing orchestral and choral music. Elgar was the first composer to take full advantage of this technological advance. Fred Gaisberg of HMV, who produced Elgar's recordings, set up a series of sessions to capture on disc the composer's interpretations of his major orchestral works, including the \"Enigma Variations\", \"Falstaff\", the first and second symphonies, and the cello and violin concertos. For most of these, the orchestra was the LSO, but the \"Variations\" were played by the Royal Albert Hall Orchestra. Later in the series of recordings, Elgar also conducted two newly founded orchestras, Boult's BBC Symphony Orchestra and Sir Thomas Beecham's London Philharmonic Orchestra.\nElgar's recordings were released on 78-rpm discs by both HMV and RCA Victor. After World War II, the 1932 recording of the Violin Concerto with the teenage Menuhin as soloist remained available on 78 and later on LP, but the other recordings were out of the catalogues for some years. When they were reissued by EMI on LP in the 1970s, they caused surprise to many by their fast tempi, in contrast to the slower speeds adopted by many conductors in the years since Elgar's death. The recordings were reissued on CD in the 1990s.\nIn November 1931, Elgar was filmed by Path\u00e9 for a newsreel depicting a recording session of \"Pomp and Circumstance March No. 1\" at the opening of EMI's Abbey Road Studios in London. It is believed to be the only surviving sound film of Elgar, who makes a brief remark before conducting the LSO, asking the musicians to \"play this tune as though you've never heard it before.\" A memorial plaque to Elgar at Abbey Road was unveiled on 24 June 1993.\nA late piece of Elgar's, the \"Nursery Suite\", was an early example of a studio premiere: its first performance was in the Abbey Road studios. For this work, dedicated to the wife and daughters of the Duke of York, Elgar once again drew on his youthful sketch-books.\nIn his final years, Elgar experienced a musical revival. The BBC organised a festival of his works to celebrate his seventy-fifth birthday, in 1932. He flew to Paris in 1933 to conduct the Violin Concerto for Menuhin. While in France, he visited his fellow composer Frederick Delius at his house at Grez-sur-Loing. He was sought out by younger musicians such as Adrian Boult, Malcolm Sargent and John Barbirolli, who championed his music when it was out of fashion. He began work on an opera, \"The Spanish Lady\", and accepted a commission from the BBC to compose a Third Symphony. His final illness prevented their completion. He fretted about the unfinished works. He asked Reed to ensure that nobody would \"tinker\" with the sketches and attempt a completion of the symphony, but at other times he said, \"If I can't complete the Third Symphony, somebody will complete it \u2013 or write a better one.\" After Elgar's death, Percy M. Young, in co-operation with the BBC and Elgar's daughter Carice, produced a version of \"The Spanish Lady\", which was issued on CD. The Third Symphony sketches were elaborated by the composer Anthony Payne into a complete score in 1997.\nInoperable colorectal cancer was discovered during an operation on 8 October 1933. He told his consulting doctor, Arthur Thomson, that he had no faith in an afterlife: \"I believe there is nothing but complete oblivion.\" Elgar died on 23 February 1934 at the age of seventy-six and was buried next to his wife at St Wulstan's Roman Catholic Church in Little Malvern. \nMusic.\nInfluences, antecedents and early works.\nElgar was contemptuous of folk music and had little interest in or respect for the early English composers, calling William Byrd and his contemporaries \"museum pieces\". Of later English composers, he regarded Purcell as the greatest, and he said that he had learned much of his own technique from studying Hubert Parry's writings. The continental composers who most influenced Elgar were Handel, Dvo\u0159\u00e1k and, to some degree, Brahms. In Elgar's chromaticism, the influence of Wagner is apparent, but Elgar's individual style of orchestration owes much to the clarity of nineteenth-century French composers, Berlioz, Massenet, Saint-Sa\u00ebns and, particularly, Delibes, whose music Elgar played and conducted at Worcester and greatly admired.\nElgar began composing when still a child, and all his life he drew on his early sketchbooks for themes and inspiration. The habit of assembling his compositions, even large-scale ones, from scraps of themes jotted down randomly remained throughout his life. His early adult works included violin and piano pieces, music for the wind quintet in which he and his brother played between 1878 and 1881, and music of many types for the Powick Asylum band. Diana McVeagh in \"Grove's Dictionary\" finds many embryonic Elgarian touches in these pieces, but few of them are regularly played, except \"Salut d'Amour\" and (as arranged decades later into \"The Wand of Youth\" Suites) some of the childhood sketches. Elgar's sole work of note during his first spell in London in 1889\u201391, the overture \"Froissart\", was a romantic-bravura piece, influenced by Mendelssohn and Wagner, but also showing further Elgarian characteristics. Orchestral works composed during the subsequent years in Worcestershire include the \"Serenade for Strings\" and \"Three Bavarian Dances\". In this period and later, Elgar wrote songs and part songs. W. H. Reed expressed reservations about these pieces, but praised the part song \"The Snow\", for female voices, and \"Sea Pictures\", a cycle of five songs for contralto and orchestra which remains in the repertory.\nElgar's principal large-scale early works were for chorus and orchestra for the Three Choirs and other festivals. These were \"The Black Knight\", \"King Olaf\", \"The Light of Life\", \"The Banner of St George\" and \"Caractacus\". He also wrote a \"Te Deum\" and \"Benedictus\" for the Hereford Festival. Of these, McVeagh comments favourably on his lavish orchestration and innovative use of leitmotifs, but less favourably on the qualities of his chosen texts and the patchiness of his inspiration. McVeagh makes the point that, because these works of the 1890s were for many years little known (and performances remain rare), the mastery of his first great success, the \"Enigma Variations\", appeared to be a sudden transformation from mediocrity to genius, but in fact his orchestral skills had been building up throughout the decade.\nPeak creative years.\nElgar's best-known works were composed within the twenty-one years between 1899 and 1920. Most of them are orchestral. Reed wrote, \"Elgar's genius rose to its greatest height in his orchestral works\" and quoted the composer as saying that, even in his oratorios, the orchestral part is the most important. The \"Enigma Variations\" made Elgar's name nationally. The variation form was ideal for him at this stage of his career, when his comprehensive mastery of orchestration was still in contrast to his tendency to write his melodies in short, sometimes rigid, phrases. His next orchestral works, \"Cockaigne\", a concert-overture (1900\u20131901), the first two \"Pomp and Circumstance\" marches (1901), and the gentle \"Dream Children\" (1902), are all short: the longest of them, \"Cockaigne\", lasting less than fifteen minutes. \"In the South\" (1903\u20131904), although designated by Elgar as a concert-overture, is, according to Kennedy, really a tone poem and the longest continuous piece of purely orchestral writing Elgar had essayed. He wrote it after setting aside an early attempt to compose a symphony. The work reveals his continuing progress in writing sustained themes and orchestral lines, although some critics, including Kennedy, find that in the middle part \"Elgar's inspiration burns at less than its brightest.\" In 1905 Elgar completed the \"Introduction and Allegro for Strings\". This work is based, unlike much of Elgar's earlier writing, not on a profusion of themes but on only three. Kennedy called it a \"masterly composition, equalled among English works for strings only by Vaughan Williams's \"Tallis Fantasia\".\"\nDuring the next four years Elgar composed three major concert pieces, which, though shorter than comparable works by some of his European contemporaries, are among the most substantial such works by an English composer. These were his First Symphony, Violin Concerto, and Second Symphony, which all play for between forty-five minutes and an hour. McVeagh says of the symphonies that they \"rank high not only in Elgar's output but in English musical history. Both are long and powerful, without published programmes, only hints and quotations to indicate some inward drama from which they derive their vitality and eloquence. Both are based on classical form but differ from it to the extent that\u00a0... they were considered prolix and slackly constructed by some critics. Certainly the invention in them is copious; each symphony would need several dozen music examples to chart its progress.\"\nElgar's Violin Concerto and Cello Concerto, in the view of Kennedy, \"rank not only among his finest works, but among the greatest of their kind\". They are, however, very different from each other. The Violin Concerto, composed in 1909 as Elgar reached the height of his popularity, and written for the instrument dearest to his heart, is lyrical throughout and rhapsodical and brilliant by turns. The Cello Concerto, composed a decade later, immediately after World War I, seems, in Kennedy's words, \"to belong to another age, another world\u00a0... the simplest of all Elgar's major works\u00a0... also the least grandiloquent.\" Between the two concertos came Elgar's symphonic study \"Falstaff\", which has divided opinion even among Elgar's strongest admirers. Donald Tovey viewed it as \"one of the immeasurably great things in music\", with power \"identical with Shakespeare's\", while Kennedy criticises the work for \"too frequent reliance on sequences\" and an over-idealised depiction of the female characters. Reed thought that the principal themes show less distinction than some of Elgar's earlier works. Elgar himself thought \"Falstaff\" the highest point of his purely orchestral work.\nThe major works for voices and orchestra of the twenty-one years of Elgar's middle period are three large-scale works for soloists, chorus and orchestra: \"The Dream of Gerontius\" (1900), and the oratorios \"The Apostles\" (1903) and \"The Kingdom\" (1906); and two shorter odes, the \"Coronation Ode\" (1902) and \"The Music Makers\" (1912). The first of the odes, as a \"pi\u00e8ce d'occasion\", has rarely been revived after its initial success, with the culminating \"Land of Hope and Glory\". The second is, for Elgar, unusual in that it contains several quotations from his earlier works, as Richard Strauss quoted himself in \"Ein Heldenleben\". The choral works were all successful, although the first, \"Gerontius\", was and remains the best-loved and most performed. On the manuscript Elgar wrote, quoting John Ruskin, \"This is the best of me; for the rest, I ate, and drank, and slept, loved and hated, like another. My life was as the vapour, and is not; but this I saw, and knew; this, if anything of mine, is worth your memory.\" All three of the large-scale works follow the traditional model with sections for soloists, chorus and both together. Elgar's distinctive orchestration, as well as his melodic inspiration, lifts them to a higher level than most of their British predecessors.\nElgar's other works of his middle period include incidental music for \"Grania and Diarmid\", a play by George Moore and W. B. Yeats (1901), and for \"The Starlight Express\", a play based on a story by Algernon Blackwood (1916). Of the former, Yeats called Elgar's music \"wonderful in its heroic melancholy\". Elgar also wrote a number of songs during his peak period, of which Reed observes, \"it cannot be said that he enriched the vocal repertory to the same extent as he did that of the orchestra.\"\nFinal years and posthumous completions.\nAfter the Cello Concerto, Elgar completed no more large-scale works. He made arrangements of works by Bach, Handel and Chopin, in distinctively Elgarian orchestration, and once again turned his youthful notebooks to use for the \"Nursery Suite\" (1931). His other compositions of this period have not held a place in the regular repertory. For most of the rest of the twentieth century, it was generally agreed that Elgar's creative impulse ceased after his wife's death. Anthony Payne's elaboration of the sketches for Elgar's Third Symphony into a complete score led to a reconsideration of this supposition. Elgar left the opening of the symphony complete in full score, and those pages, along with others, show Elgar's orchestration changed markedly from the richness of his pre-war work. \"The Gramophone\" described the opening of the new work as something \"thrilling\u00a0... unforgettably gaunt\". Its first public performance was given by the BBC Symphony Orchestra under Andrew Davis in London on 15 February 1998. Payne also subsequently produced a performing version of the sketches for a sixth \"Pomp and Circumstance March\", premiered at the Proms in August 2006. Elgar's sketches for a piano concerto dating from 1913 were elaborated by the composer Robert Walker and first performed in August 1997 by the pianist David Owen Norris. The realisation has since been extensively revised.\nReputation.\nViews of Elgar's stature have varied in the decades since his music came to prominence at the beginning of the twentieth century. Richard Strauss, as noted, hailed Elgar as a progressive composer; even the hostile reviewer in \"The Observer\", unimpressed by the thematic material of the First Symphony in 1908, called the orchestration \"magnificently modern\". Hans Richter rated Elgar as \"the greatest modern composer\" in any country, and Richter's colleague Arthur Nikisch considered the First Symphony \"a masterpiece of the first order\" to be \"justly ranked with the great symphonic models \u2013 Beethoven and Brahms.\" By contrast, the critic W. J. Turner, in the mid-twentieth century, wrote of Elgar's \"Salvation Army symphonies,\" and Herbert von Karajan called the \"Enigma Variations\" \"second-hand Brahms\". Elgar's immense popularity was not long-lived. After the success of his First Symphony and Violin Concerto, his Second Symphony and Cello Concerto were politely received but without the earlier wild enthusiasm. His music was identified in the public mind with the Edwardian era, and after the First World War he no longer seemed a progressive or modern composer. In the early 1920s, even the First Symphony had only one London performance in more than three years. Wood and younger conductors such as Boult, Sargent and Barbirolli championed Elgar's music, but in the recording catalogues and the concert programmes of the middle of the century his works were not well represented.\nIn 1924, the music scholar Edward J. Dent wrote an article for a German music journal in which he identified four features of Elgar's style that gave offence to a section of English opinion (namely, Dent indicated, the academic and snobbish section): \"too emotional\", \"not quite free from vulgarity\", \"pompous\", and \"too deliberately noble in expression\". This article was reprinted in 1930 and caused controversy. In the later years of the century there was, in Britain at least, a revival of interest in Elgar's music. The features that had offended austere taste in the inter-war years were seen from a different perspective. In 1955, the reference book \"The Record Guide\" wrote of the Edwardian background during the height of Elgar's career:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Boastful self-confidence, emotional vulgarity, material extravagance, a ruthless philistinism expressed in tasteless architecture and every kind of expensive yet hideous accessory: such features of a late phase of Imperial England are faithfully reflected in Elgar's larger works and are apt to prove indigestible today. But if it is difficult to overlook the bombastic, the sentimental, and the trivial elements in his music, the effort to do so should nevertheless be made, for the sake of the many inspired pages, the power and eloquence and lofty pathos, of Elgar's best work.\u00a0... Anyone who doubts the fact of Elgar's genius should take the first opportunity of hearing \"The Dream of Gerontius\", which remains his masterpiece, as it is his largest and perhaps most deeply felt work; the symphonic study, \"Falstaff\"; the Introduction and Allegro for Strings; the \"Enigma Variations\"; and the Violoncello Concerto.\nBy the 1960s, a less severe view was being taken of the Edwardian era. In 1966 the critic Frank Howes wrote that Elgar reflected the last blaze of opulence, expansiveness and full-blooded life, before World War I swept so much away. In Howes's view, there was a touch of vulgarity in both the era and Elgar's music, but \"a composer is entitled to be judged by posterity for his best work.\u00a0... Elgar is historically important for giving to English music a sense of the orchestra, for expressing what it felt like to be alive in the Edwardian age, for conferring on the world at least four unqualified masterpieces, and for thereby restoring England to the comity of musical nations.\"\nIn 1967 the critic and analyst David Cox considered the question of the supposed Englishness of Elgar's music. Cox noted that Elgar disliked folk-songs and never used them in his works, opting for an idiom that was essentially German, leavened by a lightness derived from French composers including Berlioz and Gounod. How then, asked Cox, could Elgar be \"the most English of composers\"? Cox found the answer in Elgar's own personality, which \"could use the alien idioms in such a way as to make of them a vital form of expression that was his and his alone. And the personality that comes through in the music is English.\" This point about Elgar's transmuting his influences had been touched on before. In 1930 \"The Times\" wrote, \"When Elgar's first symphony came out, someone attempted to prove that its main tune on which all depends was like the Grail theme in Parsifal.\u00a0... but the attempt fell flat because everyone else, including those who disliked the tune, had instantly recognized it as typically 'Elgarian', while the Grail theme is as typically Wagnerian.\" As for Elgar's \"Englishness\", his fellow-composers recognised it: Richard Strauss and Stravinsky made particular reference to it, and Sibelius called him \"the personification of the true English character in music\u00a0... a noble personality and a born aristocrat\".\nAmong Elgar's admirers there is disagreement about which of his works are to be regarded as masterpieces. The \"Enigma Variations\" are generally counted among them. \"The Dream of Gerontius\" has also been given high praise by Elgarians, and the Cello Concerto is similarly rated. Many rate the Violin Concerto equally highly, but some do not. Sackville-West omitted it from the list of Elgar masterpieces in \"The Record Guide\", and in a long analytical article in \"The Musical Quarterly\", Daniel Gregory Mason criticised the first movement of the concerto for a \"kind of sing-songiness\u00a0... as fatal to noble rhythm in music as it is in poetry.\" \"Falstaff\" also divides opinion. It has never been a great popular favourite, and Kennedy and Reed identify shortcomings in it. In a \"Musical Times\" 1957 centenary symposium on Elgar led by Vaughan Williams, by contrast, several contributors share Eric Blom's view that \"Falstaff\" is the greatest of all Elgar's works.\nThe two symphonies divide opinion even more sharply. Mason rates the Second poorly for its \"over-obvious rhythmic scheme\", but calls the First \"Elgar's masterpiece.\u00a0... It is hard to see how any candid student can deny the greatness of this symphony.\" However, in the 1957 centenary symposium, several leading admirers of Elgar express reservations about one or both symphonies. In the same year, Roger Fiske wrote in \"The Gramophone\", \"For some reason few people seem to like the two Elgar symphonies equally; each has its champions and often they are more than a little bored by the rival work.\" The critic John Warrack wrote, \"There are no sadder pages in symphonic literature than the close of the First Symphony's Adagio, as horn and trombones twice softly intone a phrase of utter grief\", whereas to Michael Kennedy, the movement is notable for its lack of anguished yearning and \"angst\" and is marked instead by a \"benevolent tranquillity.\"\nDespite the fluctuating critical assessment of the various works over the years, Elgar's major works taken as a whole have in the twenty-first century recovered strongly from their neglect in the 1950s. \"The Record Guide\" in 1955 could list only one currently available recording of the First Symphony, none of the Second, one of the Violin Concerto, two of the Cello Concerto, two of the \"Enigma Variations\", one of \"Falstaff\", and none of \"The Dream of Gerontius\". Since then there have been multiple recordings of all the major works. More than thirty recordings have been made of the First Symphony since 1955, for example, and more than a dozen of \"The Dream of Gerontius\". Similarly, in the concert hall, Elgar's works, after a period of neglect, are once again frequently programmed. The Elgar Society's website, in its diary of forthcoming performances, lists performances of Elgar's works by orchestras, soloists and conductors across Europe, North America and Australasia.\nHonours, awards and commemorations.\nElgar was knighted in 1904, and in 1911 he was appointed a member of the Order of Merit. In 1920 he received the Cross of Commander of the Belgian Order of the Crown; in 1924 he was made Master of the King's Musick; the following year he received the Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society; and in 1928 he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order (KCVO). Between 1900 and 1931, Elgar received honorary degrees from the Universities of Cambridge, Durham, Leeds, Oxford, Yale (USA), Aberdeen, Western Pennsylvania (USA), Birmingham and London. Foreign academies of which he was made a member were Regia Accademia di Santa Cecilia, Rome; Accademia del Reale Istituto Musicale, Florence; Acad\u00e9mie des Beaux Arts, Paris; Institut de France; and the American Academy. In 1931 he was created a Baronet, of Broadheath in the County of Worcester. In 1933 he was promoted within the Royal Victorian Order to Knight Grand Cross (GCVO). In Kennedy's words, he \"shamelessly touted\" for a peerage, but in vain. In \"Who's Who\", post-First World War, he claimed to have been awarded \"several Imperial Russian and German decorations (lapsed)\". Elgar was offered, but declined, the office of Mayor of Hereford (despite not being a member of its city council) when he lived in the city in 1905. The same year he was made an honorary freeman of the city of Worcester.\nThe house in Lower Broadheath where Elgar was born is now the Elgar Birthplace Museum, devoted to his life and work. Elgar's daughter, Carice, helped to found the museum in 1936 and bequeathed to it much of her collection of Elgar's letters and documents on her death in 1970. Carice left Elgar manuscripts to musical colleges: \"The Black Knight\" to Trinity College of Music; \"King Olaf\" to the Royal Academy of Music; \"The Music Makers\" to Birmingham University; the Cello Concerto to the Royal College of Music; \"The Kingdom\" to the Bodleian Library; and other manuscripts to the British Museum. The Elgar Society dedicated to the composer and his works was formed in 1951.\nElgar's statue at the end of Worcester High Street stands facing the cathedral, only yards from where his father's shop once stood. Another statue of the composer by Rose Garrard is at the top of Church Street in Malvern, overlooking the town and giving visitors an opportunity to stand next to the composer in the shadow of the Hills that he so often regarded. In September 2005, a third statue sculpted by Jemma Pearson was unveiled near Hereford Cathedral in honour of his many musical and other associations with the city. It depicts Elgar with his bicycle. From 1999 until early 2007, new Bank of England twenty pound notes featured a portrait of Elgar. The change to remove his image generated controversy, particularly because 2007 was the 150th anniversary of Elgar's birth. From 2007 the Elgar notes were phased out, ceasing to be legal tender on 30 June 2010. There are around 65 roads in the UK named after Elgar, including six in the counties of Herefordshire and Worcestershire. Elgar had three locomotives named in his honour.\nElgar's life and music have inspired works of literature including the novel \"Gerontius\" and several plays. \"Elgar's Rondo\", a 1993 stage play by David Pownall depicts the dead Jaeger offering ghostly advice on Elgar's musical development. Pownall also wrote a radio play, \"Elgar's Third\" (1994); another Elgar-themed radio play is Alick Rowe's \"The Dorabella Variation\" (2003). David Rudkin's BBC television \"Play for Today\" \"Penda's Fen\" (1974) deals with themes including sex and adolescence, spying, and snobbery, with Elgar's music, chiefly \"The Dream of Gerontius\", as its background. In one scene, a ghostly Elgar whispers the secret of the \"Enigma\" tune to the youthful central character, with an injunction not to reveal it. \"Elgar on the Journey to Hanley\", a novel by Keith Alldritt (1979), tells of the composer's attachment to Dora Penny, later Mrs Powell, (depicted as \"Dorabella\" in the \"Enigma Variations\").\nPerhaps the best-known work depicting Elgar is Ken Russell's 1962 BBC television film \"Elgar\", made when the composer was still largely out of fashion. This hour-long film contradicted the view of Elgar as a jingoistic and bombastic composer, and evoked the more pastoral and melancholy side of his character and music.\nNotes and references.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10086", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10086", "title": "European Investment Fund", "text": "The European Investment Fund (EIF), established in 1994, is a financial institution for the provision of finance to SMEs (small and medium-sized enterprises), headquartered in Luxembourg. It is part of the European Investment Bank Group.\nIt does not lend money to SMEs directly; rather it provides finance through private banks and funds. Its main operations are in the areas of venture capital and guaranteeing loans. Its shareholders are: the European Investment Bank (62%); the European Union, represented by the European Commission (29%); and 30 privately owned EU financial institutions (9%).\nThe European Investment Bank Group is able to assist the development of a broader creative, green ecosystem through the European Investment Fund: venture capital funds, technical transfer, business perspectives, and private-sector equity (infrastructure funds) in general.\nSince 2015, the EaSI Guarantee Instrument (EU Programme for Employment and Social Innovation), managed by the European Investment Fund, has provided over \u20ac280 million in guarantees across Europe and is expected to provide over \u20ac3 billion in financing to micro-enterprises and social enterprises. In the coming years, the EIF intends to continue providing assistance to these types of final beneficiaries in areas heavily impacted by the transition to a low-carbon economy.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10087", "revid": "29695403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10087", "title": "European Currency Unit", "text": "Basket of the currencies of the European Community member states\nThe European Currency Unit (, , \u200a; \u27e8\u20a0\u27e9, ECU, or XEU) was a unit of account used by the European Economic Community and composed of a basket of member country currencies. The ECU came in to operation on 13 March 1979 and was assigned the ISO\u00a04217 code. The ECU replaced the European Unit of Account (EUA) at parity in 1979, and it was later replaced by the euro (EUR) at parity on 1\u00a0January 1999.\nAs a unit of account, the ECU was not a circulating currency and did not replace or override the value of the currency of EEC member countries. However, it was used to price some international financial transactions and capital transfers.\nExchange rate.\nUsing a mechanism known as the \"snake in the tunnel\", the European Exchange Rate Mechanism was an attempt to minimize fluctuations between member state currencies\u2014initially by managing the variance of each against its respective ECU reference rate\u2014with the aim to achieve fixed ratios over time, and so enable the European Single Currency (which became known as the euro) to replace national currencies.\nHard ECU proposal.\nIn 1990 the British Chancellor of the Exchequer John Major proposed the creation of a 'hard' ECU, which different national currencies could compete against and, if the ECU was successful, could lead to a single currency. The move was seen by France and Germany as a wrecking tactic, especially when the increasingly Eurosceptic Thatcher announced her outright opposition to European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), and the idea was abandoned.\nEuro replaces the ECU.\nOn 1 January 1999, the euro (with the code EUR and symbol \u27e8\u20ac\u27e9) replaced the ECU at par (one-to-one). Unlike the ECU, the euro is a real currency, although not all member states participate (for details on euro membership see Eurozone). Two of the countries in the ECU basket of currencies, UK and Denmark, did not join the eurozone, and a third, Greece, joined late. On the other hand, Finland and Austria joined the eurozone from the beginning, even though their currencies were not part of the ECU basket, since they had joined the EU in 1995, two years after the ECU composition was \"frozen\".\nLegal implications.\nDue to the ECU being used in some international financial transactions, there was a concern that foreign courts might not recognize the euro as the legal successor to the ECU. This was unlikely to be a problem, since it is a generally accepted principle of private international law that states determine their currencies, and that therefore states would accept the European Union legislation to that effect. However, for abundant caution, several foreign jurisdictions adopted legislation to ensure a smooth transition. Of particular importance, the U.S. states of Illinois and New York adopted legislation to ensure a large proportion of international financial contracts recognized the euro as the successor of the ECU.\nSymbol and name.\nThe ECU's symbol, \u20a0, consists of an interlaced \"C\" and \"E\"\u200a\u2014the initials of \"European Community\" in many languages of Europe. However, the symbol was not widely adopted. Few computer systems utilized by financial institutions and governments could render it, and commercial payment systems were obliged to use the ISO code, XEU, as with other currencies without widely recognised currency symbols. The Unicode designation for the ECU symbol () was not implemented on many personal computer operating systems until the release of Unicode v1.1 in May 1998, which also introduced the euro sign (). Microsoft did include the ECU symbol in many of its European versions of Windows beginning in the early 1990s; however, accessing it required the use of an Alt code, and not all typefaces provided a glyph. By 2009, Microsoft referred to the ECU symbol as \"historical\". Support among other operating systems, including Macintosh operating systems, was inconsistent.\nAlthough the acronym for ECU is formed from the English name of the unit, the \u00e9cu was a family of gold coins minted during the reign of Louis IX of France. The name of the ECU's successor, the euro, was chosen because the name did not favor any single language, nation, or historical period.\nCoins and notes.\nAs the ECU was only an electronic unit of account and not a full currency, it did not have any official coins or notes that could be used for everyday transactions. However, various European countries and organizations like the European Parliament made commemorative and mock-up coins and notes. A common theme on the coins was usually celebrating European unity, such as celebrating membership of the European Union.\nGibraltar issued commemorative coins from 1993 through 1996, though these were (nominally) legal tender only in Gibraltar, which uses the pound sterling.\nCurrency basket.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10088", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10088", "title": "Eastern Caribbean dollar", "text": "Currency of all members of the OECS\nThe Eastern Caribbean dollar (symbol: EC$; code: XCD) is the currency of all seven full members and one associate member of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS). The successor to the British West Indies dollar, it has existed since 1965, and it is normally abbreviated with the dollar sign \"$\" or, alternatively, \"EC$\" to distinguish it from other dollar-denominated currencies. The EC$ is subdivided into 100 cents. It has been pegged to the United States dollar since 7 July 1976, at the exchange rate of US$ = .70.\nCirculation.\nSix of the states using the EC$ are independent states: Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The other two, Anguilla and Montserrat, are British Overseas Territories. These states are all members of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union.\nThe other two associate members of the OECS do not use the Eastern Caribbean dollar as their official currency: the British Virgin Islands and Martinique. The British Virgin Islands were always problematic for currency purposes due to their proximity to the Danish West Indies, which became the United States Virgin Islands in 1917. Officially, the British Virgin Islands used to use sterling, but in practice the situation was more complicated and involved the circulation of French francs and U.S. dollars. In 1951, the British Virgin Islands adopted the British West Indies dollar which at that time operated in conjunction with the sterling coinage, and in 1959 they changed over officially to the U.S. dollar.\nMartinique, as part of France, uses the euro as its currency.\nBritish Guiana and Barbados had previously been members of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union but withdrew in 1966 and 1972, respectively. Trinidad and Tobago had been a member of the earlier British West Indies currency union, but withdrew in 1964.\nThe combined population of the EC$ area is about 613,000 (2014 census and estimates), which is comparable to Montenegro or the American capital city of Washington, D.C. The combined GDP is 5.46\u00a0billion US dollars, which is comparable to Bermuda.\nThe late Queen Elizabeth II appears on the banknotes and also on the obverse of the coins. She was the head of state of all the states and territories using the EC$, except for Dominica. Dominica is nevertheless a member of the Commonwealth of Nations which now recognizes King Charles III as Head of the Commonwealth.\nHistory.\nQueen Anne's proclamation of 1704 was the first attempt to introduce sterling currency to the British West Indies, however it failed to displace the existing Spanish dollar currency system right up until the late 1870s. In 1822, the British government coined &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204416 fractional 'Anchor dollars' for use in Mauritius and the British West Indies (but not Jamaica). A few years later copper fractional dollars were coined for Mauritius, Sierra Leone, and the British West Indies.\nThe next attempts to introduce British sterling silver coinage to the colonies came with an imperial order-in-council dated 1825. This move was inspired by a number of factors. The United Kingdom was now operating a very successful gold standard in relation to the gold sovereign that was introduced in 1816, and there was a desire to extend this system to the colonies. In addition to this, there was the fact that the supply of Spanish dollars (pieces of eight) had been cut off as a result of the revolutions in Latin America where most of the Spanish dollars were minted. The last Spanish Dollar was in fact minted at Potosi in 1825. There was now a growing desire to have a stable and steady supply of British shillings everywhere the British drum was beating. The 1825 order-in-council was largely a failure because it made sterling silver coinage legal tender at the unrealistic rating in relation to the Spanish dollar of = 4 shillings 4 pence. It succeeded in Jamaica, Bermuda, and British Honduras because the authorities in those territories set aside the official ratings and used the more realistic rating of = 4 shillings. The reality of the rating between the dollar and the pound was based on the silver content of the Spanish pieces of eight as compared to the gold content of the British gold sovereign.\nA second imperial order-in-council was passed in 1838 with the correct rating of = 4 shillings 2 pence. In the years following the 1838 order-in-council, the British West Indies territories began to enact local legislation for the purposes of assimilating their monies of account with the British pound sterling. Gold discoveries in Australia in 1851 drove the silver dollar out of the West Indies, but it returned again with the great depreciation in the value of silver that followed with Germany's transition to the gold standard between 1871 and 1873. In the years immediately following 1873, there was a fear that the British West Indies might return to a silver standard. As such, legislation was passed in the individual territories to demonetize the silver dollars. Even though the British coinage was also silver, it represented fractions of the gold sovereign and so its value was based on a gold standard.\nDuring this period, and into the nineteenth century, accounts could be kept in either dollars or sterling. Jamaica, Bermuda, and the Bahamas preferred to use sterling accounts whereas British Guiana used dollar accounts. British Guiana used dollar accounts for the purpose of assisting in the transition from the Dutch guilder system of currency to the British pound sterling system. In the Eastern Caribbean territories the private sector preferred to use dollar accounts whereas the government preferred to use sterling accounts. In some of the Eastern Caribbean territories, notes were issued by various private banks, denominated in dollars equivalent to 4 shillings 2 pence. See Antigua dollar, Barbadian dollar, Dominican dollar, Grenadian dollar, Guyanese dollar, Saint Kitts dollar, Saint Lucia dollar, Saint Vincent dollar and Trinidad and Tobago dollar.\nIn 1946, a West Indian Currency Conference saw Barbados, British Guiana, the Leeward Islands, Trinidad and Tobago and the Windward Islands agree to establish a unified decimal currency system based on a West Indian dollar to replace the current arrangement of having three different Boards of Commissioners of Currency (for Barbados (which also served the Leeward and Windward Islands), British Guiana and Trinidad &amp; Tobago).\nIn 1949, the British government formalized the dollar system of accounts in British Guiana and the Eastern Caribbean territories by introducing the British West Indies dollar (BWI$) at the already existing conversion rate of per pound sterling (or = 4 shillings 2 pence). It was one of the many experimental political and economic ventures tested by the British government to form a uniform system within the British West Indies territories. The symbol \"BWI$\" was frequently used and the currency was known verbally as the \"Beewee\" (slang for British West Indies) dollar. Shortly thereafter in 1950, the British Caribbean Currency Board (BCCB) was set up in Trinidad with the sole right to issue notes and coins of the new unified currency and given the mandate of keeping full foreign exchange cover to ensure convertibility at .80 per pound sterling. In 1951, the British Virgin Islands joined the arrangement, but this led to discontent because that territory was more naturally drawn to the currency of the neighbouring U.S. Virgin Islands. In 1961, the British Virgin Islands withdrew from the arrangement and adopted the U.S. dollar.\nUntil 1955, the BWI$ existed only as banknotes in conjunction with sterling fractional coinage. Decimal coins replaced the sterling coins in 1955. These decimal coins were denominated in cents, with each cent worth one halfpenny in sterling.\nIn 1958, the West Indies Federation was established and the BWI$ was its currency. However, although Jamaica (including the Cayman Islands and the Turks and Caicos Islands) was part of the West Indies Federation, it retained the Jamaican pound, despite adopting the BWI$ as legal tender from 1954. Jamaica, the Cayman Islands, and the Turks and Caicos Islands were already long established users of the sterling accounts system of pounds, shillings, and pence.\nIn 1964 Jamaica ended the legal tender status of the BWI$ and Trinidad and Tobago withdrew from the currency union (adopting the Trinidad and Tobago dollar) forcing the movement of the headquarters of the BCCB to Barbados and soon the \"BWI$\" dollar lost its regional support.\nIn 1965, the British West Indies dollar of the now defunct West Indies Federation was replaced at par by the Eastern Caribbean dollar and the BCCB was replaced by the Eastern Caribbean Currency Authority or ECCA (established by the Eastern Caribbean Currency Agreement 1965). British Guiana withdrew from the currency union the following year. Grenada, which had used the Trinidad and Tobago dollar from 1964, rejoined the common currency arrangement in 1968. Barbados withdrew from the currency union in 1972, following which the ECCA headquarters were moved to St. Kitts.\nBetween 1965 and 1983, the Eastern Caribbean Currency Authority issued the EC$, with banknotes from 1965 and coins from 1981. The EC$ is now issued by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, based in the city of Basseterre, in Saint Kitts and Nevis. The bank was established by an agreement (the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank Agreement) signed at Port of Spain on 5 July 1983.\nThe exchange rate of = \u00a31 sterling (equivalent to the old = 4s\u00a02d) continued until 1976 for the new Eastern Caribbean dollar.\nFor a wider outline of the history of currency in the region see Currencies of the British West Indies.\nCoins.\nUntil 1981, the coins of the BWI$ circulated. In 1982, a new series of coins was introduced in denominations of 1, 2, 5, 10 and 25 cents and 1 dollar. The 1 and 5 cent coins were scalloped in shape while the 2 cent coin was square. These three were struck in aluminum. The 10 and 25 cent coins were round and cupro-nickel. The dollar was aluminum bronze and also round. The round, aluminum bronze dollar coin was replaced in 1989 with a decagonal, cupro-nickel type. In 2002 new and larger round-shaped 1, 2, and 5 cent pieces were introduced, along with a new 1 dollar coin which was also round. The effigy of Queen Elizabeth II was also changed that same year on all coin denominations to the Ian Rank-Broadley design, making it the last commonwealth currency up to that date to discontinue the Arnold Machin portrait. Their compositions remained aluminum and cupro-nickel, respectively. Higher denominations exist, but these were issued only as medal-coins. 1 and 2 cent coins were withdrawn from circulation in July 2015, and remained legal tender until 30 June 2020.\nBanknotes.\nIn 1965, the Eastern Caribbean Currency Authority issued banknotes in denominations of 1, 5, 20 and 100 dollars, all featuring Pietro Annigoni's 1956 portrait of Queen Elizabeth II in regalia of the Order of the Garter. The first issues in the name of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank in 1985 were of the same denominations, with the addition of 10 dollar notes. The last 1 dollar notes were issued in 1989 and 50 dollar notes were introduced in 1993. On 1 April 2008, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank issued a new series of banknotes which are like the preceding issues, except for omitting both the barcode and the country code letters which form part of the serial number on current notes. In 2012, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank issued a series of banknotes with Braille features in an effort to provide notes which are easier for blind and visually impaired persons to use. The raised Braille characters on the upgraded notes feature a cricket theme in the form of balls and stumps. These characters have been added to the 10, 20, 50, and 100 dollar notes.\nIn 2019, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank is set to introduce a new family of notes produced in polymer substrate and are to be presented in a vertical format.\nPrevious issues.\nThe 2012 issue included raised braille elements for the visually-impaired in the form of a cricket ball and stumps. These were added to the EC$10, $20, $50, and $100 banknotes. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10090", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10090", "title": "Erythromycin", "text": "Chemical compound\nErythromycin is an antibiotic used for the treatment of a number of bacterial infections. This includes respiratory tract infections, skin infections, chlamydia infections, pelvic inflammatory disease, and syphilis. It may also be used during pregnancy to prevent Group B streptococcal infection in the newborn, as well as to improve delayed stomach emptying. It can be given intravenously and by mouth. An eye ointment is routinely recommended after delivery to prevent eye infections in the newborn.\nCommon side effects include abdominal cramps, vomiting, and diarrhea. More serious side effects may include \"Clostridium difficile\" colitis, liver problems, prolonged QT, and allergic reactions. It is generally safe in those who are allergic to penicillin. Erythromycin also appears to be safe to use during pregnancy. While generally regarded as safe during breastfeeding, its use by the mother during the first two weeks of life may increase the risk of pyloric stenosis in the baby. This risk also applies if taken directly by the baby during this age. It is in the macrolide family of antibiotics and works by decreasing bacterial protein production.\nErythromycin was first isolated in 1952 from the bacteria \"Saccharopolyspora erythraea\". It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. In 2020, it was the 225th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 2million prescriptions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nErythromycin can be used to treat bacteria responsible for causing infections of the skin and upper respiratory tract, including \"Streptococcus\", \"Staphylococcus\", \"Haemophilus\" and \"Corynebacterium\" genera. The following represents MIC susceptibility data for a few medically significant bacteria:\nIt may be useful in treating gastroparesis due to this promotility effect. It has been shown to improve feeding intolerances in those who are critically ill. Intravenous erythromycin may also be used in endoscopy to help clear stomach contents.\nAvailable forms.\nErythromycin is available in enteric-coated tablets, slow-release capsules, oral suspensions, ophthalmic solutions, ointments, gels, enteric-coated capsules, non enteric-coated tablets, non enteric-coated capsules, and injections.\nThe following erythromycin combinations are available for oral dosage:\nFor injection, the available combinations are:\nFor ophthalmic use:\nAdverse effects.\nGastrointestinal disturbances, such as diarrhea, nausea, abdominal pain, and vomiting, are very common because erythromycin is a motilin agonist. Because of this, erythromycin tends not to be prescribed as a first-line drug.\nMore serious side effects include arrhythmia with prolonged QT intervals, including \"torsades de pointes\", and reversible deafness. Allergic reactions range from urticaria to anaphylaxis. Cholestasis, Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis are some other rare side effects that may occur.\nStudies have shown evidence both for and against the association of pyloric stenosis and exposure to erythromycin prenatally and postnatally. Exposure to erythromycin (especially long courses at antimicrobial doses, and also through breastfeeding) has been linked to an increased probability of pyloric stenosis in young infants. Erythromycin used for feeding intolerance in young infants has not been associated with hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.\nErythromycin estolate has been associated with reversible hepatotoxicity in pregnant women in the form of elevated serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase and is not recommended during pregnancy. Some evidence suggests similar hepatotoxicity in other populations.\nIt can also affect the central nervous system, causing psychotic reactions, nightmares, and night sweats.\nInteractions.\nErythromycin is metabolized by enzymes of the cytochrome P450 system, in particular, by isozymes of the CYP3A superfamily. The activity of the CYP3A enzymes can be induced or inhibited by certain drugs (e.g., dexamethasone), which can cause it to affect the metabolism of many different drugs, including erythromycin. If other CYP3A substrates \u2014 drugs that are broken down by CYP3A \u2014 such as simvastatin (Zocor), lovastatin (Mevacor), or atorvastatin (Lipitor)\u2014are taken concomitantly with erythromycin, levels of the substrates increase, often causing adverse effects. A noted drug interaction involves erythromycin and simvastatin, resulting in increased simvastatin levels and the potential for rhabdomyolysis. Another group of CYP3A4 substrates are drugs used for migraine such as ergotamine and dihydroergotamine; their adverse effects may be more pronounced if erythromycin is associated.\nEarlier case reports on sudden death prompted a study on a large cohort that confirmed a link between erythromycin, ventricular tachycardia, and sudden cardiac death in patients also taking drugs that prolong the metabolism of erythromycin (like verapamil or diltiazem) by interfering with CYP3A4. Hence, erythromycin should not be administered to people using these drugs, or drugs that also prolong the QT interval. Other examples include terfenadine (Seldane, Seldane-D), astemizole (Hismanal), cisapride (Propulsid, withdrawn in many countries for prolonging the QT time) and pimozide (Orap). Theophylline, which is used mostly in asthma, is also contraindicated.\nErythromycin and doxycycline can have a synergistic effect when combined and kill bacteria (\"E. coli)\" with a higher potency than the sum of the two drugs together. This synergistic relationship is only temporary. After approximately 72 hours, the relationship shifts to become antagonistic, whereby a 50/50 combination of the two drugs kills less bacteria than if the two drugs were administered separately.\nIt may alter the effectiveness of combined oral contraceptive pills because of its effect on the gut flora. A review found that when erythromycin was given with certain oral contraceptives, there was an increase in the maximum serum concentrations and AUC of estradiol and dienogest.\nErythromycin is an inhibitor of the cytochrome P450 system, which means it can have a rapid effect on levels of other drugs metabolised by this system, e.g., warfarin.\nPharmacology.\nMechanism of action.\nErythromycin displays bacteriostatic activity or inhibits growth of bacteria, especially at higher concentrations. By binding to the 50s subunit of the bacterial rRNA complex, protein synthesis and subsequent structure and function processes critical for life or replication are inhibited. Erythromycin interferes with aminoacyl translocation, preventing the transfer of the tRNA bound at the A site of the rRNA complex to the P site of the rRNA complex. Without this translocation, the A site remains occupied, thus the addition of an incoming tRNA and its attached amino acid to the nascent polypeptide chain is inhibited. This interferes with the production of functionally useful proteins, which is the basis of this antimicrobial action.\nErythromycin increases gut motility by binding to Motillin receptor, thus it is a Motillin receptor agonist in addition to its antimicrobial properties.\nPharmacokinetics.\nErythromycin is easily inactivated by gastric acid; therefore, all orally administered formulations are given as either enteric-coated or more-stable salts or esters, such as erythromycin ethylsuccinate. Erythromycin is very rapidly absorbed, and diffuses into most tissues and phagocytes. Due to the high concentration in phagocytes, erythromycin is actively transported to the site of infection, where, during active phagocytosis, large concentrations of erythromycin are released.\nMetabolism.\nMost of erythromycin is metabolised by demethylation in the liver by the hepatic enzyme CYP3A4. Its main elimination route is in the bile with little renal excretion, 2%-15% unchanged drug. Erythromycin's elimination half-life ranges between 1.5 and 2.0 hours and is between 5 and 6 hours in patients with end-stage renal disease. Erythromycin levels peak in the serum 4 hours after dosing; ethylsuccinate peaks 0.5-2.5 hours after dosing, but can be delayed if digested with food.\nErythromycin crosses the placenta and enters breast milk. The American Association of Pediatrics determined erythromycin is safe to take while breastfeeding. Absorption in pregnant patients has been shown to be variable, frequently resulting in levels lower than in nonpregnant patients.\nChemistry.\nComposition.\nStandard-grade erythromycin is primarily composed of four related compounds known as erythromycins A, B, C, and D. Each of these compounds can be present in varying amounts and can differ by lot. Erythromycin A has been found to have the most antibacterial activity, followed by erythromycin B. Erythromycins C and D are about half as active as erythromycin A. Some of these related compounds have been purified and can be studied and researched individually.\nSynthesis.\nOver the three decades after the discovery of erythromycin A and its activity as an antimicrobial, many attempts were made to synthesize it in the laboratory. The presence of 10 stereogenic carbons and several points of distinct substitution has made the total synthesis of erythromycin A a formidable task. Complete syntheses of erythromycins\u2019 related structures and precursors such as 6-deoxyerythronolide B have been accomplished, giving way to possible syntheses of different erythromycins and other macrolide antimicrobials. Woodward successfully completed the synthesis of erythromycin A.\nErythromycin related compounds.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory.\nIn 1949 Abelardo B. Aguilar, a Filipino scientist, sent some soil samples to his employer at Eli Lilly. Aguilar managed to isolate erythromycin from the metabolic products of a strain of \"Streptomyces erythreus\" (designation changed to \"Saccharopolyspora erythraea\") found in the samples. Aguilar received no further credit or compensation for his discovery.\nThe scientist was allegedly promised a trip to the company\u2019s manufacturing plant in Indianapolis, but it was never fulfilled. In a letter to the company\u2019s president, Aguilar wrote: \u201cA leave of absence is all I ask as I do not wish to sever my connection with a great company which has given me wonderful breaks in life.\u201d The request was not granted.\nAguilar reached out to Eli Lilly again in 1993, requesting royalties from sales of the drug over the years, intending to use them to put up a foundation for poor and sickly Filipinos. This request was also denied. He died in September of the same year.\nLilly filed for patent protection on the compound which was granted in 1953. The product was launched commercially in 1952 under the brand name Ilosone (after the Philippine region of Iloilo where it was originally collected). Erythromycin was formerly also called Ilotycin.\nThe antibiotic clarithromycin was invented by scientists at the Japanese drug company Taisho Pharmaceutical in the 1970s as a result of their efforts to overcome the acid instability of erythromycin.\nScientists at Chugai Pharmaceuticals discovered an erythromycin-derived motilin agonist called mitemcinal that is believed to have strong prokinetic properties (similar to erythromycin) but lacking antibiotic properties. Erythromycin is commonly used off-label for gastric motility indications such as gastroparesis. If mitemcinal can be shown to be an effective prokinetic agent, it would represent a significant advance in the gastrointestinal field, as treatment with this drug would not carry the risk of unintentional selection for antibiotic-resistant bacteria.\nSociety and culture.\nCost.\nIt is available as a generic medication.\nIn the United States in 2014 the price increased to seven dollars per tablet.\nThe price of Erythromycin rose three times between 2010 and 2015, from 24 cents per tablet in 2010 to $8.96 in 2015. In 2017, a Kaiser Health News study found that the per-unit cost of dozens of generics doubled or even tripled from 2015 to 2016, increasing spending by the Medicaid program. Due to price increases by drug manufacturers, Medicaid paid on average $2,685,330 more for Erythromycin in 2016 compared to 2015 (not including rebates). By 2018, generic drug prices had climbed another 5% on average.\nBrand names.\nBrand names include Robimycin, E-Mycin, E.E.S. Granules, E.E.S.-200, E.E.S.-400, E.E.S.-400 Filmtab, Erymax, Ery-Tab, Eryc, Ranbaxy, Erypar, EryPed, Eryped 200, Eryped 400, Erythrocin Stearate Filmtab, Erythrocot, E-Base, Erythroped, Ilosone, MY-E, Pediamycin, Zineryt, Abboticin, Abboticin-ES, Erycin, PCE Dispertab, Stiemycine, Acnasol, and Tiloryth. Fishcare brand name API E.M. ERYTHROMYCIN \nUse in fishcare.\nThis drug is also used in fishcare for the 'broad spectrum treatment and control of bacterial disease'. Body slime, mouth fungus, Furunculosis, bacterial gill illness, and hemorrhagic septicaemia are all examples of bacterial diseases in fish that may be treated and controlled with this therapy. It mainly attacks gram-positive bacteria in fish.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10091", "revid": "21951195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10091", "title": "Environmental law", "text": "Branch of law concerning the natural environment\nEnvironmental laws are laws that protect the environment. This includes environmental regulations; laws governing management of natural resources, such as forests, minerals, or fisheries; and related topics such as environmental impact assessments.&lt;section end=scope /&gt;\nHistory.\nEarly examples of laws designed to preserve the environment for its own sake or for human enjoyment are found throughout history. In the common law, the primary protection was found in the law of nuisance, but this only allowed for private actions for damages or injunctions if there was harm to land. Thus, smells emanating from pigsties, strict liability against dumping rubbish, or damage from exploding dams. Private enforcement, however, was limited and found to be woefully inadequate to deal with major environmental threats, particularly threats to common resources. During the \"Great Stink\" of 1858, the dumping of sewerage into the River Thames began to smell so ghastly in the summer heat that Parliament had to be evacuated. Ironically, the Metropolitan Commission of Sewers Act 1848 had allowed the Metropolitan Commission for Sewers to close cesspits around the city in an attempt to \"clean up\" but this simply led people to pollute the river. In 19 days, Parliament passed a further Act to build the London sewerage system. London also suffered from terrible air pollution, and this culminated in the \"Great Smog\" of 1952, which in turn triggered its own legislative response: the Clean Air Act 1956. The basic regulatory structure was to set limits on emissions for households and businesses (particularly burning of coal) while an inspectorate would enforce compliance.\nPollution control.\nChemical safety.\nChemical safety laws govern the use of chemicals in human activities, particularly human-made chemicals in modern industrial applications. As contrasted with media-oriented environmental laws (e.g., air or water quality laws), chemical control laws seek to manage the (potential) pollutants themselves. Regulatory efforts include banning specific chemical constituents in consumer products (e.g., Bisphenol A in plastic bottles), and regulating pesticides.\nResource sustainability.\nWater resources.\nWater resources laws govern the ownership and use of water resources, including surface water and ground water. Regulatory areas may include water conservation, use restrictions, and ownership regimes.\nWildlife and plants.\nWildlife laws govern the potential impact of human activity on wild animals, whether directly on individuals or populations, or indirectly via habitat degradation. Similar laws may operate to protect plant species. Such laws may be enacted entirely to protect biodiversity, or as a means for protecting species deemed important for other reasons. Regulatory efforts may including the creation of special conservation statuses, prohibitions on killing, harming, or disturbing protected species, efforts to induce and support species recovery, establishment of wildlife refuges to support conservation, and prohibitions on trafficking in species or animal parts to combat poaching.\nFish and game.\nFish and game laws regulate the right to pursue and take or kill certain kinds of fish and wild animal (game). Such laws may restrict the days to harvest fish or game, the number of animals caught per person, the species harvested, or the weapons or fishing gear used. Such laws may seek to balance dueling needs for preservation and harvest and to manage both environment and populations of fish and game. Game laws can provide a legal structure to collect license fees and other money which is used to fund conservation efforts as well as to obtain harvest information used in wildlife management practice.\nPrinciples.\nEnvironmental law has developed in response to emerging awareness of and concern over issues impacting the entire world. While laws have developed piecemeal and for a variety of reasons, some effort has gone into identifying key concepts and guiding principles common to environmental law as a whole. The principles discussed below are not an exhaustive list and are not universally recognized or accepted. Nonetheless, they represent important principles for the understanding of environmental law around the world.\nSustainable development.\nDefined by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) as \"development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs,\" sustainable development may be considered together with the concepts of \"integration\" (development cannot be considered in isolation from sustainability) and \"interdependence\" (social and economic development, and environmental protection, are interdependent). Laws mandating environmental impact assessment and requiring or encouraging development to minimize environmental impacts may be assessed against this principle.\nThe modern concept of sustainable development was a topic of discussion at the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm Conference), and the driving force behind the 1983 World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED, or Bruntland Commission). In 1992, the first UN Earth Summit resulted in the Rio Declaration, Principle 3 of which reads: \"The right to development must be fulfilled so as to equitably meet developmental and environmental needs of present and future generations.\" Sustainable development has been a core concept of international environmental discussion ever since, including at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Earth Summit 2002), and the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Earth Summit 2012, or Rio+20).\nEquity.\nDefined by UNEP to include intergenerational equity \u2013 \"the right of future generations to enjoy a fair level of the common patrimony\" \u2013 and intragenerational equity \u2013 \"the right of all people within the current generation to fair access to the current generation's entitlement to the Earth's natural resources\" \u2013 environmental equity considers the present generation under an obligation to account for long-term impacts of activities, and to act to sustain the global environment and resource base for future generations. Pollution control and resource management laws may be assessed against this principle.\nTransboundary responsibility.\nDefined in the international law context as an obligation to protect one's own environment, and to prevent damage to neighboring environments, UNEP considers transboundary responsibility at the international level as a potential limitation on the rights of the sovereign state. Laws that act to limit externalities imposed upon human health and the environment may be assessed against this principle.\nPublic participation and transparency.\nIdentified as essential conditions for \"accountable governments... industrial concerns,\" and organizations generally, public participation and transparency are presented by UNEP as requiring \"effective protection of the human right to hold and express opinions and to seek, receive and impart ideas... a right of access to appropriate, comprehensible and timely information held by governments and industrial concerns on economic and social policies regarding the sustainable use of natural resources and the protection of the environment, without imposing undue financial burdens upon the applicants and with adequate protection of privacy and business confidentiality,\" and \"effective judicial and administrative proceedings.\" These principles are present in environmental impact assessment, laws requiring publication and access to relevant environmental data, and administrative procedure.\nPrecautionary principle.\nOne of the most commonly encountered and controversial principles of environmental law, the Rio Declaration formulated the precautionary principle as follows:In order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.The principle may play a role in any debate over the need for environmental regulation.\nThe concept of prevention ... can perhaps better be considered an overarching aim that gives rise to a multitude of legal mechanisms, including prior assessment of environmental harm, licensing or authorization that set out the conditions for operation and the consequences for violation of the conditions, as well as the adoption of strategies and policies. Emission limits and other product or process standards, the use of best available techniques and similar techniques can all be seen as applications of the concept of prevention.\nPolluter pays principle.\nThe polluter pays principle stands for the idea that \"the environmental costs of economic activities, including the cost of preventing potential harm, should be internalized rather than imposed upon society at large.\" All issues related to responsibility for cost for environmental remediation and compliance with pollution control regulations involve this principle.\nTheory.\nEnvironmental law is a continuing source of controversy. Debates over the necessity, fairness, and cost of environmental regulation are ongoing, as well as regarding the appropriateness of regulations vs. market solutions to achieve even agreed-upon ends.\nAllegations of scientific uncertainty fuel the ongoing debate over greenhouse gas regulation, and are a major factor in debates over whether to ban particular pesticides. In cases where the science is well-settled, it is not unusual to find that corporations intentionally hide or distort the facts, or sow confusion.\nIt is very common for regulated industry to argue against environmental regulation on the basis of cost. Difficulties arise in performing cost-benefit analysis of environmental issues. It is difficult to quantify the value of an environmental value such as a healthy ecosystem, clean air, or species diversity. Many environmentalists' response to pitting economy vs. ecology is summed up by former Senator and founder of Earth Day Gaylord Nelson, \"The economy is a wholly owned subsidiary of the environment, not the other way around.\" Furthermore, environmental issues are seen by many as having an ethical or moral dimension, which would transcend financial cost. Even so, there are some efforts underway to systemically recognize environmental costs and assets, and account for them properly in economic terms.\nWhile affected industries spark controversy in fighting regulation, there are also many environmentalists and public interest groups who believe that current regulations are inadequate, and advocate for stronger protection. Environmental law conferences \u2013 such as the annual Public Interest Environmental Law Conference in Eugene, Oregon \u2013 typically have this focus, also connecting environmental law with class, race, and other issues.\nAn additional debate is to what extent environmental laws are fair to all regulated parties. For instance, researchers Preston Teeter and Jorgen Sandberg highlight how smaller organizations can often incur disproportionately larger costs as a result of environmental regulations, which can ultimately create an additional barrier to entry for new firms, thus stifling competition and innovation.\nInternational environmental law.\nGlobal and regional environmental issues are increasingly the subject of international law. Debates over environmental concerns implicate core principles of international law and have been the subject of numerous international agreements and declarations.\nCustomary international law is an important source of international environmental law. These are the norms and rules that countries follow as a matter of custom and they are so prevalent that they bind all states in the world. When a principle becomes customary law is not clear cut and many arguments are put forward by states not wishing to be bound. Examples of customary international law relevant to the environment include the duty to warn other states promptly about icons of an environmental nature and environmental damages to which another state or states may be exposed, and Principle 21 of the Stockholm Declaration ('good neighbourliness' or sic utere).\nGiven that customary international law is not static but ever evolving and the continued increase of air pollution (carbon dioxide) causing climate changes, has led to discussions on whether basic customary principles of international law, such as the jus cogens (peremptory norms) and erga omnes principles could be applicable for enforcing international environmental law.\nNumerous legally binding international agreements encompass a wide variety of issue-areas, from terrestrial, marine and atmospheric pollution through to wildlife and biodiversity protection. International environmental agreements are generally multilateral (or sometimes bilateral) treaties (a.k.a. convention, agreement, protocol, etc.). Protocols are subsidiary agreements built from a primary treaty. They exist in many areas of international law but are especially useful in the environmental field, where they may be used to regularly incorporate recent scientific knowledge. They also permit countries to reach an agreement on a framework that would be contentious if every detail were to be agreed upon in advance. The most widely known protocol in international environmental law is the Kyoto Protocol, which followed from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.\nWhile the bodies that proposed, argued, agreed upon, and ultimately adopted existing international agreements vary according to each agreement, certain conferences, including 1972's United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, 1983's World Commission on Environment and Development, 1992's United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, and 2002's World Summit on Sustainable Development have been particularly important. Multilateral environmental agreements sometimes create an International Organization, Institution or Body responsible for implementing the agreement. Major examples are the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).\nInternational environmental law also includes the opinions of international courts and tribunals. While there are few and they have limited authority, the decisions carry much weight with legal commentators and are quite influential on the development of international environmental law. One of the biggest challenges in international decisions is to determine an adequate compensation for environmental damages. The courts include the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), the European Court of Justice, European Court of Human Rights and other regional treaty tribunals.\nAround the world.\nAfrica.\nAccording to the International Network for Environmental Compliance and Enforcement (INECE), the major environmental issues in Africa are \"drought and flooding, air pollution, deforestation, loss of biodiversity, freshwater availability, degradation of soil and vegetation, and widespread poverty.\" The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is focused on the \"growing urban and industrial pollution, water quality, electronic waste and indoor air from cookstoves.\" They hope to provide enough aid on concerns regarding pollution before their impacts contaminate the African environment as well as the global environment. By doing so, they intend to \"protect human health, particularly vulnerable populations such as children and the poor.\" In order to accomplish these goals in Africa, EPA programs are focused on strengthening the ability to enforce environmental laws as well as public compliance to them. Other programs work on developing stronger environmental laws, regulations, and standards.\nAsia.\nThe Asian Environmental Compliance and Enforcement Network (AECEN) is an agreement between 16 Asian countries dedicated to improving cooperation with environmental laws in Asia. These countries include Cambodia, China, Indonesia, India, Maldives, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Nepal, Philippines, Pakistan, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vietnam, and Lao PDR.\nEuropean Union.\nThe European Union issues secondary legislation on environmental issues that are valid throughout the EU (so called regulations) and many directives that must be implemented into national legislation from the 27 member states (national states). Examples are the Regulation (EC) No. 338/97 on the implementation of CITES; or the Natura 2000 network the centerpiece for nature &amp; biodiversity policy, encompassing the bird Directive (79/409/EEC/ changed to 2009/147/EC)and the habitats directive (92/43/EEC). Which are made up of multiple SACs (Special Areas of Conservation, linked to the habitats directive) &amp; SPAs (Special Protected Areas, linked to the bird directive), throughout Europe.\nEU legislation is ruled in Article 249 Treaty for the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). Topics for common EU legislation are:\nMiddle East.\nEnvironmental law is rapidly growing in the Middle East. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is working with countries in the Middle East to improve \"environmental governance, water pollution and water security, clean fuels and vehicles, public participation, and pollution prevention.\"\nOceania.\nThe main concerns about environmental issues in Oceania are \"illegal releases of air and water pollutants, illegal logging/timber trade, illegal shipment of hazardous wastes, including e-waste and ships slated for destruction, and insufficient institutional structure/lack of enforcement capacity\". The Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Programme (SPREP) is an international organization between Australia, the Cook Islands, FMS, Fiji, France, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, PNG, Samoa, Solomon Island, Tonga, Tuvalu, USA, and Vanuatu. The SPREP was established in order to provide assistance in improving and protecting the environment as well as assure sustainable development for future generations.\nAustralia.\n\"Commonwealth v Tasmania\" (1983), also known as the \"Tasmanian Dam Case\", was a highly significant case in Australian environmental law.\nThe \"Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999\" is the centrepiece of environmental legislation in Australia. It sets up the \"legal framework to protect and manage nationally and internationally important flora, fauna, ecological communities and heritage places\" and focuses on protecting world heritage properties, national heritage properties, wetlands of international importance, nationally threatened species and ecological communities, migratory species, Commonwealth marine areas, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, and the environment surrounding nuclear activities. However, it has been subject to numerous reviews examining its shortcomings, the latest taking place in mid-2020. The interim report of this review concluded that the laws created to protect unique species and habitats are ineffective.\nBrazil.\nThe Brazilian government created the Ministry of Environment in 1992 in order to develop better strategies for protecting the environment, using natural resources sustainably, and enforcing public environmental policies. The Ministry of Environment has authority over policies involving environment, water resources, preservation, and environmental programs involving the Amazon.\nCanada.\nThe Department of the Environment Act establishes the Department of the Environment in the Canadian government as well as the position Minister of the Environment. Their duties include \"the preservation and enhancement of the quality of the natural environment, including water, air and soil quality; renewable resources, including migratory birds and other non-domestic flora and fauna; water; meteorology;\" The Environmental Protection Act is the main piece of Canadian environmental legislation that was put into place March 31, 2000. The Act focuses on \"respecting pollution prevention and the protection of the environment and human health in order to contribute to sustainable development.\" Other principle federal statutes include the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, and the Species at Risk Act. When provincial and federal legislation are in conflict federal legislation takes precedence, that being said individual provinces can have their own legislation such as Ontario's Environmental Bill of Rights, and Clean Water Act.\nChina.\nAccording to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, \"China has been working with great determination in recent years to develop, implement, and enforce a solid environmental law framework. Chinese officials face critical challenges in effectively implementing the laws, clarifying the roles of their national and provincial governments, and strengthening the operation of their legal system.\" Explosive economic and industrial growth in China has led to significant environmental degradation, and China is currently in the process of developing more stringent legal controls. The harmonization of Chinese society and the natural environment is billed as a rising policy priority.\nCongo (RC).\nIn the Republic of Congo, inspired by the African models of the 1990s, the phenomenon of constitutionalization of environmental law appeared in 1992, which completed an historical development of environmental law and policy dating back to the years of independence and even long before the colonization. It gives a constitutional basis to environmental protection, which traditionally was part of the legal framework. The two Constitutions of 15 March 1992 and 20 January 2002 concretize this paradigm, by stating a legal obligation of a clean environment, by establishing a principle of compensation and a foundation of criminal nature. By this phenomenon, Congolese environmental law is situated between non-regression and the search for efficiency.\"\nEcuador.\nWith the enactment of the 2008 Constitution, Ecuador became the first country in the world to codify the Rights of Nature. The Constitution, specifically Articles 10 and 71\u201374, recognizes the inalienable rights of ecosystems to exist and flourish, gives people the authority to petition on the behalf of ecosystems, and requires the government to remedy violations of these rights. The rights approach is a break away from traditional environmental regulatory systems, which regard nature as property and legalize and manage degradation of the environment rather than prevent it.\nThe Rights of Nature articles in Ecuador's constitution are part of a reaction to a combination of political, economic, and social phenomena. Ecuador's abusive past with the oil industry, most famously the class-action litigation against Chevron, and the failure of an extraction-based economy and neoliberal reforms to bring economic prosperity to the region has resulted in the election of a New Leftist regime, led by President Rafael Correa, and sparked a demand for new approaches to development. In conjunction with this need, the principle of \"Buen Vivir,\" or good living \u2013 focused on social, environmental and spiritual wealth versus material wealth \u2013 gained popularity among citizens and was incorporated into the new constitution.\nThe influence of indigenous groups, from whom the concept of \"Buen Vivir\" originates, in the forming of the constitutional ideals also facilitated the incorporation of the Rights of Nature as a basic tenet of their culture and conceptualization of \"Buen Vivir.\"\nEgypt.\nThe Environmental Protection Law outlines the responsibilities of the Egyptian government to \"preparation of draft legislation and decrees pertinent to environmental management, collection of data both nationally and internationally on the state of the environment, preparation of periodical reports and studies on the state of the environment, formulation of the national plan and its projects, preparation of environmental profiles for new and urban areas, and setting of standards to be used in planning for their development, and preparation of an annual report on the state of the environment to be prepared to the President.\"\nIndia.\nIn India, Environmental law is governed by the Environment Protection Act, 1986. This act is enforced by the Central Pollution Control Board and the numerous State Pollution Control Boards. Apart from this, there are also individual legislations specifically enacted for the protection of Water, Air, Wildlife, etc. Such legislations include :\nJapan.\nThe Basic Environmental Law is the basic structure of Japan's environmental policies replacing the Basic Law for Environmental Pollution Control and the Nature Conservation Law. The updated law aims to address \"global environmental problems, urban pollution by everyday life, loss of accessible natural environment in urban areas and degrading environmental protection capacity in forests and farmlands.\"\nThe three basic environmental principles that the Basic Environmental Law follows are \"the blessings of the environment should be enjoyed by the present generation and succeeded to the future generations, a sustainable society should be created where environmental loads by human activities are minimized, and Japan should contribute actively to global environmental conservation through international cooperation.\"\nFrom these principles, the Japanese government have established policies such as \"environmental consideration in policy formulation, establishment of the Basic Environment Plan which describes the directions of long-term environmental policy, environmental impact assessment for development projects, economic measures to encourage activities for reducing environmental load, improvement of social infrastructure such as sewerage system, transport facilities etc., promotion of environmental activities by corporations, citizens and NGOs, environmental education, and provision of information, promotion of science and technology.\"\nNew Zealand.\nThe Ministry for the Environment and Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment were established by the Environment Act 1986. These positions are responsible for advising the Minister on all areas of environmental legislation. A common theme of New Zealand's environmental legislation is sustainably managing natural and physical resources, fisheries, and forests. The Resource Management Act 1991 is the main piece of environmental legislation that outlines the government's strategy to managing the \"environment, including air, water soil, biodiversity, the coastal environment, noise, subdivision, and land use planning in general.\"\nRussia.\nThe Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment of the Russian Federation makes regulation regarding \"conservation of natural resources, including the subsoil, water bodies, forests located in designated conservation areas, fauna and their habitat, in the field of hunting, hydrometeorology and related areas, environmental monitoring and pollution control, including radiation monitoring and control, and functions of public environmental policy making and implementation and statutory regulation.\"\nSingapore.\nSingapore is a signatory of the Convention on Biological Diversity; with most of its CBD obligations being overseen by the National Biodiversity Reference Centre, a division of its National Parks Board (NParks). Singapore is also a signatory of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Animals, with its obligations under that treaty also being overseen by NParks. The Parliament of Singapore has enacted numerous pieces of legislation to fulfil its obligations under these treaties, such as the Parks and Trees Act, Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act, and Wildlife Act. The new Wildlife (Protected Wildlife Species) Rules 2020 marks the first instance in Singapore's history that direct legal protection has been offered for specific named species, as listed in Parts 1-5 of the Rules' schedule.\nVietnam.\nVietnam is currently working with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency on dioxin remediation and technical assistance in order to lower methane emissions. In March 2002, the U.S and Vietnam signed the U.S.-Vietnam Memorandum of Understanding on Research on Human Health and the Environmental Effects of Agent Orange/Dioxin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10093", "revid": "13440149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10093", "title": "Eurostar", "text": "High-speed train service between the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, and the Netherlands\nEurostar is an international high-speed rail service connecting the United Kingdom with France, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Most Eurostar trains travel through the Channel Tunnel between the United Kingdom and France, owned and operated separately by Getlink.\nThe London terminus is London St Pancras International; the other and since suspended British calling points used to be Ebbsfleet International and Ashford International in Kent. Intermediate calling points in France are Calais-Fr\u00e9thun, which has been suspended since 2020, and Lille-Europe. Trains to Paris terminate at Paris-Nord. Trains to Belgium and the Netherlands serve Brussels-South and Rotterdam Centraal, before terminating at Amsterdam Centraal. Additionally, in France there are direct services from London to the French Alps in winter.\nThe service is operated by 11 Class 373/1 trainsets, each with 18 coaches, and 17 Class 374 trainsets, each with 16 coaches. The trains run at up to on high-speed lines. The LGV Nord high-speed line in France opened before Eurostar services began in 1994, and newer lines enabling faster journeys were added later: HSL 1 in Belgium and High Speed 1 in south-east England. The French and Belgian parts of the network are shared with Paris\u2013Brussels Thalys services and TGV trains.\nEurostar is operated by Eurostar International Limited (EIL), which is owned by Eurostar Group.\nIn December 2021, Eurostar said it intended to move its administrative activities from London to Brussels as part of a forthcoming merger with Thalys which was approved in March 2022, citing problems with doing business in the UK and stating that being based in an EU country would make expansion and development easier.\nHistory.\nConception and planning.\nThe history of Eurostar can be traced to the choice in 1986 of a rail tunnel to provide a cross-channel link between Britain and France. A previous attempt to construct a tunnel between the two nations had begun in 1974, but was quickly aborted. Construction began afresh in 1988. Eurotunnel was created to manage and own the tunnel, which was finished in 1993, the official opening taking place on 6 May 1994.\nIn addition to the tunnel's shuttle trains carrying cars and lorries between Folkestone and Calais, the tunnel opened up the possibility of through passenger and freight train services between places further afield. British Rail and France's SNCF contracted with Eurotunnel to use half the tunnel's capacity for this purpose. In 1987, Britain, France and Belgium set up an International Project Group to specify a train to provide an international high-speed passenger service through the tunnel. France had been operating high-speed TGV services since 1981, and had begun construction of a new high-speed line between Paris and the Channel Tunnel, LGV Nord; French TGV technology was chosen as the basis for the new trains. An order for 30 trainsets, to be manufactured in France but with some British and Belgian components, was placed in December 1989. On 20 June 1993, the first Eurostar test train travelled through the tunnel to the UK. Various technical difficulties in running the new trains on British tracks were quickly overcome.\nLaunch of service.\nOn 14 November 1994, Eurostar services began running from Waterloo International station in London, to Paris-Nord, as well as Brussels-South railway station. The train service started with a limited \"Discovery\" service; the full daily service started from 28 May 1995.\nIn 1995, Eurostar was achieving an average end-to-end speed of from London to Paris.\nOn 8 January 1996, Eurostar launched services from a second railway station in the UK when Ashford International was opened.\nAlso in 1996, Eurostar commenced its year-round service to Disneyland with the first train running on 29 June. The following year saw the introduction of services to the French Alps during the winter.\nOn 20 July 2002 a summer seasonal service to Avignon-Centre was launched. The service ran until 2014 after which it was replaced on 1 May 2015 by an expanded service calling at Avignon TGV and also serving Lyon and Marseille.\nOn 23 September 2003, passenger services began running on the first completed section of High Speed 1. Following a high-profile glamorous opening ceremony and a large advertising campaign, on 14 November 2007, Eurostar services in London transferred from Waterloo to the extended and extensively refurbished London St Pancras International.\nOne-way services from London to Amsterdam (returning to Brussels only) were launched on 4 April 2018. This service was made a return service on 26 October 2020. \nRecords achieved.\nThe Channel Tunnel used by Eurostar services holds the record for having the longest underwater section of any tunnel in the world, and it is the third-longest railway tunnel (behind the Seikan Tunnel and the Gotthard Base Tunnel) in the world.\nOn 30 July 2003, a Eurostar train set a new British speed record of on the first section of the \"High Speed 1\" railway between the Channel Tunnel, and Fawkham Junction in north Kent, two months before official public services began running.\nOn 16 May 2006, Eurostar set a new record for the longest non-stop high-speed journey, a distance of from London to Cannes taking 7 hours 25 minutes.\nOn 4 September 2007, a record-breaking train left Paris-Nord at 10:44 (09:44 BST) and reached London St Pancras International in 2\u00a0hours 3\u00a0minutes 39 seconds, carrying journalists and railway workers. This record trip was also the first passenger-carrying arrival at the new London St Pancras International station. On 20 September 2007, Eurostar broke another record when it completed the journey from Brussels to London in 1\u00a0hour 43\u00a0minutes.\nRegional Eurostar and Nightstar.\nThe original proposals for Eurostar included direct services to Paris and Brussels from cities north of London: Manchester Piccadilly via Birmingham New Street on the West Coast Main Line and Leeds and Glasgow Central via Edinburgh Waverley, Newcastle and York on the East Coast Main Line.\nSeven 14-coach \"North of London\" Eurostar trains for these Regional Eurostar services were built, but these services never came to fruition. Predicted journey times of almost nine hours for Glasgow to Paris at the time of growth of low-cost air travel during the 1990s made the plans commercially unviable against the cheaper and quicker airlines. Other reasons that have been suggested for these services having never been run were both government policies and the disruptive privatisation of British Rail. Three of the Regional Eurostar units were leased by Great North Eastern Railway (GNER) to increase domestic services from London King's Cross to York and later Leeds. The lease expired in December 2005, and most of the North of London sets were transferred to SNCF for TGV services in northern France.\nAn international Nightstar sleeper train was also planned; this would have travelled the same routes as Regional Eurostar, plus the Great Western Main Line to Cardiff Central. These were also deemed commercially unviable, and the scheme was abandoned with no services ever operated. In 2000, the coaches were sold to Via Rail in Canada.\nAshford International station.\nAshford International station was the original station for Eurostar services in Kent.\nOnce Ebbsfleet International railway station, also designed to serve Kent, had opened, only three trains a day to Paris-Nord and one to Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e \u2013 Chessy called at Ashford International for a considerable period of time. There were fears that services at Ashford International might be further reduced or withdrawn altogether as Eurostar planned to make Ebbsfleet International the new regional hub instead. However, after a period during which no Brussels-South trains served the station, to the dissatisfaction of the local communities, Eurostar reintroduced a single daily Ashford\u2013Brussels service on 23 February 2009.\nChanges to corporate structure.\nOn 1 September 2010, Eurostar was incorporated as a single corporate entity, Eurostar International Limited (EIL), replacing the joint operation between EUKL, SNCF and SNCB/NMBS. EIL is owned by SNCF (55%), Caisse de d\u00e9p\u00f4t et placement du Qu\u00e9bec (CDPQ) (30%), Hermes Infrastructure (10%) and SNCB (5%).\nIn June 2014, the UK shareholding in Eurostar International Limited was transferred from London and Continental Railways / Department for Transport to HM Treasury. That October, it was announced that the UK government planned to raise \u00a3300 million by selling its stake. In March 2015, the UK government announced that it would sell its 40% share to an Anglo-Canadian consortium made up of the Caisse and Hermes Infrastructure. The sale was completed in May 2015.\nRules for cycles on trains.\nIn 2015, Eurostar threatened to require cyclists to disassemble bicycles before they could be transported on the trains. Following criticism from Boris Johnson and cycling groups, Eurostar reversed the plans.\nIn March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic the bicycle service was suspended. The service was not reintroduced until January 2023 due to issues caused by both the pandemic and Brexit. After the reintroduction cyclists were required to disassemble their bicycles and put them in boxes.\nWi-Fi and onboard entertainment.\nBy March 2016, onboard entertainment was provided by GoMedia, including Wi-Fi connectivity and up to 300 hours of movies and television kept on the train's servers and accessed using the passenger's own devices: mobile phones, tablets, laptops etc. A tracker app allows customers to see where they are.\nMerger with Thalys.\nOn 27 September 2019, the heads of two of Eurostar's major shareholders, Guillaume Pepy of SNCF, and the chair of SNCB, Sophie Dutordoir, publicised that Eurostar was planning to come together with its sister company the Franco-Belgian transnational rail service Thalys. The arrangement is to merge their operations under the working title of \"Green Speed\" and expand services outside the core London-Paris-Brussels-Amsterdam service, to create a grand Western European high-speed rail service covering the UK, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany, serving up to 30 million customers by 2030.\nAs of 2019,[ [update]] Thalys assisted Eurostar with onward connections between Amsterdam and Brussels, and to provide the Amsterdam to London service, in lieu of passport and customs checks at Amsterdam Centraal station.\nIn September 2020, the merger between Thalys and Eurostar International was confirmed, a year after Thalys announced its intention to merge with the cross-Channel provider subject to gaining European Commission clearance, to form \"Green Speed\". SNCF and SNCB already hold a controlling shareholding in Eurostar. In October 2021, it was announced that, following the completion of the merger, the Thalys brand would be discontinued, with all of the new operation's services to be operated under the Eurostar name but with each service's own liveries.\nEurostar is also intending to merge with Thalys administratively, combining ticket sales in a single system.\nCOVID-19 Impact.\nBy January 2021, Eurostar ridership went down to less than 1% of pre-pandemic levels. The combined financial troubles and lack of ridership caused by the COVID-19 pandemic led to Eurostar seeking governmental assistance from Britain's Treasury and Department for Transport, even though Britain sold its 40% Eurostar holding in 2015. Eurostar's appeal included granting the company access to Bank of England-backed loans and a temporary reduction in track access charges for use of the UK's high-speed rail line. Despite being majority-owned by the French state railway, SNCF, Eurostar was thought to have already exhausted options for governmental assistance from Paris, but both the French transport minister and the UK Department for Transport confirmed they were working on further plans to maintain the service.\nIn March 2020, Eurostar placed all of their Class 373 or E300 into storage due to reduced operations. As of January 2022 the sets recommenced testing on HS1, before returning to service on 21 February.\nMainline routes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLGV Nord (France).\nLGV Nord is a French -long high-speed rail line that connects Paris to the Belgian border and the Channel Tunnel via Lille. It opened in 1993.\nIts extensions to Belgium and towards Paris, as well as connecting to the Channel Tunnel, have made LGV Nord a part of every Eurostar journey undertaken. A Belgian high-speed line, HSL 1, was added to the end of LGV Nord, at the Belgian border, in 1997. Of all French high-speed lines, LGV Nord sees the widest variety of high-speed rolling stock and is quite busy; a proposed cut-off bypassing Lille, which would reduce Eurostar journey times to Paris, is called LGV Picardie.\nChannel Tunnel.\nThe Channel Tunnel is the most important part of the route as it is the only rail connection between Great Britain and the European mainland. It joins LGV Nord in France with High Speed One in Britain. Tunnelling began in 1988, and the tunnel was officially opened by British sovereign Queen Elizabeth II and the French President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand at a ceremony in Calais on 6 May 1994.\nIt is owned by Getlink, which charges a significant toll to Eurostar for its use.\nIn 1996, the American Society of Civil Engineers named the tunnel as one of the Seven Wonders of the Modern World.\nAlong the current route of the Eurostar service, line speeds are except within the Channel Tunnel, where a reduced speed of applies for safety reasons.\nSince the launch of Eurostar services, severe disruptions and cancellations have been caused by fires breaking out within the Channel Tunnel, such as in 1996, 2006 (minor), 2008 and 2015.\nHSL 1 (Belgium).\nUntil the opening on 2 June 1996, of the first phase of the Belgian high speed line, Eurostar trains were routed via the Belgian railway line 94. The Eurostar routes still use the line as a diversion if engineering works are taking place on HSL1, depending where it is. The 06:13 from London St Pancras to Brussels still uses the line as a diversion to bypass the peak time disruptions on HSL1 due to the extra TGV services from Brussels for the commuters. After 2 June 1996, some Eurostars to Brussels were routed via the first phase of the Belgian High Speed line and the Belgian railway line 78 via Mons. Although this line is still as a diversion if HSL1 is doing engineering, also depending where the maintenance is taking place. Journey times between London and Brussels were improved when an Belgian high-speed line, HSL 1, opened on 14 December 1997. It links with LGV Nord on the border with France, allowing Eurostar trains heading to Brussels to make the transition between the two without having to reduce speed. A further four-minute improvement for London\u2013Brussels trains was achieved in December 2006, with the opening of the Brussels South Viaduct. Linking the international platforms of Brussels-South railway station with the high-speed line, the viaduct separates Eurostar (and Thalys) from local services.\nHigh Speed 1 (United Kingdom).\nHigh Speed 1 (HS1), formerly known as the Channel Tunnel Rail Link (CTRL), is a high-speed railway line running from London through Kent to the British end of the Channel Tunnel.\nIt was built in two stages. The first section between the tunnel and Fawkham Junction in north Kent opened in September 2003, cutting London\u2013Paris journey times by 21\u00a0minutes to 2\u00a0hours 35\u00a0minutes, and London\u2013Brussels to 2\u00a0hours 20\u00a0minutes. On 14 November 2007, commercial services began over the whole of the new HS1 line. The redeveloped London St Pancras International station became the new London terminus for all Eurostar services.\nThe completion of High Speed 1 has brought the British part of Eurostar's route up to the same standards as the French and Belgian high-speed lines. Non-stop journey times were reduced by a further 20\u00a0minutes to 2\u00a0hours 15\u00a0minutes for London\u2013Paris and 1\u00a0hour 51\u00a0minutes for London\u2013Brussels. As of Autumn 2020, HS1 is the UK's first renewable-powered railway.\nServices.\nFrequency.\nEurostar offers up to fifteen weekday London \u2013 Paris services (nineteen on Fridays) including nine non-stop (thirteen on Fridays). There are also nine (ten on Friday) London\u2013Brussels services, of which two run non-stop (continuing to Amsterdam) and a further two call at Lille only. One service daily operates to Amsterdam via Brussels and Rotterdam, also calling at Lille. There are also seasonal services: in the winter, \"Snow trains\", aimed at skiers, to Bourg-Saint-Maurice, Aime-la-Plagne and Mo\u00fbtiers in the Alps; these run weekly, arriving in the alps in the evening and leaving the same evening to arrive in London the following morning. In February 2018, Eurostar announced the start of its long-planned service from London to Amsterdam, with an initial two trains per day from April of that year running between St Pancras and Amsterdam Centraal. This launched as a one-way service, with return trains carrying passengers to Rotterdam and Brussels Midi/Zuid, making a 28-minute stop (which was not deemed long enough to process UK-bound passengers) and then carrying different passengers from Brussels to London. Initially passengers travelling back took a Thalys service to Brussels Midi/Zuid where they could join the Eurostar. This was due to the lack of facilities for juxtaposed controls by the UK Border Force at Amsterdam Centraal and Rotterdam Centraal. On 4 February 2020, the Dutch Minister of Infrastructure and Water Management, Cora van Nieuwenhuizen, and the UK Transport Secretary, Grant Shapps, announced that juxtaposed controls would be established at Amsterdam Centraal and Rotterdam Centraal. The direct train from Amsterdam was originally due to launch on 30 April 2020, and from Rotterdam on 18 May 2020, although it was later postponed to 26 October 2020 for both cities due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nSince 14 November 2007, all Eurostar trains have been routed via High Speed\u00a01 to or from the redeveloped London terminus at London St Pancras International, which at a cost of \u00a3800\u00a0million was extensively rebuilt and extended to cope with long Eurostar trains.\nIt had been intended to retain some Eurostar services at Waterloo International, but this was ruled out on cost grounds.\nCompletion of High Speed\u00a01 increased the potential number of trains serving London. Separation of Eurostar from British domestic services through Kent meant that timetabling was no longer affected by peak-hour restrictions.\nFares.\nEurostar's fares were significantly higher in its early years; the cheapest fare in 1994 was \u00a399 return.\nIn 2002, Eurostar was planning cheaper fares, an example of which was an offer of \u00a350-day returns from London to Paris or Brussels. \nBy March 2003, the cheapest fare from the UK was \u00a359 return, available all year around. In June 2009 it was announced that one-way single fares would be available at \u00a331 at the cheapest. Competition between Eurostar and airline services was a large factor in ticket prices being reduced from the initial levels.\nBusiness Premier fares also slightly undercut air fares on similar routes, targeted at regular business travellers.\nIn 2009, Eurostar greatly increased its budget ticket availability to help maintain and grow its dominant market share. \nThe Eurostar ticketing system is very complex, being distributed through no fewer than 48 individual sales systems.\nEurostar is a member of the Amadeus CRS distribution system, making its tickets available alongside those of airlines worldwide.\nEurostar has two sub-classes of first class: Standard Premier and Business Premier; benefits include guaranteed faster checking-in and meals served at-seat, as well as the improved furnishings and interior of carriages.\nThe rebranding is part of Eurostar's marketing drive to attract more business professionals. Increasingly, business people in a group have been chartering private carriages as opposed to individual seats on the train.\nService connections.\nWithout the operation of Regional Eurostar services using the North of London trainsets across the rest of Britain, Eurostar has developed its connections with other transport services instead, such as integrating effectively with traditional UK rail operators' schedules and routes, making it possible for passengers to use Eurostar as a quick connection to further destinations on the continent.\nAll three main terminals used by the Eurostar service \u2013 St Pancras International, Paris Gare du Nord, and Brussels Midi/Zuid \u2013 are served by domestic trains and by local urban transport networks such as the London Underground, Paris Metro Brussels Metro and Amsterdam Metro. Standard Eurostar tickets no longer include free onward connections to or from any other station in Belgium: this is now available for a flat-rate supplement, currently \u00a35.50.\nEurostar has announced several partnerships with other rail services,\nmost notably Thalys connections at Lille and Brussels for passengers to go beyond current Eurostar routes towards the Netherlands and Germany.\nIn 2002, Eurostar initiated the Eurostar-Plus program, offering connecting tickets for onward journeys from Lille and Paris to dozens of destinations in France. \nThrough fares are also available from 68 British towns and cities to destinations in France and Belgium.\nIn May 2009 Eurostar announced that a formal connection to Switzerland had been established in a partnership between Eurostar and Lyria, which will operate TGV services from Lille to the Swiss Alps for Eurostar connection.\nIn May 2019, Eurostar ended its agreement with Deutsche Bahn that allowed passengers to travel by train from the UK to Germany, Austria and Switzerland. Under the agreement passengers could travel on a single booking which made rescheduling easier. However, the direct tickets ceased to be sold from 9 November 2019.\nControls and security.\nBecause the UK is not part of the European Union or the Schengen Area, and because the Netherlands, Belgium and France are not part of the Common Travel Area, all Eurostar passengers must go through border controls. Both the British Government and the Schengen governments concerned (Belgium, Netherlands and France) have legal obligations to check the travel documents of those entering and leaving their respective countries.\nTo allow passengers to walk off the train without arrival checks in most cases, juxtaposed controls ordinarily take place at the embarkation station.\nTo comply with UK law, there are full security checks similar to those at airports, scanning both bags and people's pockets. The recommended check-in time is 90\u2013120 minutes except for business class where it is 45\u201360 minutes; these are much longer than previously because of extra checks in place due to Brexit and the COVID-19 pandemic.\nEurostar passengers travelling within the Schengen area on trains towards London bypass border checks, and enter the preallocated cars at the rear of the train, which are reserved for these passengers. This area is then searched at Lille and all passengers removed. This arrangement was set up after numerous people entered the UK without prior authorisation, by buying a ticket from Brussels to Lille or Calais but remaining on the train until London \u2013 an issue exacerbated by Belgian police threatening to arrest UK Border Agency staff at Brussels-South if they tried to prevent passengers whom they suspected of attempting to exploit this loophole from boarding Eurostar trains. Travel from Calais or Lille towards Brussels and the Netherlands has no border or security control. On 7 July 2020 a modified agreement was signed in Brussels that includes The Netherlands in the previous agreement. This allows for juxtaposed controls in Amsterdam and Rotterdam like those in Brussels and Paris.\nWhen the tripartite agreements were signed, the Belgian Government said that it had serious questions about the compatibility of this agreement with the Schengen Convention and the principle of free movement of people enshrined in various European treaties.\nOn 30 June 2009 Eurostar raised concerns at the UK House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee that it was illegal under French law to collect the information required by the UK government under the e-Borders scheme, and the company would be unable to cooperate.\nOn the northbound Disneyland and ski trains, the security check and French passport check take place at the origin, while the UK passport check takes place at the UK arrival stations. These are the only route where passengers are not cleared by UK border officials before crossing the Channel.\nOn the northbound Marseille-London train, there is no facility for security or passport checks at the southern French stations, so passengers must leave the train at Lille-Europe, taking all their belongings with them, and undergo security and border checks there before rejoining the train which waits at the station for just over an hour.\nOn several occasions, people have tried to stow away illegally on board the train, sometimes in large groups, trying to enter the UK; border monitoring and security is therefore extremely tight.\nEurostar claims to have good and well-funded security measures.\nOperational performance.\nEurostar's punctuality has fluctuated from year to year, but usually remains over 90%; in the first quarter of 1999, 89% of services operated were on time, and in the second quarter it reached 92%. Eurostar's best punctuality record was 97.35%, between 16 and 22 August 2004. In 2006, it was 92.7%, and in 2007, 91.5% were on time. In the first quarter of 2009, 96% of Eurostar services were punctual, compared with rival air routes' 76%.\nAn advantage held by Eurostar is the convenience and speed of the service: with shorter check-in times than at most airports and hence quicker boarding and less queueing and high punctuality, it takes less time to travel between central London and central Paris by high-speed rail than by air. Eurostar now has a dominant share of the combined rail\u2013air market on its routes to Paris and Brussels. In 2004, it had a 66% share of the London\u2013Paris market, and a 59% share of the London\u2013Brussels market. In 2007, it achieved record market shares of 71% for London\u2013Paris and 65% for London\u2013Brussels routes.\nEurostar's passenger numbers initially failed to meet predictions. In 1996, London and Continental Railways forecast that passenger numbers would reach 21.4\u00a0million annually by 2004, but only 7.3\u00a0million was achieved. 82 million passengers used Waterloo International Station from its opening in 1994 to its closure in 2007. 2008 was a record year for Eurostar, with a 10.3% rise in passenger use, which was attributed to the use of High Speed 1 and the move to St Pancras. The following year, Eurostar saw an 11.5% fall in passenger numbers during the first three months of 2009, attributed to the 2008 Channel Tunnel fire and the 2009 recession.\nAs a result of the poor economic conditions, Eurostar received state aid in May 2009 to cancel out some of the accumulated debt from the High Speed 1 construction programme. Later that year, during snowy conditions in the run-up to Christmas, thousands of passengers were left stranded as several trains broke down and many more were cancelled. In an independent review commissioned by Eurostar, the company came in for serious criticism about its handling of the incident and lack of plans for such a scenario.\nIn 2006, the Department for Transport predicted that, by 2037, annual cross-channel passenger numbers would probably reach 16 million, considerably less optimistic than London and Continental Railways's original 1996 forecast. In 2007 Eurostar set a target of carrying 10\u00a0million passengers by 2010.\nThe company cited several factors to support this objective, such as improved journey times, punctuality and station facilities. Passengers in general, it stated, are becoming increasingly aware of the environmental effects of air travel, and Eurostar services emit much less carbon dioxide. and that its remaining carbon emissions are now offset, making its services carbon neutral. Further expansion of the high-speed rail network in Europe, such as the HSL-Zuid line between Belgium and the Netherlands, continues to bring more destinations within rail-competitive range, giving Eurostar the possibility of opening up new services in future.\nThe following chart presents the estimated number of passengers annually transported by the Eurostar service since 1995:\nAwards and accolades.\nEurostar has been hailed as having set new standards in international rail travel and has won praise several times over for its high standards. However, Eurostar had previously struggled with its reputation and brand image. One commentator had defined the situation at the time as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In June 2003, Eurostar was battling to recover from the worst period in its 10-year history. Negative media coverage combined with poor sales and the general public's low opinion of the British rail industry, created a major challenge... Eurostar was finding it difficult to pick itself up from one of the worst periods in its decade-long history. The period post 9/11 had sent the business into a downturn. Passenger numbers were drying up due to worries over international travel. Several management changes had led to a pause in strategy. Punctuality had suffered badly because of wider problems with the UK's rail infrastructure.\nEurostar won the Train Operator of the Year award in the HSBC Rail Awards for 2005. In 2006, Eurostar's Environment Group was set up, with the aim of making changes in the Eurostar services' daily running to decrease negative environmental impact. The organization set itself a target of reducing carbon emissions per passenger journey by 25% by 2012. Drivers were trained in techniques to achieve maximum energy efficiency, and lighting was minimised; the provider of the bulk of the energy for the Channel Tunnel was switched to nuclear power stations in France. Eurostar's target was to reduce emissions by 35 percent per passenger journey by 2012, putting itself beyond the efforts of other railway companies in this field and thereby winning the 2007 Network Rail Efficiency Award. In the grand opening ceremony of St Pancras International, one of the Eurostar trains was given the name 'Tread Lightly', said to symbolise their smaller impact on the environment compared to planes. By 2008, Eurostar's environmental credentials had become highly developed and promoted.\nSince then, Eurostar has received multiple awards. It was declared the Best Train Company in the joint Guardian/Observer Travel Awards 2008 and earned a spot on the Sunday Times' Best Green Companies List (2009). Other awards include: ICARUS\u2019 Environmental Award for Best Rail Provider (2009), Guardian &amp; Observer Travel Award for Best Train Company (2009), Travel Weekly's Golden Globes Award for Best Rail Operator (2010), World Travel Market's Responsible Tourism Award for Best Low Carbon Initiative (2011), TNT Magazine's Gold Backpack Award for Favourite Travel Transport (2012), World Travel Awards Europe's Leading Passenger Rail Operator (2011), National Rail Awards Train of the Year (2017), PETA's Travel Award for Best Travel Experience (2019), Mobile Industry Awards' Distributor of the Year (2020).\nEnvironmental initiatives.\nIn 2007, Eurostar became the world's first carbon-neutral train service through its launch of \n\"Tread Lightly,\" an environmental programme with the goal of reducing the service's carbon-dioxide emissions by 25% by 2012. The programme included: reducing power consumption on its rolling stock; sourcing more electricity from lower-emission generators; adding new controls on lighting, heating, and air conditioning; reducing paper usage via electronic tickets; recycling water and employee uniforms; sourcing all food on board from Britain, France, or Belgium. Eurostar also funded three renewable energy projects in developing regions around the world: a windfarm in Tamil Nadu, India; a micro-hydropower project in China; and a plan specifying improvements on fuel consumption of three-wheeler taxis in Indonesia.\nIn 2019, Eurostar removed all single-use plastics from its trains between London and Paris. Now the trains serve only wooden cutlery, recyclable cans of water, glass wine bottles, paper-based coffee cups, and eco-friendly food packaging. Eurostar partnered with the Woodland Trust, ReforestAction, and Trees for All in 2020, with the goal of planting 20,000 trees each year in woodlands along its routes across the UK, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Since Tread Lightly launched, Eurostar has reduced its carbon footprint by over 40% and now emits up to 90% less greenhouse gas emissions than the equivalent flight.\nOrganisation.\nSince 2010, Eurostar has been operated by Eurostar International Limited (EIL), a company owned since April 2022 by Eurostar Group.\nRailteam.\nEurostar is a member of Railteam, a marketing alliance formed in July 2007 of seven European high-speed rail operators.\nThe alliance plans to allow tickets to be booked from one end of Europe to the other on a single website. In June 2009 London and Continental Railways, and the Eurostar UK operations they held ownership of, became fully nationalised by the UK government.\nDomestic journeys.\nEurostar is not permitted to carry passengers on journeys within a country, so passengers cannot travel (for example) from Lille to Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e\u2013Chessy, London to Ashford, or Rotterdam to Amsterdam. Lille to Brussels is the only international intra-Schengen journey that Eurostar is offering for sale.\nFleet.\nFleet details.\nIn addition to its multiple unit fleet units, Eurostar operates a single Class 08 diesel shunter as the pilot at Temple Mills depot.\nCurrent fleet.\nClass 373.\nBuilt between 1992 and 1996, Eurostar's fleet consisted of 38 EMU trains, designated Class 373 in the United Kingdom and TGV TMST in France. The units have also been branded as the Eurostar e300 by Eurostar since 2015. There are two variants:\nEach train has a unique four-digit number starting with \"3\" (3xxx). This designates the train as a Mark 3 TGV (Mark 1 being SNCF TGV Sud-Est; Mark 2 being SNCF TGV Atlantique). The second digit denotes the country of ownership:\nThe trains are essentially modified TGV sets, and can operate at up to on high-speed lines, and in the Channel Tunnel. It is possible to exceed the 300\u00a0km/h speed limit, but only with special permission from the safety authorities in the respective country.\nSpeed limits in the Channel Tunnel are dictated by air-resistance, energy (heat) dissipation and the need to be used with other, slower trains. The trains were designed with Channel Tunnel safety in mind, and consist of two independent \"half-sets\" each with its own power car. In the event of a serious fire on board while travelling through the tunnel, passengers would be transferred into the undamaged half of the train, which would then be detached and driven out of the tunnel to safety.\nIf the undamaged part were the rear half of the train, this would be driven by the Chef du Train, who is a fully authorised driver and occupies the rear driving cab while the train travels through the tunnel for this purpose.\nAs 27 of the 31 Inter-Capital sets were sufficient to operate the service, four were used by SNCF for domestic TGV services. The Eurostar logos were removed from these sets, but the base colours of white, black, and yellow remained.\nAs the Class 374 units have entered service the Class 373 fleet has gradually been reduced. 11 remain in regular service with 17 scrapped and 10 in store.\nFleet updates.\nIn 2004\u20132005 the \"Inter-Capital\" sets still in daily use for international services were refurbished with a new interior designed by Philippe Starck.\nThe original grey-yellow scheme in Standard class and grey-red of First/Premium First were replaced with a grey-brown look in Standard and grey-burnt-orange in First class. Power points were added to seats in First class and coaches 5 and 14 in Standard class. Premium First class was renamed BusinessPremier.\nIn 2008, Eurostar announced that it would be carrying out a mid-life refurbishment of its Class 373 trains to allow the fleet to remain in service beyond 2020.\nThis will include the 28 units making up the Eurostar fleet, but not the three Class 373/1 units used by SNCF or the seven Class 373/2 \"North of London\" sets.\nAs part of the refurbishment, the Italian company Pininfarina was contracted to redesign the interiors, and The Yard Creative was selected to design the new buffet cars.\nOn 11 May 2009 Eurostar revealed the new look for its first-class compartments.\nThe first refurbished train was due in service in 2012, and Eurostar planned to complete the entire process by 2014. On 13 November 2014 Eurostar announced the first refurbished trains would not re-enter the fleet until the 3rd or 4th quarter of 2015 due to delays at the completion centre. The last refurbished \"e300\" eventually re-entered service in April 2019.\nClass 374.\nIn addition to the announced mid-life update of the existing Class 373 fleet, Eurostar in 2009 reportedly entered prequalification bids for eight new trainsets to be purchased. Any new trains would need to meet the same safety rules governing passage through the Channel Tunnel as the existing Class 373 fleet. The replacement to the Class 373 trains has been decided jointly between the French Transport Ministry and the UK Department for Transport. The new trains will be equipped to use the new ERTMS in-cab signalling system, due to be fitted to High Speed 1 around 2040.\nOn 7 October 2010, it was reported that Eurostar had selected Siemens as preferred bidder to supply 10 Siemens Velaro e320 trainsets at a cost of \u20ac600 million (and a total investment of more than \u00a3700 million with the refurbishment of the existing fleet included) to operate an expanded route network, including services from London to Cologne and Amsterdam. These would be sixteen-car, long trainsets built to meet current Channel Tunnel regulations. The top speed will be and they will have 894\u2013950 seats, unlike the current fleet built by the French company Alstom, which has a top speed of and a seating capacity of 750. Total traction power will be rated at 16 MW.\nThe nomination of Siemens would see it break into the French high-speed market for the first time, as all French and French subsidiary high-speed operators use TGV derivatives produced by Alstom. Alstom attempted legal action to prevent Eurostar from acquiring German-built trains, claiming that the Siemens sets ordered would breach Channel Tunnel safety rules, but this was thrown out of court. Alstom said, after its High Court defeat, that it would \"pursue alternative legal options to uphold its position\". On 4 November 2010, the company lodged a complaint with the European Commission over the tendering process, which then asked the British government for \"clarification\". Alstom then announced it had started legal action against Eurostar, again in the High Court in London.\nIn July 2011, the High Court rejected Alstom's claim that the tender process was \"ineffective\", and in April 2012 Alstom said it would call off pending court actions against Siemens. This effectively freed the way for Siemens to build the new Eurostar trains, the first of which were expected to enter service in late 2015.\nOn 13 November 2014 Eurostar announced the purchase of an additional seven e320s for delivery in the second half of 2016. At the same time, Eurostar announced the first five e320s from the original order of ten would be available by December 2015, with the remaining five entering service by May 2016. Of the five sets ready by December 2015, three of them were planned to be used on London-Paris and London-Brussels routes.\nPossible use of double-deck trains.\nIn 2005, the chief executive of Eurostar, Richard Brown, suggested that existing Eurostar trains could be replaced by double-deck trains similar to the TGV Duplex units when they are withdrawn from service. According to Brown, a double-deck fleet could carry 40\u00a0million passengers per year from Britain to Continental Europe, equivalent to adding an extra runway at a London airport.\nAccidents, incidents and events.\nA number of technical incidents have affected Eurostar services over the years, but up to the present[ [update]] there has only been one major accident involving a service operated by Eurostar, a derailment in June 2000. Other incidents in the Channel Tunnel \u2013 such as the 1996 and 2008 Channel Tunnel fires \u2013 have affected Eurostar services but were not directly related to Eurostar's operations. However, the breakdowns in the tunnel, which resulted in cessation of service and inconvenience to thousands of passengers, in the run-up to Christmas 2009, proved a public-relations disaster.\nMinor incidents.\nThere have been several minor incidents with a few Eurostar services. In October 1994 there were teething problems relating to the start of operations. The first preview train, carrying 400\u00a0members of the press and media, was delayed for two hours by technical problems.\nOn 29 May 2002 a Eurostar train was initially sent down a wrong line \u2013 towards London Victoria railway station instead of Waterloo International \u2013 causing the service to arrive 25\u00a0minutes late. A signalling error that led to the incorrect routeing was stated to have caused \"no risk\" as a result.\nOn 11 April 2006, a house collapsed next to a railway line near London which caused Eurostar services to have to terminate and start from Ashford International instead of Waterloo International. Passengers waiting at Waterloo International were initially directed on to local trains towards Ashford leaving from the adjacent London Waterloo East railway station, until overcrowding occurred at Ashford.\n1996.\nApproximately 1,000 passengers were trapped in darkness for several hours inside two Eurostar trains on the night of 19/20 February 1996. The trains stopped inside the tunnels due to electronic failures caused by snow and ice. Questions were raised at the time about the ability of the train and tunnel electronics to withstand the mix of snow, salt and ice which collect in the tunnels during periods of extreme cold.\n2000.\nOn 5 June 2000 a Eurostar train travelling from Paris to London derailed on the LGV Nord high-speed line while traveling at . Fourteen people were treated for light injuries or shock, with no fatalities or major injuries. The articulated nature of the trainset was credited with maintaining stability during the incident and all of the train stayed upright. The incident was caused by a traction link on the second bogie of the front power car coming loose, leading to components of the transmission system on that bogie impacting the track.\n2007.\nThe first departures from London St Pancras International on 14 November 2007 coincided with an open-ended strike by French rail unions as part of general strike actions over proposed public-sector pension reforms. The trains were operated by uninvolved British employees and service was not interrupted.\n2009.\nOn 23 September 2009 an overhead power line dropped on to a Class 373 train arriving at London St Pancras International station, activating a circuit breaker and delaying 11 other trains. Two days later, on 25 September 2009, electrical power via the overhead lines was lost on a section of high-speed line outside Lille, delaying passengers on two evening Eurostar-operated services.\nDuring the December 2009 European snowfall, five Eurostar trains broke down inside the Channel Tunnel, after leaving France, and one in Kent on 18 December. Although the trains had been winterised, the systems had not coped with the conditions. Over 2,000passengers were stuck inside failed trains inside the tunnel, and over 75,000 had their services disrupted. All Eurostar services were cancelled from Saturday 19 December to Monday 21 December 2009. An independent review, published on 12 February 2010, was critical of the contingency plans in place for assisting passengers stranded by the delays, calling them \"insufficient\".\n2010.\nOn 7 January 2010, a Brussels-London train broke down in the Channel Tunnel, resulting in three other trains failing to complete their journeys. The cause of the failure was the onboard signalling system. Due to the severe weather, a limited service was operated in the next few days.\nOn 15 February 2010, services between Brussels and London were interrupted following the Halle train collision, this time after the dedicated HSL 1 lines in the suburbs of the Belgian capital were blocked by debris from a serious train crash on the suburban commuter lines alongside. No efforts were made to reroute trains around the blockage; Eurostar instead terminated services to Brussels at Lille, directing passengers to continue their journey on local trains. Brussels services resumed on a limited scale on 22 February.\nOn 21 February 2010, the 21:43 service from Paris to London broke down just outside Ashford International, stranding 740passengers for several hours while a rescue train was called in.\nOn 15 April 2010, air traffic in Western Europe closed because of the eruption of the Eyjafjallaj\u00f6kull volcano. Many travellers between the UK and the European mainland instead took the Eurostar train, all tickets between Brussels and London on 15 and 16 April being sold out within 3\u00bdhours after the closure of British airspace.\n Between 15 and 20 April, Eurostar put on 33 additional trains and carried 165,000passengers \u2013 50,000 more than had been scheduled to travel during this period.\nOn 20 December 2010, the Channel Tunnel was closed off for a day due to snowy weather. Eurostar services were suspended that day with thousands of passengers stranded in the run up to Christmas.\n2011.\nOn 17 October 2011 a man fell from the 17:04 service from London to Brussels as it passed through Westenhanger and Cheriton in Folkestone, near the entry to the Channel Tunnel. The individual was an Albanian who had been refused entry to the United Kingdom and was voluntarily returning to Brussels. He was pronounced dead at the scene. The line was closed for several hours following the incident. The train itself returned north to Ashford International, where passengers were transferred to a Eurostar service operating from Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e to London.\nPossible developments.\nStratford International station.\nEurostar trains do not currently call at Stratford International, which was intended to be a London stop for the regional Eurostars when the station was constructed. This was to be reviewed following the 2012 Olympics. However, in 2013, Eurostar claimed that its 'business would be hit' by stopping trains there.\nRegional Eurostar.\nAlthough the original plan for Regional Eurostar services to destinations north of London was abandoned, the significantly improved journey times available since the opening of High Speed 1 \u2014 which is physically connected to both the East Coast Main Line and the North London Line (for the West Coast Main Line) at London St Pancras International \u2013 and the increased maximum speeds on the West Coast Main Line since the 2000s may make potential Regional Eurostar services more commercially viable. This would be even more likely if proposals are adopted for a new high-speed line from London to the north of Britain.\nSimon Montague, Eurostar's Director of Communications, commented that: \"...International services to the regions are only likely once High Speed 2 is built.\" However, as of 2014 the current plans for High Speed 2 do not allow for a direct rail link between that new line, and High Speed 1, meaning passengers would still be required to change at London Euston and take some form of transportation to London St Pancras International.\nKey pieces of infrastructure still belong to LCR via its subsidiary London &amp; Continental Stations and Property, such as the Manchester International Depot, and Eurostar (UK) still owns several track access rights and the rights to paths on both the East Coast Main Line and the West Coast Main Line.\nWhile no announcement has been made of plans to start Regional Eurostar services, it remains a possibility for the future. In the meantime, the closest equivalent to Regional Eurostar services are same-station connections with East Midlands Railway and Thameslink, changing at London St Pancras International. The construction of a new concourse at adjacent London King's Cross improved interchange with St Pancras and provided London North Eastern Railway, Great Northern, Hull Trains and Grand Central services with easier connections to Eurostar.\nHigh Speed 2.\nEurostar has already been involved in reviewing and publishing reports into High Speed 2 for the British Government and looks favourably upon such an undertaking. The operation of Regional Eurostar services will not be considered until such time as High Speed 2 has been completed. Alternatively, future loans of the North of London sets to other operators would enable the trains to operate at their full speed, unlike GNER's previous loan between 2000 and 2005, where the trains were limited to on regular track.\nLGV Picardie.\nLGV Picardie is a proposed high-speed line between Paris and Calais via Amiens. By cutting off the corner of the LGV Nord at Lille, it would enable Eurostar trains to save 20\u00a0minutes on the journey between Paris and Calais, bringing the London\u2013Paris journey time under 2\u00a0hours. In 2008 the French Government announced its future investment plans for new LGVs to be built up to 2020; LGV Picardie was not included but was listed as planned in the longer term.\nNew destinations.\nOperational difficulties with cross-border trains.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We know we can go to most places in France physically, because our trains are compatible with French infrastructure, but then you've got to look at impact on fleet utilisation, you've got to have a station that's got the spare capacity to have a train stood for a number of hours, for all the security, screening, passport control passes. So it's not possible to go just anywhere. And you've got to be able to get the control authorities to agree that there's a big enough market for it to be worthwhile for them to set up there.\"\nThe reduced journey times offered by the opening of High Speed 1 and the opening of the LGV Est and HSL-Zuid bring more continental destinations\nwithin a range from London where rail is competitive with air travel. By Eurostar's estimates a train would then take 3 hours 30 minutes from London to Amsterdam.\nAt present Eurostar is concentrating on developing its connections with other services, but direct services to other destinations would be possible. With the new e320 rolling stock allowed Eurostar to enter the Netherlands and possibly Germany in future. In additional with every new country Eurostar enters there are security issues, due to the UK's not having signed up to the Schengen Agreement, which allows unrestricted movement across borders of member countries. For example, the Amsterdam to London route was previously direct in only one way, with people needing to get a train to Brussels to go through the juxtaposed controls; the direct connection was subject to talks between the UK and Dutch governments, and became completed in 2020 for services to start.\nThe difficulties that Eurostar faces in expanding its services would also be faced by any potential competitors to Eurostar. As the UK is outside the Schengen Agreement, London-bound trains must use platforms that are physically isolated, a constraint which other international operators such as Thalys do not face. In addition, the British authorities are required to make passenger security and passport checks before they board the train,\nwhich might deter domestic passengers. Compounding the difficulties in providing a similar service are the Channel Tunnel safety rules, the major ones being the \"half-train rule\" and the \"length rule\". The \"half-train rule\" stipulated that passenger trains had to be able to split in the case of emergency. Class 373 trains were designed as two half-sets, which when coupled form a complete train, enabling them to be split easily in the event of an emergency while in the tunnel, with the unaffected set able to be driven out. The half-train rule was finally abolished in May 2010. However, the \"length rule\", which states that passenger trains must be at least 375 metres long with a through corridor (to match the distance between the safety doors in the tunnel), was retained, preventing any potential operators from applying to run services with existing fleets (the majority of both TGV and ICE trains are only 200m long).\nEurostar expansion.\nAt the same time as Pepy's announcement, Richard Brown announced that Eurostar's plans for expanding its network potentially included Amsterdam and Rotterdam as destinations, using the HSL Zuid line. This would require either equipment upgrades of the existing fleet, or a new fleet equipped for both ERTMS and the domestic signalling systems used by Nederlandse Spoorwegen. Following the December 2009 opening of HSL Zuid, a London\u2013Amsterdam journey is estimated to take 4 hr 16 min.\nIn an interview with Eurostar's Chief Executive Nicolas Petrovic in the \"Financial Times\" in May 2012, an intention for Eurostar to serve ten new destinations was expressed, including Amsterdam, Frankfurt, Cologne, Lyon, Marseille and Geneva, along with a likely second hub to be created in Brussels.\nIn March 2016 in an interview with Bloomberg, Eurostar's Chief Executive expressed interest in operating a direct train service between London and Bordeaux, but not before 2019. Journey time was said to be around four and a half hours using the new LGV Sud Europe Atlantique.\nSouthern France.\nIn December 2012 Eurostar announced that on Saturdays during May 2013\u2013June 2013 a new seasonal service would be introduced to Aix-en-Provence, also serving Lyon-Part-Dieu and Avignon TGV on the way (the latter being from central Avignon). This was in addition to the seasonal service launched in 2002 which ran on Saturdays during July and August and the first week of September travelling to Avignon-Centre. The Aix-en-Provence services did not run in 2014 but was replaced along with the seasonal Avignon Centre services with the new year-round service to Lyon, Avignon and Marseille as of 1 May 2015.\nThe winter service ended in November 2017, meaning that - from 2018 - these services ran only from May to September, with connections during the rest of the year being offered via Eurostar, but requiring a change to SNCF trains in Paris or Lille. Travel time from London to Marseille was roughly 6.5 hours in 2018. These services have been suspended since 2019.\nNetherlands.\nIn September 2013, Eurostar announced an agreement with the Government of Netherlands and NS, the Dutch railway company, to start twice daily services between London and Amsterdam Centraal; the launch was initially planned for December 2016. With a journey time of around four hours, the service would use the newly bought Siemens Velaro trainsets and also call at Brussels, and Rotterdam.\nInitially, trains stopped in Brussels for about half an hour to allow domestic passengers from Amsterdam and Rotterdam to leave and let London bound passengers to board. The Brussels-bound half of the train was then security-swept on arrival at Brussels before Brussels-to-London passengers could board.\nThe journey from London to Amsterdam Centraal was initially planned to take 3 hr 41 min with trains calling at Brussels-South and Rotterdam Centraal Station. From Amsterdam Centraal to London St Pancras International, trains took 4 hr 9 min to include the 28-minute stop at Brussels-South.\nIn November 2014, Eurostar announced the service to Amsterdam would start in \"2016\u20132017\", and would include a stop at Schiphol Airport in addition to the previously announced destinations. Eurostar indicated that the calling pattern was \"not set in stone\" and if a business case supported it the service might be extended to additional cities such as Utrecht.\nThe service was finally planned to start running on 4 April 2018, with fare prices starting at \u00a335 for a single ticket. An \"inaugural train\" from London St Pancras International to Amsterdam via Rotterdam broke a speed record for the journey to Brussels (1hr 46mins) on 20 February 2018. The first regular service to Amsterdam left London St Pancras International at 08:31 on 4 April 2018.\nThe direct Amsterdam to London service launched on 26 October 2020 with two trains a day Monday\u2013Friday. Until that date, a change in Brussels for passport controls and security added about an hour to journey time. Eurostar stated that the new journey time to London was 4 hr 9 min from Amsterdam, and 3 hr 29 min from Rotterdam.\nCompetition.\nIn 2010, international rail travel was liberalised by new European Union directives, designed to break up monopolies in order to encourage competition for services between countries. \nThis sparked interest among other companies in providing services in competition to Eurostar and new services to destinations beyond Paris and Brussels. The only rail carrier to formally propose and secure permission for such a service up to now is Deutsche Bahn, which intends to run services between London and Germany and the Netherlands. The sale of High Speed One by the British Government having effectively nationalised LCR in June 2009 is also likely to stimulate competition on the line.\nIn March 2010, it was announced that Eurotunnel was in discussions with the Intergovernment Commission, which oversees the tunnel, with the aim of amending elements of the safety code governing the tunnel's usage. Most saliently, the requirement that trains be able to split within the tunnel and each part of the train be driven out to opposite ends has been removed. However, the proposal to allow shorter trains was not passed. Eurotunnel Chairman &amp; Chief Executive Jacques Gounon said that he hoped the liberalisation of rules would allow entry into the market of competitors such as Deutsche Bahn. Sources at Eurotunnel suggested that Deutsche Bahn could have entered the market at the timetable change in December 2012. This, however, did not happen.\nIn July 2010 Deutsche Bahn (DB) announced that it intended to make a test run with a high-speed ICE-3MF train through the Channel Tunnel in October 2010 in preparation for possible future operations. The trial ran on 19 October 2010 with a Class 406 ICE train specially liveried with a British \"Union flag\" decal. The train was then put on display for the press at London St Pancras International. However, this is not the class of train that would be used for the proposed service. At the London St Pancras International ceremony, DB revealed that it planned to operate from London to Frankfurt and Amsterdam (two of the biggest air travel markets in Europe), with trains 'splitting &amp; joining' in Brussels. It hoped to begin these services in 2013 using Class 407 ICE units, with three trains per day each way\u2014morning, midday and afternoon. Initially the only calling points would be Rotterdam on the way to Amsterdam, and K\u00f6ln on the way to Frankfurt. Amsterdam and K\u00f6ln would be under four hours from London, Frankfurt around five hours. DB decided to put this on hold mainly due to advance passport check requirements. DB had hoped that immigration checks could be done on board, but British authorities required immigration and security checks to be done at Lille-Europe station, taking at least 30 minutes.\nIn August 2010, Trenitalia announced its desire to eventually run high-speed trains from Italy to the United Kingdom, using its newly ordered high-speed trains. The trains will be delivered from 2013.\nRidership.\nIn 2019 cumulative ridership since 1994 surpassed 200 million .11 million passengers travelled on its international services during 2018, the highest ever, a 7% increase on the 10.3 million carried in 2017.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10094", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10094", "title": "Eurostar train", "text": ""}
{"id": "10100", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10100", "title": "Equinox", "text": "Semi-annual astronomical event where the Sun is directly above the Earth's equator\nA solar equinox is a moment in time when the Sun crosses the Earth's equator, which is to say, appears directly above the equator, rather than north or south of the equator. On the day of the equinox, the Sun appears to rise \"due east\" and set \"due west\". This occurs twice each year, around 20 March and 23 September.\nMore precisely, an equinox is traditionally defined as the time when the plane of Earth's equator passes through the geometric center of the Sun's disk. Equivalently, this is the moment when Earth's rotation axis is directly perpendicular to the Sun-Earth line, tilting neither toward nor away from the Sun. In modern times, since the Moon (and to a lesser extent the planets) causes Earth's orbit to vary slightly from a perfect ellipse, the equinox is officially defined by the Sun's more regular ecliptic longitude rather than by its declination. The instants of the equinoxes are currently defined to be when the apparent geocentric longitude of the Sun is 0\u00b0 and 180\u00b0.\nThe word is derived from the Latin ', from ' (equal) and ' (genitive ') (night). On the day of an equinox, daytime and nighttime are of approximately equal duration all over the planet. They are not exactly equal, however, because of the angular size of the Sun, atmospheric refraction, and the rapidly changing duration of the length of day that occurs at most latitudes around the equinoxes. Long before conceiving this equality, primitive equatorial cultures noted the day when the Sun rises due east and sets due west, and indeed this happens on the day closest to the astronomically defined event. As a consequence, according to a properly constructed and aligned sundial, the daytime duration is 12 hours.\nIn the Northern Hemisphere, the March equinox is called the vernal or spring equinox while the September equinox is called the autumnal or fall equinox. In the Southern Hemisphere, the reverse is true. During the year, equinoxes alternate with solstices. Leap years and other factors cause the dates of both events to vary slightly.\nHemisphere-neutral names are \"northward equinox\" for the March equinox, indicating that at that moment the solar declination is crossing the celestial equator in a northward direction, and \"southward equinox\" for the September equinox, indicating that at that moment the solar declination is crossing the celestial equator in a southward direction.\nEquinoxes on Earth.\nGeneral.\nSystematically observing the sunrise, people discovered that it occurs between two extreme locations at the horizon and eventually noted the midpoint between the two. Later it was realized that this happens on a day when the duration of the day and the night are practically equal and the word \"equinox\" comes from Latin \"aequus\", meaning \"equal\", and \"nox\", meaning \"night\".\nIn the northern hemisphere, the \"vernal equinox\" (March) conventionally marks the beginning of spring in most cultures and is considered the start of the New Year in the Assyrian calendar, Hindu, and the Persian or Iranian calendars, while the \"autumnal equinox\" (September) marks the beginning of autumn. Ancient Greek calendars too had the beginning of the year either at the autumnal or vernal equinox and some at solstices. The Antikythera mechanism predicts the equinoxes and solstices.\nThe equinoxes are the only times when the solar terminator (the \"edge\" between night and day) is perpendicular to the equator. As a result, the northern and southern hemispheres are equally illuminated.\nFor the same reason, this is also the time when the Sun rises for an observer at one of Earth's rotational poles and sets at the other. For a brief period lasting approximately four days, both North and South Poles are in daylight. For example, in 2021 sunrise on the North Pole is 18 March 07:09 UTC, and sunset on the South Pole is 22 March 13:08 UTC. Also in 2021, sunrise on the South Pole is 20 September 16:08 UTC, and sunset on the North Pole is 24 September 22:30 UTC.\nIn other words, the equinoxes are the only times when the subsolar point is on the equator, meaning that the Sun is exactly overhead at a point on the equatorial line. The subsolar point crosses the equator moving northward at the March equinox and southward at the September equinox.\nDate.\nWhen Julius Caesar established the Julian calendar in 45\u00a0BC, he set 25\u00a0March as the date of the spring equinox; this was already the starting day of the year in the Persian and Indian calendars. Because the Julian year is longer than the tropical year by about 11.3\u00a0minutes on average (or 1\u00a0day in 128\u00a0years), the calendar \"drifted\" with respect to the two equinoxes \u2013 so that in 300\u00a0AD the spring equinox occurred on about 21\u00a0March, and by the 1580s\u00a0AD it had drifted backwards to 11\u00a0March.\nThis drift induced Pope Gregory XIII to establish the modern Gregorian calendar. The Pope wanted to continue to conform with the edicts of the Council of Nicaea in 325\u00a0AD concerning the date of Easter, which means he wanted to move the vernal equinox to the date on which it fell at that time (21\u00a0March is the day allocated to it in the Easter table of the Julian calendar), and to maintain it at around that date in the future, which he achieved by reducing the number of leap years from 100 to 97 every 400\u00a0years. However, there remained a small residual variation in the date and time of the vernal equinox of about \u00b127\u00a0hours from its mean position, virtually all because the distribution of 24\u00a0hour centurial leap-days causes large jumps (see ).\nModern dates.\nThe dates of the equinoxes change progressively during the leap-year cycle, because the Gregorian calendar year is not commensurate with the period of the Earth's revolution about the Sun. It is only after a complete Gregorian leap-year cycle of 400\u00a0years that the seasons commence at approximately the same time. In the 21st\u00a0century the earliest March equinox will be 19\u00a0March 2096, while the latest was 21\u00a0March 2003. The earliest September equinox will be 21\u00a0September 2096 while the latest was 23\u00a0September 2003 (Universal Time).\nLength of equinoctial day and night.\nDay is usually defined as the period when sunlight reaches the ground in the absence of local obstacles. On the date of the equinox, the center of the Sun spends a roughly equal amount of time above and below the horizon at every location on the Earth, so night and day are about the same length. Sunrise and sunset can be defined in several ways, but a widespread definition is the time that the top limb of the Sun is level with the horizon. With this definition, the day is longer than the night at the equinoxes:\nIn sunrise/sunset tables, the atmospheric refraction is assumed to be 34\u00a0arcminutes, and the assumed semidiameter (apparent radius) of the Sun is 16\u00a0arcminutes. (The apparent radius varies slightly depending on time of year, slightly larger at perihelion in January than aphelion in July, but the difference is comparatively small.) Their combination means that when the upper limb of the Sun is on the visible horizon, its centre is 50\u00a0arcminutes below the geometric horizon, which is the intersection with the celestial sphere of a horizontal plane through the eye of the observer.\nThese effects make the day about 14\u00a0minutes longer than the night at the equator and longer still towards the poles. The real equality of day and night only happens in places far enough from the equator to have a seasonal difference in day length of at least 7\u00a0minutes, actually occurring a few days towards the winter side of each equinox.\nThe times of sunset and sunrise vary with the observer's location (longitude and latitude), so the dates when day and night are equal also depend upon the observer's location.\nA third correction for the visual observation of a sunrise (or sunset) is the angle between the apparent horizon as seen by an observer and the geometric (or sensible) horizon. This is known as the dip of the horizon and varies from 3\u00a0arcminutes for a viewer standing on the sea shore to 160\u00a0arcminutes for a mountaineer on Everest. The effect of a larger dip on taller objects (reaching over 2\u00bd\u00b0 of arc on Everest) accounts for the phenomenon of snow on a mountain peak turning gold in the sunlight long before the lower slopes are illuminated.\nThe date on which the day and night are exactly the same is known as an \"equilux\"; the neologism, believed to have been coined in the 1980s, achieved more widespread recognition in the 21st\u00a0century. At the most precise measurements, a true equilux is rare, because the lengths of day and night change more rapidly than any other time of the year around the equinoxes. In the mid-latitudes, daylight increases or decreases by about three minutes per day at the equinoxes, and thus adjacent days and nights only reach within one minute of each other. The date of the closest approximation of the equilux varies slightly by latitude; in the mid-latitudes, it occurs a few days before the spring equinox and after the fall equinox in each respective hemisphere.\nGeocentric view of the astronomical seasons.\nIn the half-year centered on the June solstice, the Sun rises north of east and sets north of west, which means longer days with shorter nights for the northern hemisphere and shorter days with longer nights for the southern hemisphere. In the half-year centered on the December solstice, the Sun rises south of east and sets south of west and the durations of day and night are reversed.\nAlso on the day of an equinox, the Sun rises everywhere on Earth (except at the poles) at about 06:00 and sets at about 18:00 (local solar time). These times are not exact for several reasons:\nDay arcs of the Sun.\nSome of the statements above can be made clearer by picturing the day arc (i.e., the path along which the Sun appears to move across the sky). The pictures show this for every hour on equinox day. In addition, some 'ghost' suns are also indicated below the horizon, up to 18\u00b0 below it; the Sun in such areas still causes twilight. The depictions presented below can be used for both the northern and the southern hemispheres. The observer is understood to be sitting near the tree on the island depicted in the middle of the ocean; the green arrows give cardinal directions.\nThe following special cases are depicted:\nCelestial coordinate systems.\nThe March equinox occurs about when the Sun appears to cross the celestial equator northward. In the Northern Hemisphere, the term \"vernal point\" is used for the time of this occurrence and for the precise direction in space where the Sun exists at that time. This point is the origin of some celestial coordinate systems, which are usually rooted to an astronomical epoch since it gradually varies (precesses) over time:\nThe modern definition of equinox is the instant when the Sun's apparent geocentric ecliptic longitude is 0\u00b0 (northward equinox) or 180\u00b0 (southward equinox). Note that at that moment, its latitude will not be exactly zero, since Earth is not exactly in the plane of the ecliptic. Its declination will also not be exactly zero, so the scientific definition is slightly different from the traditional one. The \"mean\" ecliptic is defined by the barycenter of Earth and the Moon combined, to minimize the fact that the orbital inclination of the Moon causes the Earth to wander slightly above and below the ecliptic. See the adjacent diagram.\nBecause of the precession of the Earth's axis, the position of the vernal point on the celestial sphere changes over time, and the equatorial and the ecliptic coordinate systems change accordingly. Thus when specifying celestial coordinates for an object, one has to specify at what time the vernal point and the celestial equator are taken. That reference time can either be a conventional time (like J2000), or an arbitrary point in time, as for the equinox of date.\nThe upper culmination of the vernal point is considered the start of the sidereal day for the observer. The hour angle of the vernal point is, by definition, the observer's sidereal time.\nUsing the current official IAU constellation boundaries \u2013 and taking into account the variable precession speed and the rotation of the celestial equator \u2013 the equinoxes shift through the constellations as follows (expressed in astronomical year numbering when the year 0 \n 1\u00a0BC, \u22121 \n 2\u00a0BC, etc.):\nCultural aspects.\nThe equinoxes are sometimes regarded as the start of spring and autumn. A number of traditional harvest festivals are celebrated on the date of the equinoxes.\nReligious architecture is often determined by the equinox; the Angkor Wat Equinox during which the sun rises in a perfect alignment over Angkor Wat in Cambodia is one such example.\nCatholic churches, since the recommendations of Charles Borromeo, have chosen the equinox as their reference point for the orientation of churches.\nEffects on satellites.\nOne effect of equinoctial periods is the temporary disruption of communications satellites. For all geostationary satellites, there are a few days around the equinox when the Sun goes directly behind the satellite relative to Earth (i.e. within the beam-width of the ground-station antenna) for a short period each day. The Sun's immense power and broad radiation spectrum overload the Earth station's reception circuits with noise and, depending on antenna size and other factors, temporarily disrupt or degrade the circuit. The duration of those effects varies but can range from a few minutes to an hour. (For a given frequency band, a larger antenna has a narrower beam-width and hence experiences shorter duration \"Sun outage\" windows.)\nSatellites in geostationary orbit also experience difficulties maintaining power during the equinox because they have to travel through Earth's shadow and rely only on battery power. Usually, a satellite travels either north or south of the Earth's shadow because Earth's axis is not directly perpendicular to a line from the Earth to the Sun at other times. During the equinox, since geostationary satellites are situated above the Equator, they are in Earth's shadow for the longest duration all year.\nEquinoxes on other planets.\nEquinoxes are defined on any planet with a tilted rotational axis. A dramatic example is Saturn, where the equinox places its ring system edge-on facing the Sun. As a result, they are visible only as a thin line when seen from Earth. When seen from above \u2013 a view seen during an equinox for the first time from the \"Cassini\" space probe in 2009 \u2013 they receive very little sunshine; indeed, they receive more planetshine than light from the Sun. This phenomenon occurs once every 14.7\u00a0years on average, and can last a few weeks before and after the exact equinox. Saturn's most recent equinox was on 11\u00a0August 2009, and its next will take place on 6\u00a0May 2025.\nMars's most recent equinoxes were on 24\u00a0February 2022 (northern autumn), and on 26\u00a0December 2022 (northern spring).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10101", "revid": "30746614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10101", "title": "Eugene Wigner", "text": "Hungarian-American physicist and mathematician (1902\u20131995)\nEugene Paul \"E. P.\" Wigner (, ]; November 17, 1902 \u2013 January 1, 1995) was a Hungarian-American theoretical physicist who also contributed to mathematical physics. He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963 \"for his contributions to the theory of the atomic nucleus and the elementary particles, particularly through the discovery and application of fundamental symmetry principles\".\nA graduate of the Technical University of Berlin, Wigner worked as an assistant to Karl Weissenberg and Richard Becker at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin, and David Hilbert at the University of G\u00f6ttingen. Wigner and Hermann Weyl were responsible for introducing group theory into physics, particularly the theory of symmetry in physics. Along the way he performed ground-breaking work in pure mathematics, in which he authored a number of mathematical theorems. In particular, Wigner's theorem is a cornerstone in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. He is also known for his research into the structure of the atomic nucleus. In 1930, Princeton University recruited Wigner, along with John von Neumann, and he moved to the United States, where he obtained citizenship in 1937.\nWigner participated in a meeting with Leo Szilard and Albert Einstein that resulted in the Einstein\u2013Szilard letter, which prompted President Franklin D. Roosevelt to initiate the Manhattan Project to develop atomic bombs. Wigner was afraid that the German nuclear weapon project would develop an atomic bomb first. During the Manhattan Project, he led a team whose task was to design nuclear reactors to convert uranium into weapons grade plutonium. At the time, reactors existed only on paper, and no reactor had yet gone critical. Wigner was disappointed that DuPont was given responsibility for the detailed design of the reactors, not just their construction. He became Director of Research and Development at the Clinton Laboratory (now the Oak Ridge National Laboratory) in early 1946, but became frustrated with bureaucratic interference by the Atomic Energy Commission, and returned to Princeton.\nIn the postwar period, he served on a number of government bodies, including the National Bureau of Standards from 1947 to 1951, the mathematics panel of the National Research Council from 1951 to 1954, the physics panel of the National Science Foundation, and the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1952 to 1957 and again from 1959 to 1964. In later life, he became more philosophical, and published \"The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences\", his best-known work outside technical mathematics and physics.\nEarly life.\nWigner Jen\u0151 P\u00e1l was born in Budapest, Austria-Hungary on November 17, 1902, to middle class Jewish parents, Elisabeth Elsa Einhorn and Antal Anton Wigner, a leather tanner. He had an older sister, Berta, known as Biri, and a younger sister Margit, known as Manci, who later married British theoretical physicist Paul Dirac. He was home schooled by a professional teacher until the age of 9, when he started school at the third grade. During this period, Wigner developed an interest in mathematical problems. At the age of 11, Wigner contracted what his doctors believed to be tuberculosis. His parents sent him to live for six weeks in a sanatorium in the Austrian mountains, before the doctors concluded that the diagnosis was mistaken.\nWigner's family was Jewish, but not religiously observant, and his Bar Mitzvah was a secular one. From 1915 through 1919, he studied at the secondary grammar school called Fasori Evang\u00e9likus Gimn\u00e1zium, the school his father had attended. Religious education was compulsory, and he attended classes in Judaism taught by a rabbi. A fellow student was J\u00e1nos von Neumann, who was a year behind Wigner. They both benefited from the instruction of the noted mathematics teacher L\u00e1szl\u00f3 R\u00e1tz. In 1919, to escape the B\u00e9la Kun communist regime, the Wigner family briefly fled to Austria, returning to Hungary after Kun's downfall. Partly as a reaction to the prominence of Jews in the Kun regime, the family converted to Lutheranism. Wigner explained later in his life that his family decision to convert to Lutheranism \"was not at heart a religious decision but an anti-communist one\". Regarding religion, Wigner was an atheist.\nAfter graduating from the secondary school in 1920, Wigner enrolled at the Budapest University of Technical Sciences, known as the \"M\u0171egyetem\". He was not happy with the courses on offer, and in 1921 enrolled at the \"Technische Hochschule Berlin\" (now Technical University of Berlin), where he studied chemical engineering. He also attended the Wednesday afternoon colloquia of the German Physical Society. These colloquia featured leading researchers including Max Planck, Max von Laue, Rudolf Ladenburg, Werner Heisenberg, Walther Nernst, Wolfgang Pauli, and Albert Einstein. Wigner also met the physicist Le\u00f3 Szil\u00e1rd, who at once became Wigner's closest friend. A third experience in Berlin was formative. Wigner worked at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry (now the Fritz Haber Institute), and there he met Michael Polanyi, who became, after L\u00e1szl\u00f3 R\u00e1tz, Wigner's greatest teacher. Polanyi supervised Wigner's DSc thesis, \"Bildung und Zerfall von Molek\u00fclen\" (\"Formation and Decay of Molecules\").\nMiddle years.\nWigner returned to Budapest, where he went to work at his father's tannery, but in 1926, he accepted an offer from Karl Weissenberg at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin. Weissenberg wanted someone to assist him with his work on x-ray crystallography, and Polanyi had recommended Wigner. After six months as Weissenberg's assistant, Wigner went to work for Richard Becker for two semesters. Wigner explored quantum mechanics, studying the work of Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger. He also delved into the group theory of Ferdinand Frobenius and Eduard Ritter von Weber.\nWigner received a request from Arnold Sommerfeld to work at the University of G\u00f6ttingen as an assistant to the great mathematician David Hilbert. This proved a disappointment, as the aged Hilbert's abilities were failing, and his interests had shifted to logic. Wigner nonetheless studied independently. He laid the foundation for the theory of symmetries in quantum mechanics and in 1927 introduced what is now known as the Wigner D-matrix. Wigner and Hermann Weyl were responsible for introducing group theory into quantum mechanics. The latter had written a standard text, \"Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics\" (1928), but it was not easy to understand, especially for younger physicists. Wigner's \"Group Theory and Its Application to the Quantum Mechanics of Atomic Spectra\" (1931) made group theory accessible to a wider audience.\nIn these works, Wigner laid the foundation for the theory of symmetries in quantum mechanics. Wigner's theorem proved by Wigner in 1931, is a cornerstone of the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The theorem specifies how physical symmetries such as rotations, translations, and CPT symmetry are represented on the Hilbert space of states. According to the theorem, any symmetry transformation is represented by a linear and unitary or antilinear and antiunitary transformation of Hilbert space. The representation of a symmetry group on a Hilbert space is either an ordinary representation or a projective representation.\nIn the late 1930s, Wigner extended his research into atomic nuclei. By 1929, his papers were drawing notice in the world of physics. In 1930, Princeton University recruited Wigner for a one-year lectureship, at 7 times the salary that he had been drawing in Europe. Princeton recruited von Neumann at the same time. Jen\u0151 P\u00e1l Wigner and J\u00e1nos von Neumann had collaborated on three papers together in 1928 and two in 1929. They anglicized their first names to \"Eugene\" and \"John\", respectively. When their year was up, Princeton offered a five-year contract as visiting professors for half the year. The Technische Hochschule responded with a teaching assignment for the other half of the year. This was very timely, since the Nazis soon rose to power in Germany. At Princeton in 1934, Wigner introduced his sister Margit \"Manci\" Wigner to the physicist Paul Dirac, with whom she remarried.\nPrinceton did not rehire Wigner when his contract ran out in 1936. Through Gregory Breit, Wigner found new employment at the University of Wisconsin. There, he met his first wife, Amelia Frank, who was a physics student there. However, she died unexpectedly in 1937, leaving Wigner distraught. He therefore accepted a 1938 offer from Princeton to return there. Wigner became a naturalized citizen of the United States on January 8, 1937, and he brought his parents to the United States.\nManhattan Project.\nAlthough he was a professed political amateur, on August 2, 1939, he participated in a meeting with Le\u00f3 Szil\u00e1rd and Albert Einstein that resulted in the Einstein\u2013Szil\u00e1rd letter, which prompted President Franklin D. Roosevelt to initiate the Manhattan Project to develop atomic bombs. Wigner was afraid that the German nuclear weapon project would develop an atomic bomb first, and even refused to have his fingerprints taken because they could be used to track him down if Germany won. \"Thoughts of being murdered,\" he later recalled, \"focus your mind wonderfully.\"\nOn June 4, 1941, Wigner married his second wife, Mary Annette Wheeler, a professor of physics at Vassar College, who had completed her Ph.D. at Yale University in 1932. After the war she taught physics on the faculty of Rutgers University's Douglass College in New Jersey until her retirement in 1964. They remained married until her death in November 1977. They had two children, David Wigner and Martha Wigner Upton.\nDuring the Manhattan Project, Wigner led a team that included J. Ernest Wilkins Jr., Alvin M. Weinberg, Katharine Way, Gale Young and Edward Creutz. The group's task was to design the production nuclear reactors that would convert uranium into weapons grade plutonium. At the time, reactors existed only on paper, and no reactor had yet gone critical. In July 1942, Wigner chose a conservative 100 MW design, with a graphite neutron moderator and water cooling. Wigner was present at a converted rackets court under the stands at the University of Chicago's abandoned Stagg Field on December 2, 1942, when the world's first atomic reactor, Chicago Pile One (CP-1) achieved a controlled nuclear chain reaction.\nWigner was disappointed that DuPont was given responsibility for the detailed design of the reactors, not just their construction. He threatened to resign in February 1943, but was talked out of it by the head of the Metallurgical Laboratory, Arthur Compton, who sent him on vacation instead. As it turned out, a design decision by DuPont to give the reactor additional load tubes for more uranium saved the project when neutron poisoning became a problem. Without the additional tubes, the reactor could have been run at 35% power until the boron impurities in the graphite were burned up and enough plutonium produced to run the reactor at full power; but this would have set the project back a year. During the 1950s, he would even work for DuPont on the Savannah River Site. Wigner did not regret working on the Manhattan Project, and sometimes wished the atomic bomb had been ready a year earlier.\nAn important discovery Wigner made during the project was the Wigner effect. This is a swelling of the graphite moderator caused by the displacement of atoms by neutron radiation. The Wigner effect was a serious problem for the reactors at the Hanford Site in the immediate post-war period, and resulted in production cutbacks and a reactor being shut down entirely. It was eventually discovered that it could be overcome by controlled heating and annealing.\nThrough Manhattan project funding, Wigner and Leonard Eisenbud also developed an important general approach to nuclear reactions, the Wigner\u2013Eisenbud R-matrix theory, which was published in 1947.\nLater years.\nWigner was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1944 and the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1945. He accepted a position as the Director of Research and Development at the Clinton Laboratory (now the Oak Ridge National Laboratory) in Oak Ridge, Tennessee in early 1946. Because he did not want to be involved in administrative duties, he became co-director of the laboratory, with James Lum handling the administrative chores as executive director. When the newly created Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) took charge of the laboratory's operations at the start of 1947, Wigner feared that many of the technical decisions would be made in Washington. He also saw the Army's continuation of wartime security policies at the laboratory as a \"meddlesome oversight\", interfering with research. One such incident occurred in March 1947, when the AEC discovered that Wigner's scientists were conducting experiments with a critical mass of uranium-235 when the Director of the Manhattan Project, Major General Leslie R. Groves, Jr., had forbidden such experiments in August 1946 after the death of Louis Slotin at the Los Alamos Laboratory. Wigner argued that Groves's order had been superseded, but was forced to terminate the experiments, which were completely different from the one that killed Slotin.\nFeeling unsuited to a managerial role in such an environment, he left Oak Ridge in 1947 and returned to Princeton University, although he maintained a consulting role with the facility for many years. In the postwar period, he served on a number of government bodies, including the National Bureau of Standards from 1947 to 1951, the mathematics panel of the National Research Council from 1951 to 1954, the physics panel of the National Science Foundation, and the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1952 to 1957 and again from 1959 to 1964. He also contributed to civil defense.\nWigner was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1950.\nNear the end of his life, Wigner's thoughts turned more philosophical. In 1960, he published a now classic article on the philosophy of mathematics and of physics, which has become his best-known work outside technical mathematics and physics, \"The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences\". He argued that biology and cognition could be the origin of physical concepts, as we humans perceive them, and that the happy coincidence that mathematics and physics were so well matched, seemed to be \"unreasonable\" and hard to explain. His original paper has provoked and inspired many responses across a wide range of disciplines. These included Richard Hamming in Computer Science, Arthur Lesk in Molecular Biology, Peter Norvig in data mining, Max Tegmark in Physics, Ivor Grattan-Guinness in Mathematics, and Vela Velupillai in Economics.\nTurning to philosophical questions about the theory of quantum mechanics, Wigner developed a thought experiment (later called Wigner's Friend paradox) to illustrate his belief that consciousness is foundational to the quantum mechanical measurement process. He thereby followed an ontological approach that sets human's consciousness at the center: \"All that quantum mechanics purports to provide are probability connections between subsequent impressions (also called 'apperceptions') of the consciousness\".\nMeasurements are understood as the interactions which create the impressions in our consciousness (and as a result modify the wave function of the \"measured\" physical system), an idea which has been called the \"consciousness causes collapse\" interpretation.\nInterestingly, Hugh Everett III (a student of Wigner) discussed Wigner's thought experiment in the introductory part of his 1957 dissertation as an \"amusing, but \"extremely hypothetical\" drama\". In an early draft of Everett's work, one also finds a drawing of the Wigner's Friend situation, which must be seen as the first evidence on paper of the thought experiment that was later assigned to be Wigner's. This suggests that Everett must at least have discussed the problem together with Wigner. \nIn November 1963, Wigner called for the allocation of 10% of the national defense budget to be spent on nuclear blast shelters and survival resources, arguing that such an expenditure would be less costly than disarmament. Wigner considered a recent Woods Hole study's conclusion that a nuclear strike would kill 20% of Americans to be a very modest projection and that the country could recover from such an attack more quickly than Germany had recovered from the devastation of World War II.\nWigner was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963 \"for his contributions to the theory of the atomic nucleus and the elementary particles, particularly through the discovery and application of fundamental symmetry principles\". The prize was shared that year, with the other half of the award divided between Maria Goeppert-Mayer and J. Hans D. Jensen. Wigner professed that he had never considered the possibility that this might occur, and added: \"I never expected to get my name in the newspapers without doing something wicked.\" He also won the Franklin Medal in 1950, the Enrico Fermi award in 1958, the Atoms for Peace Award in 1959, the Max Planck Medal in 1961, the National Medal of Science in 1969, the Albert Einstein Award in 1972, the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1974, and the eponymous Wigner Medal in 1978. In 1968 he gave the Josiah Willard Gibbs lecture.\nAfter his retirement from Princeton in 1971, Wigner prepared the first edition of Symmetries and Reflections, a collection of philosophical essays, and became more involved in international and political meetings; around this time he became a leader and vocal defender of the Unification Church's annual International Conference on the Unity of the Sciences.\nMary died in November 1977. In 1979, Wigner married his third wife, Eileen Clare-Patton (Pat) Hamilton, the widow of physicist Donald Ross Hamilton, the Dean of the Graduate School at Princeton University, who had died in 1972. In 1992, at the age of 90, he published his memoirs, \"The Recollections of Eugene P. Wigner\" with Andrew Szanton. In it, Wigner said: \"The full meaning of life, the collective meaning of all human desires, is fundamentally a mystery beyond our grasp. As a young man, I chafed at this state of affairs. But by now I have made peace with it. I even feel a certain honor to be associated with such a mystery.\" In his collection of essays 'Philosophical Reflections and Syntheses' (1995), he commented: \"It was not possible to formulate the laws of quantum mechanics in a fully consistent way without reference to consciousness.\"\nWigner was credited as a member of the advisory board for the Western Goals Foundation, a private domestic intelligence agency created in the US in 1979 to \"fill the critical gap caused by the crippling of the FBI, the disabling of the House Un-American Activities Committee and the destruction of crucial government files\".\nWigner died of pneumonia at the University Medical Center in Princeton, New Jersey on 1 January 1995. He was survived by his wife Eileen (died 2010) and children Erika, David and Martha, and his sisters Bertha and Margit.\nSelected contributions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10103", "revid": "35450504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10103", "title": "Electroweak interaction", "text": "Unified description of electromagnetism and the weak interaction\nIn particle physics, the electroweak interaction or electroweak force is the unified description of two of the four known fundamental interactions of nature: electromagnetism and the weak interaction. Although these two forces appear very different at everyday low energies, the theory models them as two different aspects of the same force. Above the unification energy, on the order of 246\u00a0GeV, they would merge into a single force. Thus, if the temperature is high enough \u2013 approximately 1015\u00a0K \u2013 then the electromagnetic force and weak force merge into a combined electroweak force. During the quark epoch (shortly after the Big Bang), the electroweak force split into the electromagnetic and weak force. It is thought that the required temperature of 1015\u00a0K has not been seen widely throughout the universe since before the quark epoch, and currently the highest human-made temperature in thermal equilibrium is around 5.5x1012\u00a0K (from the Large Hadron Collider).\nSheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam, and Steven Weinberg were awarded the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics for their contributions to the unification of the weak and electromagnetic interaction between elementary particles, known as the Weinberg\u2013Salam theory. The existence of the electroweak interactions was experimentally established in two stages, the first being the discovery of neutral currents in neutrino scattering by the Gargamelle collaboration in 1973, and the second in 1983 by the UA1 and the UA2 collaborations that involved the discovery of the W and Z gauge bosons in proton\u2013antiproton collisions at the converted Super Proton Synchrotron. In 1999, Gerardus 't Hooft and Martinus Veltman were awarded the Nobel prize for showing that the electroweak theory is renormalizable.\nHistory.\nAfter the Wu experiment in 1956 discovered parity violation in the weak interaction, a search began for a way to relate the weak and electromagnetic interactions. Extending his doctoral advisor Julian Schwinger's work, Sheldon Glashow first experimented with introducing two different symmetries, one chiral and one achiral, and combined them such that their overall symmetry was unbroken. This did not yield a renormalizable theory, and its gauge symmetry had to be broken by hand as no spontaneous mechanism was known, but it predicted a new particle, the Z boson. This received little notice, as it matched no experimental finding.\nIn 1964, Salam and Ward had the same idea, but predicted a massless photon and three massive gauge bosons with a manually broken symmetry. Later around 1967, while investigating spontaneous symmetry breaking, Weinberg found a set of symmetries predicting a massless, neutral gauge boson. Initially rejecting such a particle as useless, he later realized his symmetries produced the electroweak force, and he proceeded to predict rough masses for the W and Z bosons. Significantly, he suggested this new theory was renormalizable. In 1971, Gerard 't Hooft proved that spontaneously broken gauge symmetries are renormalizable even with massive gauge bosons.\nFormulation.\nMathematically, electromagnetism is unified with the weak interactions as a Yang\u2013Mills field with an SU(2) \u00d7 U(1) gauge group, which describes the formal operations that can be applied to the electroweak gauge fields without changing the dynamics of the system. These fields are the weak isospin fields W1, W2, and W3, and the weak hypercharge field B.\nThis invariance is known as electroweak symmetry.\nThe generators of SU(2) and U(1) are given the name weak isospin (labeled T ) and weak hypercharge (labeled Y ) respectively. These then give rise to the gauge bosons which mediate the electroweak interactions \u2013 the three W bosons of weak isospin (W1, W2, and W3), and the B boson of weak hypercharge, respectively, all of which are \"initially\" massless. These are not physical fields yet, before spontaneous symmetry breaking and the associated Higgs mechanism.\nIn the Standard Model, the observed physical particles, the and bosons, and the photon, are produced through the spontaneous symmetry breaking of the electroweak symmetry SU(2) \u00d7 U(1) to U(1)em, effected by the Higgs mechanism (see also Higgs boson), an elaborate quantum-field-theoretic phenomenon that \"spontaneously\" alters the realization of the symmetry and rearranges degrees of freedom.\nThe electric charge arises as the particular linear combination (nontrivial) of Y (weak hypercharge) and the T3 component of weak isospin formula_1 that does \"not\" couple to the Higgs boson. That is to say: The Higgs and the electromagnetic field have no effect on each other, at the level of the fundamental forces (\"tree level\"), while any \"other\" combination of the hypercharge and the weak isospin must interact with the Higgs. This causes an apparent separation between the weak force, which interacts with the Higgs, and electromagnetism, which does not. Mathematically, the electric charge is a specific combination of the hypercharge and T3 outlined in the figure.\nU(1)em (the symmetry group of electromagnetism only) is defined to be the group generated by this special linear combination, and the symmetry described by the U(1)em group is unbroken, since it does not \"directly\" interact with the Higgs.\nThe above spontaneous symmetry breaking makes the W3 and B bosons coalesce into two different physical bosons with different masses \u2013 the boson, and the photon (),\n formula_2\nwhere \u03b8 is the \"weak mixing angle\". The axes representing the particles have essentially just been rotated, in the (W3, B) plane, by the angle \u03b8. This also introduces a mismatch between the mass of the and the mass of the particles (denoted as m and m, respectively),\nformula_3\nThe W1 and W2 bosons, in turn, combine to produce the charged massive bosons :\nformula_4\nLagrangian.\nBefore electroweak symmetry breaking.\nThe Lagrangian for the electroweak interactions is divided into four parts before electroweak symmetry breaking becomes manifest,\nformula_5\nThe formula_6 term describes the interaction between the three W vector bosons and the B vector boson, \nformula_7,\nwhere formula_8 (formula_9) and formula_10 are the field strength tensors for the weak isospin and weak hypercharge gauge fields.\nformula_11 is the kinetic term for the Standard Model fermions. The interaction of the gauge bosons and the fermions are through the gauge covariant derivative,\nformula_12,\nwhere the subscript j sums over the three generations of fermions; Q, u, and d are the left-handed doublet, right-handed singlet up, and right handed singlet down quark fields; and L and e are the left-handed doublet and right-handed singlet electron fields.\nThe Feynman slash formula_13 means the contraction of the 4-gradient with the Dirac matrices, defined as\nformula_14\nand the covariant derivative (excluding the gluon gauge field for the strong interaction) is defined as\nformula_15\nHere formula_16 is the weak hypercharge and the formula_17 are the components of the weak isospin.\nThe formula_18 term describes the Higgs field formula_19 and its interactions with itself and the gauge bosons,\nformula_20\nwhere formula_21 is the vacuum expectation value.\nThe formula_22 term describes the Yukawa interaction with the fermions, \nformula_23\nand generates their masses, manifest when the Higgs field acquires a nonzero vacuum expectation value, discussed next. The formula_24 for formula_25 are matrices of Yukawa couplings.\nAfter electroweak symmetry breaking.\nThe Lagrangian reorganizes itself as the Higgs boson acquires a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value dictated by the potential of the previous section. As a result of this rewriting, the symmetry breaking becomes manifest. In the history of the universe, this is believed to have happened shortly after the hot big bang, when the universe was at a temperature 159.5\u00b11.5\u00a0GeV\n(assuming the Standard Model of particle physics).\nDue to its complexity, this Lagrangian is best described by breaking it up into several parts as follows.\nformula_26\nThe kinetic term formula_27 contains all the quadratic terms of the Lagrangian, which include the dynamic terms (the partial derivatives) and the mass terms (conspicuously absent from the Lagrangian before symmetry breaking)\nformula_28\nwhere the sum runs over all the fermions of the theory (quarks and leptons), and the fields formula_29 formula_30 formula_31 and formula_32 are given as\nformula_33\nwith 'formula_34' to be replaced by the relevant field (formula_35, formula_36, formula_37), and f\u2009abc by the structure constants of the appropriate gauge group.\nThe neutral current formula_38 and charged current formula_39 components of the Lagrangian contain the interactions between the fermions and gauge bosons,\nformula_40\nwhere formula_41 The electromagnetic current formula_42 is\nformula_43\nwhere formula_44 is the fermions' electric charges. \nThe neutral weak current formula_45 is\nformula_46\nwhere formula_47 is the fermions' weak isospin.\nThe charged current part of the Lagrangian is given by\nformula_48\nwhere formula_49 is the right-handed singlet neutrino field, and the CKM matrix formula_50 determines the mixing between mass and weak eigenstates of the quarks.\nformula_51 contains the Higgs three-point and four-point self interaction terms,\nformula_52\nformula_53 contains the Higgs interactions with gauge vector bosons,\nformula_54\nformula_55 contains the gauge three-point self interactions,\nformula_56\nformula_57 contains the gauge four-point self interactions,\nformula_58\nformula_59 contains the Yukawa interactions between the fermions and the Higgs field,\nformula_60\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10104", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10104", "title": "Elara", "text": "Elara may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10105", "revid": "84951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10105", "title": "Erasmus Reinhold", "text": "German astronomer and mathematician (1511\u20131553)\nErasmus Reinhold (22 October 1511 \u2013 19 February 1553) was a German astronomer and mathematician, considered to be the most influential astronomical pedagogue of his generation. He was born and died in Saalfeld, Saxony.\nHe was educated, under Jacob Milich, at the University of Wittenberg, where he was first elected dean and later became rector. In 1536 he was appointed professor of higher mathematics by Philipp Melanchthon. In contrast to the limited modern definition, \"mathematics\" at the time also included applied mathematics, especially astronomy. His colleague, Georg Joachim Rheticus, also studied at Wittenberg and was appointed professor of lower mathematics in 1536.\nReinhold catalogued a large number of stars. His publications on astronomy include a commentary (1542, 1553) on Georg Purbach's \"Theoricae novae planetarum\". Reinhold knew about Copernicus and his heliocentric ideas prior to the publication of his \"De revolutionibus\", and made a favourable reference to him in his commentary on Purbach. However, Reinhold (like other astronomers before Kepler and Galileo) translated Copernicus' mathematical methods back into a geocentric system, rejecting heliocentric cosmology on physical and theological grounds.\nDuke Albert of Brandenburg Prussia supported Reinhold and financed the printing of Reinhold's \"Prutenicae Tabulae\" (1551, 1562, 1571 &amp; 1585) or \"Prussian Tables\". These astronomical tables helped to disseminate calculation methods of Copernicus throughout the Empire, however, Gingerich notes that they showed a \"notable lack of commitment\" to heliocentricity and were \"carefully framed\" to be independent of the movement of the Earth. Both Reinhold's \"Prutenic Tables\" and Copernicus' studies were the foundation for the Calendar Reform by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582.\nIt was Reinhold's heavily annotated copy of \"De revolutionibus\" in the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, that started Owen Gingerich on his search for copies of the first and second editions which he describes in \"The Book Nobody Read\". In Reinhold's unpublished commentary on \"De revolutionibus\", he calculated the distance from the Earth to the sun. He \"massaged\" his calculation method in order to arrive at an answer close to that of Ptolemy.\nHis name has been given to a prominent lunar impact crater that lies to the south-southwest of the crater Copernicus, on the Mare Insularum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
