{"id": "10577", "revid": "42160223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10577", "title": "Finland", "text": "Country in Northern Europe\nFinland ( ] (); ] ()), officially the Republic of Finland (; ()), is a Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Sweden to the northwest, Norway to the north, and Russia to the east, with the Gulf of Bothnia to the west and the Gulf of Finland to the south, across from Estonia. Finland covers an area of with a population of 5.6 million. Helsinki is the capital and largest city. The vast majority of the population are ethnic Finns. Finnish and Swedish are the official languages, Swedish being the native language of 5.2% of the population. Finland's climate varies from humid continental in the south to the boreal in the north. The land cover is primarily a boreal forest biome, with more than 180,000 recorded lakes.\nFinland was first inhabited around 9000\u00a0BC after the Last Glacial Period. The Stone Age introduced several different ceramic styles and cultures. The Bronze Age and Iron Age were characterized by contacts with other cultures in Fennoscandia and the Baltic region. From the late 13th century, Finland became a part of Sweden as a consequence of the Northern Crusades. In 1809, as a result of the Finnish War, Finland became part of the Russian Empire as the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland, during which Finnish art flourished and the idea of independence began to take hold. In 1906, Finland became the first European state to grant universal suffrage, and the first in the world to give all adult citizens the right to run for public office. After the 1917 Russian Revolution, Finland declared independence from Russia. In 1918, the fledgling state was divided by the Finnish Civil War. During World War II, Finland fought the Soviet Union in the Winter War and the Continuation War, and Nazi Germany in the Lapland War. It subsequently lost parts of its territory, but maintained its independence.\nFinland largely remained an agrarian country until the 1950s. After World War II, it rapidly industrialized and developed an advanced economy, while building an extensive welfare state based on the Nordic model; the country soon enjoyed widespread prosperity and a high per capita income. During the Cold War, Finland adopted an official policy of neutrality. Finland joined the European Union in 1995, the Eurozone at its inception in 1999 and NATO in 2023. Finland performs highly in metrics of national performance, including education, economic competitiveness, civil liberties, quality of life and human development.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe area that is now Finland was settled in, at the latest, around 8,500 BC during the Stone Age towards the end of the last glacial period. The artefacts the first settlers left behind present characteristics that are shared with those found in Estonia, Russia, and Norway. The earliest people were hunter-gatherers, using stone tools.\nThe first pottery appeared in 5200\u00a0BC, when the Comb Ceramic culture was introduced. The arrival of the Corded Ware culture in Southern coastal Finland between 3000 and 2500 BC may have coincided with the start of agriculture. Even with the introduction of agriculture, hunting and fishing continued to be important parts of the subsistence economy.\nIn the Bronze Age permanent all-year-round cultivation and animal husbandry spread, but the cold climate phase slowed the change. The Seima-Turbino phenomenon brought the first bronze artefacts to the region and possibly also the Finno-Ugric languages. Commercial contacts that had so far mostly been to Estonia started to extend to Scandinavia. Domestic manufacture of bronze artefacts started 1300 BC.\nIn the Iron Age population grew. Finland Proper was the most densely populated area. Commercial contacts in the Baltic Sea region grew and extended during the eighth and ninth centuries. Main exports from Finland were furs, slaves, castoreum, and falcons to European courts. Imports included silk and other fabrics, jewelry, Ulfberht swords, and, in lesser extent, glass. Production of iron started approximately in 500 BC. At the end of the ninth century, indigenous artefact culture, especially weapons and women's jewelry, had more common local features than ever before. This has been interpreted to be expressing common Finnish identity.\nAn early form of Finnic languages spread to the Baltic Sea region approximately 1900 BC. Common Finnic language was spoken around Gulf of Finland 2000 years ago. The dialects from which the modern-day Finnish language was developed came into existence during the Iron Age. Although distantly related, the Sami people retained the hunter-gatherer lifestyle longer than the Finns. The Sami cultural identity and the Sami language have survived in Lapland, the northernmost province.\nThe name has uncertain origins, but a common etymology with (the Sami) has been suggested. In the earliest historical sources, from the 12th and 13th centuries, the term Finland refers to the coastal region around Turku. This region later became known as Finland Proper in distinction from the country name Finland. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSwedish era.\nThe 12th and 13th centuries were a violent time in the northern Baltic Sea. The Livonian Crusade was ongoing and the Finnish tribes such as the Tavastians and Karelians were in frequent conflicts with Novgorod and with each other. Also, during the 12th and 13th centuries several crusades from the Catholic realms of the Baltic Sea area were made against the Finnish tribes. Danes waged at least three crusades to Finland, in 1187 or slightly earlier, in 1191 and in 1202, and Swedes, possibly the so-called second crusade to Finland, in 1249 against Tavastians and the third crusade to Finland in 1293 against the Karelians. The so-called first crusade to Finland, possibly in 1155, is most likely an unreal event.\nAs a result of the crusades (mostly with the second crusade led by Birger Jarl) and the colonization of some Finnish coastal areas with Christian Swedish population during the Middle Ages, Finland gradually became part of the kingdom of Sweden and the sphere of influence of the Catholic Church. Under Sweden, Finland was annexed as part of the cultural order of Western Europe.\nSwedish was the dominant language of the nobility, administration, and education; Finnish was chiefly a language for the peasantry, clergy, and local courts in predominantly Finnish-speaking areas. During the Protestant Reformation, the Finns gradually converted to Lutheranism.\nIn the 16th century, a bishop and Lutheran Reformer Mikael Agricola published the first written works in Finnish; and Finland's current capital city, Helsinki, was founded by King Gustav Vasa in 1555. The first university in Finland, the Royal Academy of Turku, was established by Queen Christina of Sweden at the proposal of Count Per Brahe in 1640.\nThe Finns reaped a reputation in the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648) as a well-trained cavalrymen called \"Hakkapeliitta\". Finland suffered a severe famine in 1695\u20131697, during which about one third of the Finnish population died, and a devastating plague a few years later.\nIn the 18th century, wars between Sweden and Russia twice led to the occupation of Finland by Russian forces, times known to the Finns as the Greater Wrath (1714\u20131721) and the Lesser Wrath (1742\u20131743). It is estimated that almost an entire generation of young men was lost during the Great Wrath, due mainly to the destruction of homes and farms, and the burning of Helsinki.\nGrand Duchy of Finland.\nThe Swedish era ended in the Finnish War in 1809. On 29 March 1809, having been taken over by the armies of Alexander I of Russia, Finland became an autonomous Grand Duchy in the Russian Empire with the recognition given at the Diet held in Porvoo. This situation lasted until the end of 1917. In 1812, Alexander I incorporated the Russian Vyborg province into the Grand Duchy of Finland. In 1854, Finland became involved in Russia's involvement in the Crimean War, when the British and French navies bombed the Finnish coast and \u00c5land during the so-called \u00c5land War.\nDuring the Russian era, the Finnish language began to gain recognition. From the 1860s onwards, a strong Finnish nationalist movement known as the Fennoman movement grew. One of its most prominent leading figures of the movement was the philosopher and politician J. V. Snellman, who pushed for the stabilization of the status of the Finnish language and its own currency, the Finnish markka, in the Grand Duchy of Finland. Milestones included the publication of what would become Finland's national epic \u2013 the \"Kalevala\" \u2013 in 1835, and the Finnish language's achieving equal legal status with Swedish in 1892. In the spirit of the notion of Adolf Ivar Arwidsson (1791\u20131858) \u2013 \"we are not Swedes, we do not want to become Russians, let us therefore, be Finns\" \u2013 a Finnish national identity was established. Still there was no genuine independence movement in Finland until the early 20th century.\nThe Finnish famine of 1866\u20131868 occurred after freezing temperatures in early September ravaged crops, and it killed approximately 15% of the population, making it one of the worst famines in European history. The famine led the Russian Empire to ease financial regulations, and investment rose in the following decades. Economic development was rapid. The gross domestic product (GDP) per capita was still half of that of the United States and a third of that of Britain.\nFrom 1869 until 1917, the Russian Empire pursued a policy known as the \"Russification of Finland\". This policy was interrupted between 1905 and 1908. In 1906, universal suffrage was adopted in the Grand Duchy of Finland. However, the relationship between the Grand Duchy and the Russian Empire soured when the Russian government made moves to restrict Finnish autonomy. For example, universal suffrage was, in practice, virtually meaningless, since the tsar did not have to approve any of the laws adopted by the Finnish parliament. The desire for independence gained ground, first among radical liberals and socialists, driven in part by a declaration called the \"February Manifesto\" by the last tsar of the Russian Empire, Nicholas II, on 15 February 1899.\nCivil war and early independence.\nAfter the 1917 February Revolution, the position of Finland as part of the Russian Empire was questioned, mainly by Social Democrats. The Parliament, controlled by social democrats, passed the so-called Power Act to give the highest authority to the Parliament. This was rejected by the Russian Provisional Government which decided to dissolve the Parliament. New elections were conducted, in which right-wing parties won with a slim majority. Some social democrats refused to accept the result and still claimed that the dissolution of the parliament (and thus the ensuing elections) were extralegal. The two nearly equally powerful political blocs, the right-wing parties, and the social-democratic party were highly antagonized.\nThe October Revolution in Russia changed the geopolitical situation once more. Suddenly, the right-wing parties in Finland started to reconsider their decision to block the transfer of the highest executive power from the Russian government to Finland, as the Bolsheviks took power in Russia. The right-wing government, led by Prime Minister P. E. Svinhufvud, presented Declaration of Independence on 4 December 1917, which was officially approved on 6 December, by the Finnish Parliament. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR), led by Vladimir Lenin, recognized independence on 4 January 1918.\nOn 27 January 1918 the government's began to disarm the Russian forces in Pohjanmaa. The socialists gained control of southern Finland and Helsinki, but the White government continued in exile from Vaasa. This sparked the brief but bitter civil war. The Whites, who were supported by Imperial Germany, prevailed over the Reds, and their self-proclaimed Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic. After the war, tens of thousands of Reds were interned in camps, where thousands were executed or died from malnutrition and disease. Deep social and political enmity was sown between the Reds and Whites and would last until the Winter War and even beyond. The civil war and the 1918\u20131920 activist expeditions called \"Kinship Wars\" into Soviet Russia strained Eastern relations.\nAfter brief experimentation with monarchy, when an attempt to make Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse King of Finland was unsuccessful, Finland became a presidential republic, with K. J. St\u00e5hlberg elected as its first president in 1919. As a liberal nationalist with a legal background, St\u00e5hlberg anchored the state in liberal democracy, supported the rule of law, and embarked on internal reforms. Finland was also one of the first European countries to strongly aim for equality for women, with Miina Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4 serving in V\u00e4in\u00f6 Tanner's cabinet as the first female minister in Finnish history in 1926\u20131927. The Finnish\u2013Russian border was defined in 1920 by the Treaty of Tartu, largely following the historic border but granting Pechenga () and its Barents Sea harbour to Finland. Finnish democracy did not experience any Soviet coup attempts and likewise survived the anti-communist Lapua Movement.\nIn 1917, the population was three million. Credit-based land reform was enacted after the civil war, increasing the proportion of the capital-owning population. About 70% of workers were occupied in agriculture and 10% in industry.\nWorld War II.\nThe Soviet Union launched the Winter War on 30 November 1939 in an effort to annex Finland. The Finnish Democratic Republic was established by Joseph Stalin at the beginning of the war to govern Finland after Soviet conquest. The Red Army was defeated in numerous battles, notably at the Battle of Suomussalmi. After two months of negligible progress on the battlefield, as well as severe losses of men and materiel, the Soviets put an end to the Finnish Democratic Republic in late January 1940 and recognized the legal Finnish government as the legitimate government of Finland. Soviet forces began to make progress in February and reached Vyborg in March. The fighting came to an end on 13 March 1940 with the signing of the Moscow Peace Treaty. Finland had successfully defended its independence, but ceded 9% of its territory to the Soviet Union.\nHostilities resumed in June 1941 with the Continuation War, when Finland aligned with Germany following the latter's invasion of the Soviet Union; the primary aim was to recapture the territory lost to the Soviets scarcely one year before. Finnish forces occupied East Karelia from 1941 to 1944. Finnish resistance to the Vyborg\u2013Petrozavodsk offensive in the summer of 1944 led to a standstill, and the two sides reached an armistice. This was followed by the Lapland War of 1944\u20131945, when Finland fought retreating German forces in northern Finland. Famous war heroes of the aforementioned wars include Simo H\u00e4yh\u00e4, Aarne Juutilainen, and Lauri T\u00f6rni.\nThe Armistice and treaty signed with the Soviet Union in 1944 and 1948 included Finnish obligations, restraints, and reparations, as well as further Finnish territorial concessions in addition to those in the Moscow Peace Treaty. As a result of the two wars, Finland ceded Petsamo, along with parts of Finnish Karelia and Salla; this amounted to 12% of Finland's land area, 20% of its industrial capacity, its second-largest city, Vyborg (Viipuri), and the ice-free port of Liinakhamari (Liinahamari). Almost the whole Finnish population, some 400,000 people, fled these areas. Finland lost 97,000 soldiers and was forced to pay war reparations of $300\u00a0million ($ in 2021); nevertheless, it avoided occupation by Soviet forces and managed to retain its independence.\nFor a few decades after 1944, the Communists were a strong political party. The Soviet Union persuaded Finland to reject Marshall Plan aid. However, in the hope of preserving Finland's independence, the United States provided secret development aid and helped the Social Democratic Party.\nAfter the war.\nEstablishing trade with the Western powers, such as the United Kingdom, and paying reparations to the Soviet Union produced a transformation of Finland from a primarily agrarian economy to an industrialized one. Valmet (originally a shipyard, then several metal workshops) was founded to create materials for war reparations. After the reparations had been paid off, Finland continued to trade with the Soviet Union in the framework of bilateral trade.\nIn 1950, 46% of Finnish workers worked in agriculture and a third lived in urban areas. The new jobs in manufacturing, services, and trade quickly attracted people to the towns. The average number of births per woman declined from a baby boom peak of 3.5 in 1947 to 1.5 in 1973. When baby boomers entered the workforce, the economy did not generate jobs quickly enough, and hundreds of thousands emigrated to the more industrialized Sweden, with emigration peaking in 1969 and 1970. Finland took part in trade liberalization in the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.\nOfficially claiming to be neutral, Finland lay in the grey zone between the Western countries and the Soviet bloc during the Cold War. The military YYA Treaty (Finno-Soviet Pact of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance) gave the Soviet Union some leverage in Finnish domestic politics. This was extensively exploited by president Urho Kekkonen against his opponents. He maintained an effective monopoly on Soviet relations from 1956 on, which was crucial for his continued popularity. In politics, there was a tendency to avoid any policies and statements that could be interpreted as anti-Soviet. This phenomenon was given the name \"Finlandization\" by the West German press.\nFinland maintained a market economy. Various industries benefited from trade privileges with the Soviets. Economic growth was rapid in the postwar era, and by 1975 Finland's GDP per capita was the 15th-highest in the world. In the 1970s and 1980s, Finland built one of the most extensive welfare states in the world. Finland negotiated with the European Economic Community (EEC, a predecessor of the European Union) a treaty that mostly abolished customs duties towards the EEC starting from 1977. In 1981, President Urho Kekkonen's failing health forced him to retire after holding office for 25 years.\nMiscalculated macroeconomic decisions, a banking crisis, the collapse of its largest trading partner (the Soviet Union), and a global economic downturn caused a deep early 1990s recession in Finland. The depression bottomed out in 1993, and Finland saw steady economic growth for more than ten years. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Finland began increasing integration with the West. Finland joined the European Union in 1995, and the Eurozone in 1999. Much of the late 1990s economic growth was fueled by the success of the mobile phone manufacturer Nokia.\n21st century.\nThe Finnish population elected Tarja Halonen in the 2000 Presidential election, making her the first female President of Finland. Financial crises paralyzed Finland's exports in 2008, resulting in weaker economic growth throughout the decade. Sauli Niinist\u00f6 has subsequently been elected the President of Finland since 2012.\nFinland's support for NATO rose enormously after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. On 11 May 2022, Finland entered into a mutual security pact with the United Kingdom. On 12 May, Finland's president and prime minister called for NATO membership \"without delay\". Subsequently, on 17 May, the Parliament of Finland decided by a vote of 188\u20138 that it supported Finland's accession to NATO. On 18 May the president and foreign minister submitted the application for membership. Finland became a member of NATO on 4 April 2023.\nGeography.\nLying approximately between latitudes 60\u00b0 and 70\u00b0 N, and longitudes 20\u00b0 and 32\u00b0 E, Finland is one of the world's northernmost countries. Of world capitals, only Reykjav\u00edk lies more to the north than Helsinki. The distance from the southernmost point \u2013 Hanko in Uusimaa \u2013 to the northernmost \u2013 Nuorgam in Lapland \u2013 is .\nFinland has about 168,000 lakes (of area larger than ) and 179,000 islands. Its largest lake, Saimaa, is the fourth largest in Europe. The Finnish Lakeland is the area with the most lakes in the country; many of the major cities in the area, most notably Tampere, Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4 and Kuopio, are located near the large lakes. The greatest concentration of islands is found in the southwest, in the Archipelago Sea between continental Finland and the main island of \u00c5land.\nMuch of the geography of Finland is a result of the Ice Age. The glaciers were thicker and lasted longer in Fennoscandia compared with the rest of Europe. Their eroding effects have left the Finnish landscape mostly flat with few hills and fewer mountains. Its highest point, the Halti at , is found in the extreme north of Lapland at the border between Finland and Norway. The highest mountain whose peak is entirely in Finland is Ridnit\u0161ohkka at , directly adjacent to Halti.\nThe retreating glaciers have left the land with morainic deposits in formations of eskers. These are ridges of stratified gravel and sand, running northwest to southeast, where the ancient edge of the glacier once lay. Among the biggest of these are the three Salpausselk\u00e4 ridges that run across southern Finland.\nHaving been compressed under the enormous weight of the glaciers, terrain in Finland is rising due to the post-glacial rebound. The effect is strongest around the Gulf of Bothnia, where land steadily rises about a year. As a result, the old sea bottom turns little by little into dry land: the surface area of the country is expanding by about annually. Relatively speaking, Finland is rising from the sea.\nThe landscape is covered mostly by coniferous taiga forests and fens, with little cultivated land. Of the total area, 10% is lakes, rivers, and ponds, and 78% is forest. The forest consists of pine, spruce, birch, and other species. Finland is the largest producer of wood in Europe and among the largest in the world. The most common type of rock is granite. It is a ubiquitous part of the scenery, visible wherever there is no soil cover. Moraine or till is the most common type of soil, covered by a thin layer of humus of biological origin. Podzol profile development is seen in most forest soils except where drainage is poor. Gleysols and peat bogs occupy poorly drained areas.\nBiodiversity.\nPhytogeographically, Finland is shared between the Arctic, central European, and northern European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the WWF, the territory of Finland can be subdivided into three ecoregions: the Scandinavian and Russian taiga, Sarmatic mixed forests, and Scandinavian Montane Birch forest and grasslands. Taiga covers most of Finland from northern regions of southern provinces to the north of Lapland. On the southwestern coast, south of the Helsinki-Rauma line, forests are characterized by mixed forests, that are more typical in the Baltic region. In the extreme north of Finland, near the tree line and Arctic Ocean, Montane Birch forests are common. Finland had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.08/10, ranking it 109th globally out of 172 countries.\nSimilarly, Finland has a diverse and extensive range of fauna. There are at least sixty native mammalian species, 248 breeding bird species, over 70 fish species, and 11 reptile and frog species present today, many migrating from neighbouring countries thousands of years ago.\nLarge and widely recognized wildlife mammals found in Finland are the brown bear, grey wolf, wolverine, and elk. Three of the more striking birds are the whooper swan, a large European swan and the national bird of Finland; the Western capercaillie, a large, black-plumaged member of the grouse family; and the Eurasian eagle-owl. The latter is considered an indicator of old-growth forest connectivity, and has been declining because of landscape fragmentation. Around 24,000 species of insects are prevalent in Finland some of the most common being hornets with tribes of beetles such as the Onciderini also being common. The most common breeding birds are the willow warbler, common chaffinch, and redwing. Of some seventy species of freshwater fish, the northern pike, perch, and others are plentiful. Atlantic salmon remains the favourite of fly rod enthusiasts.\nThe endangered Saimaa ringed seal, one of only three lake seal species in the world, exists only in the Saimaa lake system of southeastern Finland, down to only 390 seals today. The species has become the emblem of the Finnish Association for Nature Conservation.\nA third of Finland's land area originally consisted of moorland, about half of this area has been drained for cultivation over the past centuries.\nClimate.\nThe main factor influencing Finland's climate is the country's geographical position between the 60th and 70th northern parallels in the Eurasian continent's coastal zone. In the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, the whole of Finland lies in the boreal zone, characterized by warm summers and freezing winters. Within the country, the temperateness varies considerably between the southern coastal regions and the extreme north, showing characteristics of both a maritime and a continental climate. Finland is near enough to the Atlantic Ocean to be continuously warmed by the Gulf Stream. The Gulf Stream combines with the moderating effects of the Baltic Sea and numerous inland lakes to explain the unusually warm climate compared with other regions that share the same latitude, such as Alaska, Siberia, and southern Greenland.\nWinters in southern Finland (when mean daily temperature remains below ) are usually about 100 days long, and in the inland the snow typically covers the land from about late November to April, and on the coastal areas such as Helsinki, snow often covers the land from late December to late March. Even in the south, the harshest winter nights can see the temperatures fall to although on coastal areas like Helsinki, temperatures below are rare. Climatic summers (when mean daily temperature remains above ) in southern Finland last from about late May to mid-September, and in the inland, the warmest days of July can reach over . Although most of Finland lies on the taiga belt, the southernmost coastal regions are sometimes classified as hemiboreal.\nIn northern Finland, particularly in Lapland, the winters are long and cold, while the summers are relatively warm but short. On the most severe winter days in Lapland can see the temperature fall to . The winter of the north lasts for about 200 days with permanent snow cover from about mid-October to early May. Summers in the north are quite short, only two to three months, but can still see maximum daily temperatures above during heat waves. No part of Finland has Arctic tundra, but Alpine tundra can be found at the fells Lapland.\nThe Finnish climate is suitable for cereal farming only in the southernmost regions, while the northern regions are suitable for animal husbandry.\nA quarter of Finland's territory lies within the Arctic Circle and the midnight sun can be experienced for more days the farther north one travels. At Finland's northernmost point, the sun does not set for 73 consecutive days during summer and does not rise at all for 51 days during winter.\nRegions.\nFinland consists of 19 regions (). The counties are governed by regional councils which serve as forums of cooperation for the municipalities of a county. The main tasks of the counties are regional planning and development of enterprise and education. In addition, the public health services are usually organized based on counties. Regional councils are elected by municipal councils, each municipality sending representatives in proportion to its population. In addition to inter-municipal cooperation, which is the responsibility of regional councils, each county has a state Employment and Economic Development Centre which is responsible for the local administration of labour, agriculture, fisheries, forestry, and entrepreneurial affairs. Historically, counties are divisions of historical provinces of Finland, areas that represent local dialects and culture more accurately.\nSix Regional State Administrative Agencies are responsible for one of the counties called in Finnish; in addition, \u00c5land was designated a seventh county.\nThe county of Eastern Uusimaa (It\u00e4-Uusimaa) was consolidated with Uusimaa on 1 January 2011.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe fundamental administrative divisions of the country are the municipalities, which may also call themselves towns or cities. They account for half of the public spending. Spending is financed by municipal income tax, state subsidies, and other revenue. As of 2021[ [update]], there are 309 municipalities, and most have fewer than 6,000 residents.\nIn addition to municipalities, two intermediate levels are defined. Municipalities co-operate in seventy sub-regions and nineteen counties. These are governed by the member municipalities and have only limited powers. The autonomous province of \u00c5land has a permanent democratically elected regional council. Sami people have a semi-autonomous Sami native region in Lapland for issues on language and culture.\nIn the following chart, the number of inhabitants includes those living in the entire municipality (\"kunta/kommun\"), not just in the built-up area. The land area is given in km2, and the density in inhabitants per km2 (land area). The figures are as of . The capital region \u2013 comprising Helsinki, Vantaa, Espoo and Kauniainen \u2013 forms a continuous conurbation of over 1.1\u00a0million people. However, common administration is limited to voluntary cooperation of all municipalities, e.g. in Helsinki Metropolitan Area Council.\nGovernment and politics.\nConstitution.\nThe Constitution of Finland defines the political system; Finland is a parliamentary republic within the framework of a representative democracy. The Prime Minister is the country's most powerful person. Citizens can run and vote in parliamentary, municipal, presidential, and European Union elections.\nPresident.\nFinland's head of state is the President of the Republic. Finland has had for most of its independence a semi-presidential system of government, but in the last few decades the powers of the President have been diminished, and the country is now considered a parliamentary republic. A new constitution enacted in 2000, have made the presidency a primarily ceremonial office that appoints the Prime Minister as elected by Parliament, appoints and dismisses the other ministers of the Finnish Government on the recommendation of the Prime Minister, opens parliamentary sessions, and confers state honors. Nevertheless, the President remains responsible for Finland's foreign relations, including the making of war and peace, but excluding matters related to the European Union. Moreover, the President exercises supreme command over the Finnish Defence Forces as commander-in-chief. In the exercise of his or her foreign and defense powers, the President is required to consult the Finnish Government, but the Government's advice is not binding. In addition, the President has several domestic reserve powers, including the authority to veto legislation, to grant pardons, and to appoint several public officials. The President is also required by the Constitution to dismiss individual ministers or the entire Government upon a parliamentary vote of no confidence.\nThe President is directly elected via runoff voting for a maximum of two consecutive 6-year terms. The current president is Sauli Niinist\u00f6; he took office on 1 March 2012. Former presidents were K. J. St\u00e5hlberg (1919\u20131925), L. K. Relander (1925\u20131931), P. E. Svinhufvud (1931\u20131937), Ky\u00f6sti Kallio (1937\u20131940), Risto Ryti (1940\u20131944), C. G. E. Mannerheim (1944\u20131946), J. K. Paasikivi (1946\u20131956), Urho Kekkonen (1956\u20131982), Mauno Koivisto (1982\u20131994), Martti Ahtisaari (1994\u20132000), and Tarja Halonen (2000\u20132012).\nParliament.\nThe 200-member unicameral Parliament of Finland () exercises supreme legislative authority in the country. It may alter the constitution and ordinary laws, dismiss the cabinet, and override presidential vetoes. Its acts are not subject to judicial review; the constitutionality of new laws is assessed by the parliament's constitutional law committee. The parliament is elected for a term of four years using the proportional D'Hondt method within several multi-seat constituencies through the most open list multi-member districts. Various parliament committees listen to experts and prepare legislation.\nSignificant parliamentary parties are Centre Party, Christian Democrats, Finns Party, Green League, Left Alliance, National Coalition Party, Social Democrats and Swedish People's Party.\nCabinet.\nAfter parliamentary elections, the parties negotiate among themselves on forming a new cabinet (the Finnish Government), which then has to be approved by a simple majority vote in the parliament. The cabinet can be dismissed by a parliamentary vote of no confidence, although this rarely happens (the last time in 1957), as the parties represented in the cabinet usually make up a majority in the parliament.\nThe cabinet exercises most executive powers and originates most of the bills that the parliament then debates and votes on. It is headed by the Prime Minister of Finland, and consists of him or her, other ministers, and the Chancellor of Justice. Each minister heads his or her ministry, or, in some cases, has responsibility for a subset of a ministry's policy. After the prime minister, the most powerful minister is often the minister of finance.\nAs no one party ever dominates the parliament, Finnish cabinets are multi-party coalitions. As a rule, the post of prime minister goes to the leader of the biggest party and that of the minister of finance to the leader of the second biggest.\nThe Marin Cabinet is the incumbent 76th government of Finland. It took office on 10 December 2019. The cabinet consists of a coalition formed by the Social Democratic Party, the Centre Party, the Green League, the Left Alliance, and the Swedish People's Party.\nLaw.\nThe judicial system of Finland is a civil law system divided between courts with regular civil and criminal jurisdiction and administrative courts with jurisdiction over litigation between individuals and the public administration. Finnish law is codified and based on Swedish law and in a wider sense, civil law or Roman law. The court system for civil and criminal jurisdiction consists of local courts, regional appellate courts, and the Supreme Court. The administrative branch of justice consists of administrative courts and the Supreme Administrative Court. In addition to the regular courts, there are a few special courts in certain branches of administration. There is also a High Court of Impeachment for criminal charges against certain high-ranking officeholders.\nAround 92% of residents have confidence in Finland's security institutions. The overall crime rate of Finland is not high in the EU context. Some crime types are above average, notably the high homicide rate for Western Europe. A day fine system is in effect and also applied to offenses such as speeding. Finland has a very low number of corruption charges; Transparency International ranks Finland as one of the least corrupt countries in Europe.\nForeign relations.\nAccording to the 2012 constitution, the president (currently Sauli Niinist\u00f6) leads foreign policy in cooperation with the government, except that the president has no role in EU affairs. In 2008, president Martti Ahtisaari was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.\nMilitary.\nThe Finnish Defence Forces consist of a cadre of professional soldiers (mainly officers and technical personnel), currently serving conscripts, and a large reserve. The standard readiness strength is 34,700 people in uniform, of which 25% are professional soldiers. A universal male conscription is in place, under which all male Finnish nationals above 18 years of age serve for 6 to 12 months of armed service or 12 months of civilian (non-armed) service.\nVoluntary post-conscription overseas peacekeeping service is popular, and troops serve around the world in UN, NATO, and EU missions. Women are allowed to serve in all combat arms. In 2022, 1211 women entered voluntary military service. The army consists of a highly mobile field army backed up by local defence units. With a high capability of military personnel, arsenal and homeland defence willingness, Finland is one of Europe's militarily strongest countries.\nFinnish defence expenditure per capita is one of the highest in the European Union. The branches of the military are the army, the navy, and the air force. The border guard is under the Ministry of the Interior but can be incorporated into the Defence Forces when required for defence readiness.\nFinland became a member of NATO on 4 April 2023, though it participated in the NATO Response Force before becoming a member. Finland also contributes to the EU Battlegroup. Finland sent personnel to the Kosovo Force and the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.\nSocial security.\nFinland has one of the world's most extensive welfare systems, one that guarantees decent living conditions for all residents. The welfare system was created almost entirely during the first three decades after World War II. Finland's history has been harsher than the histories of the other Nordic countries, but not harsh enough to bar the country from following its path of social development.\nHuman rights.\nSection 6 of the Finnish Constitution states: \"No one shall be placed in a different position on situation of sex, age, origin, language, religion, belief, opinion, state of health, disability or any other personal reason without an acceptable reason\".\nFinland has been ranked above average among the world's countries in democracy, press freedom, and human development. Amnesty International has expressed concern regarding some issues in Finland, such as the imprisonment of conscientious objectors, and societal discrimination against Romani people and members of other ethnic and linguistic minorities.\nIn the report of the European umbrella organization ILGA-Europe published in May 2023, Finland ranked sixth in a European comparison of LGBTQ+ rights.\nEconomy.\nAs of 2022, Finland has the 16th highest nominal GDP per capita in the world according to the IMF.\nIn addition to the fact that Finland is one of the richest countries in the world, it is known for its well-developed welfare system, such as free education, and advanced health care system.\nThe largest sector of the economy is the service sector at 66% of GDP, followed by manufacturing and refining at 31%. Primary production represents 2.9%. With respect to foreign trade, the key economic sector is manufacturing. The largest industries in 2007 were electronics (22%); machinery, vehicles, and other engineered metal products (21.1%); forest industry (13%); and chemicals (11%). The gross domestic product peaked in 2008. As of 2015[ [update]], the country's economy is at the 2006 level. Finland is ranked as the 9th most innovative country in the Global Innovation Index in 2022.\nFinland has significant timber, mineral (iron, chromium, copper, nickel, and gold), and freshwater resources. Forestry, paper factories, and the agricultural sector are important for rural residents. The Greater Helsinki area generates around one-third of Finland's GDP. Private services are the largest employer in Finland.\nFinland's climate and soils make growing crops a particular challenge. The country has severe winters and relatively short growing seasons that are sometimes interrupted by frost. However, because the Gulf Stream and the North Atlantic Drift Current moderate the climate, Finland contains half of the world's arable land north of 60\u00b0 north latitude. Annual precipitation is usually sufficient, but it occurs almost exclusively during the winter months, making summer droughts a constant threat. In response to the climate, farmers have relied on quick-ripening and frost-resistant varieties of crops, and they have cultivated south-facing slopes as well as richer bottomlands to ensure production even in years with summer frosts. Drainage systems are often needed to remove excess water. Finland's agriculture has been efficient and productive\u2014at least when compared with farming in other European countries.\nForests play a key role in the country's economy, making it one of the world's leading wood producers and providing raw materials at competitive prices for the crucial wood processing industries. As in agriculture, the government has long played a leading role in forestry, regulating tree cutting, sponsoring technical improvements, and establishing long-term plans to ensure that the country's forests continue to supply the wood-processing industries.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], average purchasing power-adjusted income levels are similar to those of Italy, Sweden, Germany, and France. In 2006, 62% of the workforce worked for enterprises with less than 250 employees and they accounted for 49% of total business turnover. The female employment rate is high. Gender segregation between male-dominated professions and female-dominated professions is higher than in the US. The proportion of part-time workers was one of the lowest in OECD in 1999. In 2013, the 10 largest private sector employers in Finland were Itella, Nokia, OP-Pohjola, ISS, VR, Kesko, UPM-Kymmene, YIT, Metso, and Nordea. The unemployment rate was 6.8% in 2022.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], 2.4\u00a0million households reside in Finland. The average size is 2.1 persons; 40% of households consist of a single person, 32% two persons and 28% three or more persons. Residential buildings total 1.2\u00a0million, and the average residential space is per person. The average residential property without land costs \u20ac1,187 per sq metre and residential land \u20ac8.60 per sq metre. 74% of households had a car. In 2017, Finland's GDP reached \u20ac224\u00a0 billion.\nFinland has the highest concentration of cooperatives relative to its population. The largest retailer, which is also the largest private employer, S-Group, and the largest bank, OP-Group, in the country are both cooperatives.\nEnergy.\nThe free and largely privately owned financial and physical Nordic energy markets traded in NASDAQ OMX Commodities Europe and Nord Pool Spot exchanges, have provided competitive prices compared with other EU countries. As of 2022[ [update]], Finland has the lowest non-household electricity prices in the EU.\nIn 2021, the energy market was around 87 terawatt hours and the peak demand around 14 gigawatts in winter. Industry and construction consumed 43.5% of total consumption, a relatively high figure reflecting Finland's industries. Finland's hydrocarbon resources are limited to peat and wood. About 18% of the electricity is produced by hydropower In 2021, renewable energy (mainly hydropower and various forms of wood energy) was high at 43% compared with the EU average of 22% in final energy consumption. About 20% of electricity is imported, especially from Sweden due to its lower cost there. As of \u00a02022[ [update]], Finland's strategic petroleum reserves held 200 days worth of net oil imports in the case of emergencies.\nFinland has five privately owned nuclear reactors producing 40% of the country's energy. The Onkalo spent nuclear fuel repository is currently under construction at the Olkiluoto Nuclear Power Plant in the municipality of Eurajoki, on the west coast of Finland, by the company Posiva.\nTransport.\nFinland's road system is utilized by most internal cargo and passenger traffic. The annual state operated road network expenditure of around \u20ac1\u00a0 billion is paid for with vehicle and fuel taxes which amount to around \u20ac1.5\u00a0 billion and \u20ac1\u00a0 billion, respectively. Among the Finnish highways, the most significant and busiest main roads include the Turku Highway (E18), the Tampere Highway (E12), the Lahti Highway (E75), and the ring roads (Ring I and Ring III) of the Helsinki metropolitan area and the Tampere Ring Road of the Tampere urban area.\nThe main international passenger gateway is Helsinki Airport, which handled about 21 million passengers in 2019 (5\u00a0million in 2020 due to COVID-19 pandemic). Oulu Airport is the second largest with 1 million passengers in 2019 (300,000 in 2020), whilst another 25 airports have scheduled passenger services. The Helsinki Airport-based Finnair, Blue1, and Nordic Regional Airlines, Norwegian Air Shuttle sell air services both domestically and internationally.\nThe Government annually spends around \u20ac350\u00a0 million to maintain the network of railway tracks. Rail transport is handled by the state-owned VR Group. Finland's first railway was opened in 1862, and today it forms part of the Finnish Main Line, which is more than 800 kilometers long. Helsinki opened the world's northernmost metro system in 1982.\nThe majority of international cargo shipments are handled at ports. Vuosaari Harbour in Helsinki is the largest container port in Finland; others include Kotka, Hamina, Hanko, Pori, Rauma, and Oulu. There is passenger traffic from Helsinki and Turku, which have ferry connections to Tallinn, Mariehamn, Stockholm and Travem\u00fcnde. The Helsinki-Tallinn route is one of the busiest passenger sea routes in the world. By passenger counts, the Port of Helsinki is the third busiest port in the world.\nIndustry.\nFinland rapidly industrialized after World War II, achieving GDP per capita levels comparable to that of Japan or the UK at the beginning of the 1970s. Initially, most of the economic development was based on two broad groups of export-led industries, the \"metal industry\" (\"metalliteollisuus\") and \"forest industry\" (\"mets\u00e4teollisuus\"). The \"metal industry\" includes shipbuilding, metalworking, the automotive industry, engineered products such as motors and electronics, and production of metals and alloys including steel, copper and chromium. Many of the world's biggest cruise ships, including MS Freedom of the Seas and the Oasis of the Seas have been built in Finnish shipyards.\n The \"forest industry\" includes forestry, timber, pulp and paper, and is often considered a logical development based on Finland's extensive forest resources, as 73% of the area is covered by forest. In the pulp and paper industry, many major companies are based in Finland; Ahlstrom-Munksj\u00f6, Mets\u00e4 Board, and UPM are all Finnish forest-based companies with revenues exceeding \u20ac1\u00a0billion. However, in recent decades, the Finnish economy has diversified, with companies expanding into fields such as electronics (Nokia), metrology (Vaisala), petroleum (Neste), and video games (Rovio Entertainment), and is no longer dominated by the two sectors of metal and forest industry. Likewise, the structure has changed, with the service sector growing. Despite this, production for export is still more prominent than in Western Europe, thus making Finland possibly more vulnerable to global economic trends.\nIn 2017, the Finnish economy was estimated to consist of approximately 2.7% agriculture, 28.2% manufacturing, and 69.1% services. In 2019, the per-capita income of Finland was estimated to be $48,869. In 2020, Finland was ranked 20th on the ease of doing business index, among 190 jurisdictions.\nPublic policy.\nFinnish politicians have often emulated the Nordic model. Nordics have been free-trading for over a century. The level of protection in commodity trade has been low, except for agricultural products. Finland is ranked 16th in the 2008 global Index of Economic Freedom and ninth in Europe. According to the OECD, only four EU-15 countries have less regulated product markets and only one has less regulated financial markets. The 2007 IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook ranked Finland 17th most competitive. The World Economic Forum 2008 index ranked Finland the sixth most competitive.\nThe legal system is clear and business bureaucracy less than most countries. Property rights are well protected and contractual agreements are strictly honoured. Finland is rated the least corrupt country in the world in the Corruption Perceptions Index and 13th in the Ease of doing business index.\nIn Finland, collective labour agreements are universally valid. These are drafted every few years for each profession and seniority level, with only a few jobs outside the system. The agreement becomes universally enforceable provided that more than 50% of the employees support it, in practice by being a member of a relevant trade union. The unionization rate is high (70%), especially in the middle class (AKAVA, mostly for university-educated professionals: 80%).\nTourism.\nIn 2017, tourism in Finland grossed approximately \u20ac15.0\u00a0billion. Of this, \u20ac4.6\u00a0billion (30%) came from foreign tourism. In 2017, there were 15.2\u00a0million overnight stays of domestic tourists and 6.7\u00a0million overnight stays of foreign tourists. Tourism contributes roughly 2.7% to Finland's GDP.\nLapland has the highest tourism consumption of any Finnish region. Above the Arctic Circle, in midwinter, there is a polar night, a period when the sun does not rise for days or weeks, or even months, and correspondingly, midnight sun in the summer, with no sunset even at midnight (for up to 73 consecutive days, at the northernmost point). Lapland is so far north that the aurora borealis, fluorescence in the high atmosphere due to solar wind, is seen regularly in the fall, winter, and spring. Finnish Lapland is also locally regarded as the home of Santa Claus, with several theme parks, such as Santa Claus Village and Santa Park in Rovaniemi. Other significant tourist destinations in Lapland also include ski resorts (such as Levi, Ruka and Yll\u00e4s) and sleigh rides led by either reindeer or huskies.\nTourist attractions in Finland include the natural landscape found throughout the country as well as urban attractions. Finland contains 40 national parks (such as the Koli National Park in North Karelia), from the Southern shores of the Gulf of Finland to the high fells of Lapland. Outdoor activities range from Nordic skiing, golf, fishing, yachting, lake cruises, hiking, and kayaking, among many others. Bird-watching is popular for those fond of avifauna, however, hunting is also popular.\nThe most famous tourist attractions in Helsinki include the Helsinki Cathedral and the Suomenlinna sea fortress. The most well-known Finnish amusement parks include Linnanm\u00e4ki in Helsinki and S\u00e4rk\u00e4nniemi in Tampere. St. Olaf's Castle (\"Olavinlinna\") in Savonlinna hosts the annual Savonlinna Opera Festival, and the medieval milieus of the cities of Turku, Rauma and Porvoo also attract spectators. Commercial cruises between major coastal and port cities in the Baltic region play a significant role in the local tourism industry.\nDemographics.\nPopulation by ethnic background in 2021\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Finnish (91.54%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Other European (4.12%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Asian (2.77%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0 African\n (1.09%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Others (0.48%)\nThe population of Finland is currently about 5.5\u00a0million. The current birth rate is 10.42 per 1,000 residents, for a fertility rate of 1.49 children born per woman, one of the lowest in the world, significantly below the replacement rate of 2.1. In 1887 Finland recorded its highest rate, 5.17 children born per woman. Finland has one of the oldest populations in the world, with a median age of 42.6 years. Approximately half of voters are estimated to be over 50 years old. Finland has an average population density of 18 inhabitants per square kilometre. This is the third-lowest population density of any European country, behind those of Norway and Iceland, and the lowest population density of any European Union member country. Finland's population has always been concentrated in the southern parts of the country, a phenomenon that became even more pronounced during 20th-century urbanization. Two of the three largest cities in Finland are situated in the Greater Helsinki metropolitan area\u2014Helsinki and Espoo. In the largest cities of Finland, Tampere holds the third place after Helsinki and Espoo while also Helsinki-neighbouring Vantaa is the fourth. Other cities with population over 100,000 are Turku, Oulu, Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4, Kuopio, and Lahti.\nFinland's immigrant population is growing. As of 2021[ [update]], there were 469,633 people with a foreign background living in Finland (8.5% of the population), most of whom are from the former Soviet Union, Estonia, Somalia, Iraq and former Yugoslavia. The children of foreigners are not automatically given Finnish citizenship, as Finnish nationality law practices and maintain \"jus sanguinis\" policy where only children born to at least one Finnish parent are granted citizenship. If they are born in Finland and cannot get citizenship of any other country, they become citizens. Additionally, certain persons of Finnish descent who reside in countries that were once part of Soviet Union, retain the right of return, a right to establish permanent residency in the country, which would eventually entitle them to qualify for citizenship. 442,290 people in Finland in 2021 were born in another country, representing 8% of the population. The 10 largest foreign born groups are (in order) from Russia, Estonia, Sweden, Iraq, China, Somalia, Thailand, Vietnam, Serbia and India, with Turkey dropping to 11th place from last year.\nLanguage.\nFinnish and Swedish are the official languages of Finland. Finnish predominates nationwide while Swedish is spoken in some coastal areas in the west and south (with towns such as Eken\u00e4s, Pargas, N\u00e4rpes, Kristinestad, Jakobstad and Nykarleby.) and in the autonomous region of \u00c5land, which is the only monolingual Swedish-speaking region in Finland. The native language of 87.3% of the population is Finnish, which is part of the Finnic subgroup of the Uralic language. The language is one of only four official EU languages not of Indo-European origin, and has no relation through descent to the other national languages of the Nordics. Conversely, Finnish is closely related to Estonian and Karelian, and more distantly to Hungarian and the Sami languages.\nSwedish is the native language of 5.2% of the population (Swedish-speaking Finns). Swedish is a compulsory school subject and general knowledge of the language is good among many non-native speakers. Likewise, a majority of Swedish-speaking non-\u00c5landers can speak Finnish. The Finnish side of the land border with Sweden is unilingually Finnish-speaking. The Swedish across the border is distinct from the Swedish spoken in Finland. There is a sizeable pronunciation difference between the varieties of Swedish spoken in the two countries, although their mutual intelligibility is nearly universal.\nFinnish Romani is spoken by some 5,000\u20136,000 people; Romani and Finnish Sign Language are also recognized in the constitution. There are two sign languages: Finnish Sign Language, spoken natively by 4,000\u20135,000 people, and Finland-Swedish Sign Language, spoken natively by about 150 people. Tatar is spoken by a Finnish Tatar minority of about 800 people whose ancestors moved to Finland mainly during Russian rule from the 1870s to the 1920s.\nThe Sami languages have an official status in parts of Lapland, where the Sami, numbering around 7,000, are recognized as an indigenous people. About a quarter of them speak a Sami language as their mother tongue. The Sami languages that are spoken in Finland are Northern Sami, Inari Sami, and Skolt Sami. The rights of minority groups (in particular Sami, Swedish speakers, and Romani people) are protected by the constitution. The Nordic languages and Karelian are also specially recognized in parts of Finland.\nThe largest immigrant languages are Russian (1.6%), Estonian (0.9%), Arabic (0.7%), English (0.5%) and Somali (0.4%).\nEnglish is studied by most pupils as a compulsory subject from the first grade (at seven years of age), formerly from the third or fifth grade, in the comprehensive school (in some schools other languages can be chosen instead). German, French, Spanish and Russian can be studied as second foreign languages from the fourth grade (at 10 years of age; some schools may offer other options).\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReligion.\nReligions in Finland (2019)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland (68.72%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Orthodox Church (1.10%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Other Christian (0.93%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Other religions (0.76%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Unaffiliated (28.49%)\nWith 3.9\u00a0million members, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland is Finland's largest religious body; at the end of 2019, 68.7% of Finns were members of the church. The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland has seen its share of the country's population declining by roughly one percent annually in recent years. The decline has been due to both church membership resignations and falling baptism rates. The second largest group, accounting for 26.3% of the population in 2017, has no religious affiliation. A small minority belongs to the Finnish Orthodox Church (1.1%). Other Protestant denominations and the Roman Catholic Church are significantly smaller, as are the Jewish and other non-Christian communities (totalling 1.6%). The Pew Research Center estimated the Muslim population at 2.7% in 2016.\nFinland's state church was the Church of Sweden until 1809. As an autonomous Grand Duchy under Russia from 1809 to 1917, Finland retained the Lutheran State Church system, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland was established. After Finland had gained independence in 1917, religious freedom was declared in the constitution of 1919, and a separate law on religious freedom in 1922. Through this arrangement, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland gained a constitutional status as a national church alongside the Finnish Orthodox Church, whose position however is not codified in the constitution. The main Lutheran and Orthodox churches have special roles such as in state ceremonies and schools.\nIn 2016, 69.3% of Finnish children were baptized and 82.3% were confirmed in 2012 at the age of 15, and over 90% of the funerals are Christian. However, the majority of Lutherans attend church only for special occasions like Christmas ceremonies, weddings, and funerals. The Lutheran Church estimates that approximately 1.8% of its members attend church services weekly. The average number of church visits per year by church members is approximately two.\nAccording to a 2010 Eurobarometer poll, 33% of Finnish citizens responded that they \"believe there is a God\"; 42% answered that they \"believe there is some sort of spirit or life force\"; and 22% that they \"do not believe there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force\". According to ISSP survey data (2008), 8% consider themselves \"highly religious\", and 31% \"moderately religious\". In the same survey, 28% reported themselves as \"agnostic\" and 29% as \"non-religious\".\nHealth.\nLife expectancy was 79 years for men and 84 years for women in 2017. The under-five mortality rate was 2.3 per 1,000 live births in 2017, ranking Finland's rate among the lowest in the world. The fertility rate in 2014 stood at 1.71 children born/per woman and has been below the replacement rate of 2.1 since 1969. With a low birth rate women also become mothers at a later age, the mean age at first live birth being 28.6 in 2014. A 2011 study published in \"The Lancet\" medical journal found that Finland had the lowest stillbirth rate out of 193 countries.\nThere has been a slight increase or no change in welfare and health inequalities between population groups in the 21st century. Lifestyle-related diseases are on the rise. More than half a million Finns suffer from diabetes, type 1 diabetes being globally the most common in Finland. Many children are diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. The number of musculoskeletal diseases and cancers are increasing, although the cancer prognosis has improved. Allergies and dementia are also growing health problems in Finland. One of the most common reasons for work disability are due to mental disorders, in particular depression. The suicide rates were 13 per 100 000 in 2017, close to the North European average. Suicide rates are still among the highest among developed countries in the OECD.\nThere are 307 residents for each doctor. About 19% of health care is funded directly by households and 77% by taxation.\nIn April 2012, Finland was ranked second in Gross National Happiness in a report published by The Earth Institute. Since 2012, Finland has every time ranked at least in the top 5 of world's happiest countries in the annual World Happiness Report by the United Nations, as well as ranking as the happiest country in 2018.\nEducation and science.\nMost pre-tertiary education is arranged at the municipal level. Around 3 percent of students are enrolled in private schools (mostly specialist language and international schools). Formal education is usually started at the age of 7. Primary school takes normally six years and lower secondary school three years.\nThe curriculum is set by the Ministry of Education and Culture and the Education Board. Education is compulsory between the ages of 7 and 18. After lower secondary school, graduates may apply to trade schools or gymnasiums (upper secondary schools). Trade schools offer a vocational education: approximately 40% of an age group choose this path after the lower secondary school. Academically oriented gymnasiums have higher entrance requirements and specifically prepare for Abitur and tertiary education. Graduation from either formally qualifies for tertiary education.\nIn tertiary education, two mostly separate and non-interoperating sectors are found: the profession-oriented polytechnics and the research-oriented universities. Education is free and living expenses are to a large extent financed by the government through student benefits. There are 15 universities and 24 Universities of Applied Sciences (UAS) in the country. The University of Helsinki is ranked 75th in the Top University Ranking of 2010. Other reputable universities of Finland include Aalto University in Espoo, both University of Turku and \u00c5bo Akademi University in Turku, University of Jyv\u00e4skyl\u00e4, University of Oulu, LUT University in Lappeenranta and Lahti, University of Eastern Finland in Kuopio and Joensuu, and Tampere University.\nThe World Economic Forum ranks Finland's tertiary education No. 1 in the world. Around 33% of residents have a tertiary degree, similar to Nordics and more than in most other OECD countries except Canada (44%), United States (38%) and Japan (37%). In addition, 38% of Finland's population has a university or college degree, which is among the highest percentages in the world. Adult education appears in several forms, such as secondary evening schools, civic and workers' institutes, study centres, vocational course centres, and folk high schools.\nMore than 30% of tertiary graduates are in science-related fields. Forest improvement, materials research, environmental sciences, neural networks, low-temperature physics, brain research, biotechnology, genetic technology, and communications showcase fields of study where Finnish researchers have had a significant impact. Finland is highly productive in scientific research. In 2005, Finland had the fourth most scientific publications per capita of the OECD countries. In 2007, 1,801 patents were filed in Finland.\nCulture.\nLiterature.\nWritten Finnish could be said to have existed since Mikael Agricola translated the New Testament into Finnish during the Protestant Reformation, but few notable works of literature were written until the 19th century and the beginning of a Finnish national Romantic Movement. This prompted Elias L\u00f6nnrot to collect Finnish and Karelian folk poetry and arrange and publish them as the \"Kalevala\", the Finnish national epic. The era saw a rise of poets and novelists who wrote in Finnish, notably the national writer of Finland, Aleksis Kivi (\"The Seven Brothers\"), and Minna Canth, Eino Leino, and Juhani Aho. Many writers of the national awakening wrote in Swedish, such as the national poet J. L. Runeberg (\"The Tales of Ensign St\u00e5l\") and Zachris Topelius.\nAfter Finland became independent, there was a rise of modernist writers, most famously the Swedish-speaking poet Edith S\u00f6dergran. Finnish-speaking authors explored national and historical themes. Most famous of them were Frans Eemil Sillanp\u00e4\u00e4, who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1939, historical novelist Mika Waltari, and V\u00e4in\u00f6 Linna with his \"The Unknown Soldier\" and \"Under the North\" Star trilogy. Beginning with Paavo Haavikko, Finnish poetry adopted modernism. Besides L\u00f6nnrot's \"Kalevala\" and Waltari, the Swedish-speaking Tove Jansson, best known as the creator of \"The Moomins\", is the most translated Finnish writer; her books have been translated into more than 40 languages.\nVisual arts, design, and architecture.\nThe visual arts in Finland started to form their characteristics in the 19th century when Romantic nationalism was rising in autonomic Finland. The best known Finnish painters, Akseli Gallen-Kallela, started painting in a naturalist style but moved to national romanticism. Other notable painters of the era include Pekka Halonen, Eero J\u00e4rnefelt, Helene Schjerfbeck and Hugo Simberg. In the late 20th century, the homoerotic art of Touko Laaksonen, pseudonym Tom of Finland, found a worldwide audience.\nFinland's best-known sculptor of the 20th century was W\u00e4in\u00f6 Aaltonen, remembered for his monumental busts and sculptures. The works of Eila Hiltunen and Laila Pullinen exemplifies the modernism in sculpture.\nFinns have made major contributions to handicrafts and industrial design: among the internationally renowned figures are Timo Sarpaneva, Tapio Wirkkala and Ilmari Tapiovaara. Finnish architecture is famous around the world, and has contributed significantly to several styles internationally, such as Jugendstil (or Art Nouveau), Nordic Classicism and functionalism. Among the top 20th-century Finnish architects to gain international recognition are Eliel Saarinen and his son Eero Saarinen. Architect Alvar Aalto is regarded as among the most important 20th-century designers in the world; he helped bring functionalist architecture to Finland, but soon was a pioneer in its development towards an organic style. Aalto is also famous for his work in furniture, lamps, textiles, and glassware, which were usually incorporated into his buildings.\nMusic.\nMuch of Finland's classical music is influenced by traditional Karelian melodies and lyrics, as comprised in the \"Kalevala\". Karelian culture is perceived as less influenced by Germanic influence than the Nordic folk dance music that largely replaced the kalevaic tradition. Finnish folk music has undergone a roots revival and has become a part of popular music. The people of northern Finland, Sweden, and Norway, the Sami, are known primarily for highly spiritual songs called joik.\nThe first Finnish opera was written by the German-born composer Fredrik Pacius in 1852. Pacius also wrote the music to the poem \"Maamme/V\u00e5rt land\" (Our Country), Finland's national anthem. In the 1890s Finnish nationalism based on the \"Kalevala\" spread, and Jean Sibelius became famous for his vocal symphony \"Kullervo\". In 1899 he composed \"Finlandia\", which played an important role in Finland gaining independence. He remains one of Finland's most popular national figures.\nAlongside Sibelius, the distinct Finnish style of music was created by Oskar Merikanto, Toivo Kuula, Erkki Melartin, Leevi Madetoja and Uuno Klami. Important modernist composers include Einojuhani Rautavaara, Aulis Sallinen and Magnus Lindberg, among others. Kaija Saariaho was ranked the world's greatest living composer in a 2019 composers' poll. Many Finnish musicians have achieved international success. Among them are the conductor Esa-Pekka Salonen, the opera singer Karita Mattila and the violinist Pekka Kuusisto.\n\"Iskelm\u00e4\" (coined directly from the German word \"Schlager\", meaning \"hit\") is a traditional Finnish word for a light popular song. Finnish popular music also includes various kinds of dance music; tango, a style of Argentine music, is also popular. The light music in Swedish-speaking areas has more influences from Sweden. At least a couple of Finnish polkas are known worldwide, such as \"S\u00e4kkij\u00e4rven polkka\" and \"Ievan polkka\".\nDuring the 1970s, progressive rock group Wigwam and rock and roll group Hurriganes gained respect abroad. The Finnish punk scene produced some internationally acknowledged names including Terveet K\u00e4det in the 1980s. Hanoi Rocks was a pioneering glam rock act. Many Finnish metal bands have gained international recognition; Finland has been often called the \"Promised Land of Heavy Metal\" because there are more than 50 metal Bands for every 100,000 inhabitants \u2013 more than any other nation in the world. Modern Finnish popular music includes a number of prominent pop musicians, jazz musicians, hip hop performers, and dance music acts.\nFinland has won the Eurovision Song Contest once in 2006 when Lordi won the contest with the song \"Hard Rock Hallelujah\". The Finnish pop artist K\u00e4\u00e4rij\u00e4 also got second place in the contest in 2023 with his worldwide hit song \"Cha Cha Cha\".\nCinema and television.\nIn the film industry, notable modern directors include brothers Mika and Aki Kaurism\u00e4ki, Dome Karukoski, Antti Jokinen, Jalmari Helander, and Renny Harlin. Around twelve feature films are made each year. Some Finnish drama series are internationally known, such as \"Bordertown\".\nOne of the most internationally successful Finnish films are \"The White Reindeer\", directed by Erik Blomberg in 1952, which won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Film in 1956; \"The Man Without a Past\", directed by Aki Kaurism\u00e4ki in 2002, which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 2002 and won the Grand Prix at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival; and \"The Fencer\", directed by Klaus H\u00e4r\u00f6 in 2015, which was nominated for the 73rd Golden Globe Awards in the Best Foreign Language Film category as a Finnish/German/Estonian co-production.\nIn Finland, the most significant films include \"The Unknown Soldier\", directed by Edvin Laine in 1955. \"Here, Beneath the North Star\" from 1968, is also one of the most significant works in Finnish history. A 1960 crime comedy film \"Inspector Palmu's Mistake\", directed by Matti Kassila, was voted in 2012 the best Finnish film of all time by Finnish film critics and journalists, but the 1984 comedy film \"Uuno Turhapuro in the Army\", the ninth film in \"Uuno Turhapuro\" film series, remains Finland's most seen domestic film made since 1968 by Finnish audience.\nMedia and communications.\nToday, there are around 200 newspapers, 320 popular magazines, 2,100 professional magazines, and 67 commercial radio stations. The largest newspaper is , its circulation being 339,437 as of 2019[ [update]]. Yle, the Finnish Broadcasting Company, operates five television channels and thirteen radio channels. Each year, around 12,000 book titles are published.\nThanks to its emphasis on transparency and equal rights, Finland's press has been rated the freest in the world. Worldwide, Finns, along with other Nordic peoples and the Japanese, spend the most time reading newspapers. In regards to telecommunication infrastructure, Finland is the highest ranked country in the World Economic Forum's Network Readiness Index (NRI) \u2013 an indicator for determining the development level of a country's information and communication technologies.\nSauna.\nThe Finns' love for saunas is generally associated with Finnish cultural tradition in the world. Sauna is a type of dry steam bath practiced widely in Finland, which is especially evident in the strong tradition around Midsummer and Christmas. The word sauna is of Proto-Finnish origin (found in Finnic and Sami languages) dating back 7,000 years. Steam baths have been part of European tradition elsewhere as well, but the sauna has survived best in Finland, in addition to Sweden, Estonia, Latvia, Russia, Norway, and parts of the United States and Canada. Moreover, nearly all Finnish houses have either their own sauna or in multi-story apartment houses, a timeshare sauna. Municipal swimming halls and hotels have often their own saunas. The Finnish sauna culture is inscribed on the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists.\nCuisine.\nFinnish cuisine generally combines traditional country fare and contemporary style cooking. Potato, meat and fish play a prominent role in traditional Finnish dishes. Finnish foods often use wholemeal products (rye, barley, oats) and berries (such as bilberries, lingonberries, cloudberries, and sea buckthorn). Milk and its derivatives like buttermilk are commonly used as food and drink. The most popular fish food in Finland is salmon.\nFinland has the world's second highest per capita consumption of coffee. Milk consumption is also high, at an average of about , per person, per year, even though 17% of the Finns are lactose intolerant.\nPublic holidays.\nThere are several holidays in Finland, of which perhaps the most characteristic of Finnish culture include Christmas (\"joulu\"), Midsummer (\"juhannus\"), May Day (\"vappu\") and Independence Day (\"itsen\u00e4isyysp\u00e4iv\u00e4\"). Of these, Christmas and Midsummer are special in Finland because the actual festivities take place on eves, such as Christmas Eve and Midsummer's Eve, while Christmas Day and Midsummer's Day are more consecrated to rest. Other public holidays in Finland are New Year's Day, Epiphany, Good Friday, Easter Sunday and Easter Monday, Ascension Day, All Saints' Day and Saint Stephen's Day. All official holidays in Finland are established by Acts of Parliament.\nSports.\nVarious sporting events are popular in Finland. Pes\u00e4pallo, the Finnish equivalent of American baseball, is the national sport of Finland, although the most popular sport in terms of spectators is ice hockey. Other popular sports include athletics, cross-country skiing, ski jumping, football, volleyball, and basketball. Association football is the most played team sport in terms of the number of players in the country. Finland's national basketball team has received widespread public attention.\nIn terms of medals and gold medals won per capita, Finland is the best-performing country in Olympic history. Finland first participated as a nation in its own right at the Olympic Games in 1908. At the 1912 Summer Olympics, three gold medals were won by the original \"Flying Finn\" Hannes Kolehmainen. In the 1920s and '30s, Finnish long-distance runners dominated the Olympics, with Paavo Nurmi winning a total of nine Olympic gold medals and setting 22 official world records between 1921 and 1931. Nurmi is often considered the greatest Finnish sportsman and one of the greatest athletes of all time. The 1952 Summer Olympics were held in Helsinki.\nThe javelin throw event has brought Finland nine Olympic gold medals, five world championships, five European championships, and 24 world records. Finland also has a notable history in figure skating. Finnish skaters have won 8 world championships and 13 junior world cups in synchronized skating.\nFinnish competitors have achieved significant success in motorsport. In the World Rally Championship, Finland has produced eight world champions, more than any other country. In Formula One, Finland has won the most world championships per capita, with Keke Rosberg, Mika H\u00e4kkinen and Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen all having won the title.\nSome of the most popular recreational sports and activities include Nordic walking, running, cycling and skiing. Floorball is the most popular youth and workplace sport.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10578", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10578", "title": "Finite Mathematics", "text": ""}
{"id": "10583", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10583", "title": "FrodoBaggins", "text": ""}
{"id": "10585", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10585", "title": "Flagellate", "text": "Group of protists with at least one whip-like appendage\n \nA flagellate is a cell or organism with one or more whip-like appendages called flagella. The word \"flagellate\" also describes a particular construction (or level of organization) characteristic of many prokaryotes and eukaryotes and their means of motion. The term presently does not imply any specific relationship or classification of the organisms that possess flagella. However, the term \"flagellate\" is included in other terms (such as \"dinoflagellate\" and \"choanoflagellata\") which are more formally characterized.\nForm and behavior.\nFlagella in eukaryotes are supported by microtubules in a characteristic arrangement, with nine fused pairs surrounding two central singlets. These arise from a basal body. In some flagellates, flagella direct food into a cytostome or mouth, where food is ingested. Flagella often support hairs, called mastigonemes, or contain rods. Their ultrastructure plays an important role in classifying eukaryotes.\nAmong protoctists and microscopic animals, a flagellate is an organism with one or more flagella. Some cells in other animals may be flagellate, for instance the spermatozoa of most animal phyla. Flowering plants do not produce flagellate cells, but ferns, mosses, green algae, and some gymnosperms and closely related plants do so. Likewise, most fungi do not produce cells with flagellae, but the primitive fungal chytrids do. Many protists take the form of single-celled flagellates.\nFlagella are generally used for propulsion. They may also be used to create a current that brings in food. In most such organisms, one or more flagella are located at or near the anterior of the cell, e.g., \"Euglena\". Often there is one directed forwards and one trailing behind. Among animals, fungi, which are part of a group called the opisthokonts, there is a single posterior flagellum. They are from the phylum Mastigophora. They can cause diseases and are typically heterotrophic. They reproduce by binary fission. They spend most of their existence moving or feeding. Many parasites that affect human health or economy are flagellates. Flagellates are the major consumers of primary and secondary production in aquatic ecosystems - consuming bacteria and other protists.\nFlagellates as specialized cells or life cycle stages.\nAn overview of the occurrence of flagellated cells in eukaryote groups, as specialized cells of multicellular organisms or as life cycle stages, is given below (see also the article flagellum):\nFlagellates as organisms: the Flagellata.\nIn older classifications, flagellated protozoa were grouped in Flagellata (= Mastigophora), sometimes divided into Phytoflagellata (= Phytomastigina, mostly autotrophic) and Zooflagellata (= Zoomastigina, heterotrophic). They were sometimes grouped with Sarcodina (ameboids) in the group Sarcomastigophora.\nThe autotrophic flagellates were grouped similarly to the botanical schemes used for the corresponding algae groups. The colourless flagellates were customary grouped in three groups, highly artificial:\nPresently, these groups are known to be highly polyphyletic. In modern classifications of the protists, the principal flagellated taxa are placed in the following eukaryote groups, which include also non-flagellated forms (A: autotrophic; F: free-living heterotrophic; P: parasitic; S: symbiotic):\nAlthough the taxonomic group Flagellata was abandoned, the term \"flagellate\" is still used as the description of a and also as an ecological functional group. Another term used is \"monadoid\", from monad. as in \"Monas\", and \"Cryptomonas\" and in the groups as listed above.\nThe amoeboflagellates (e.g., the rhizarian genus \"Cercomonas\", some amoebozoan Archamoebae, some excavate Heterolobosea) have a peculiar type of flagellate/amoeboid organization, in which cells may present flagella and pseudopods, simultaneously or sequentially, while the helioflagellates (e.g., the cercozoan heliomonads/dimorphids, the stramenopile pedinellids and ciliophryids) have a flagellate/heliozoan organization.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10587", "revid": "2030868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10587", "title": "Film Techniques", "text": ""}
{"id": "10589", "revid": "1113933901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10589", "title": "Function", "text": "Function or functionality may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10590", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10590", "title": "Federal Republic of Germany", "text": ""}
{"id": "10591", "revid": "40764242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10591", "title": "Flavoring", "text": "Food additive used to change its aroma or taste\nA flavoring (or flavouring), also known as flavor (or flavour) or flavorant, is a food additive used to improve the taste or smell of food. It changes the perceptual impression of food as determined primarily by the chemoreceptors of the gustatory and olfactory systems. Along with additives, other components like sugars determine the taste of food. \nA flavoring is defined as a substance that gives another substance taste, altering the characteristics of the solute, causing it to become sweet, sour, tangy, etc. Although the term, in common language, denotes the combined chemical sensations of taste and smell, the same term is used in the fragrance and flavors industry to refer to edible chemicals and extracts that alter the flavor of food and food products through the sense of smell.\nOwing to the high cost, or unavailability of natural flavor extracts, most commercial flavorings are \"nature-identical\", which means that they are the chemical equivalent of natural flavors, but chemically synthesized rather than being extracted from source materials. Identification of components of natural foods, for example a raspberry, may be done using technology such as headspace techniques, so the flavorist can imitate the flavor by using a few of the same chemicals present. In the EU legislation, the term \"natural-identical flavoring\" does not exist. The legislation is specified on what is a \"flavoring\" and a \"natural flavoring\".\nDefinition.\nA flavoring is a volatile additive that improves the taste or smell of food. They work primarily via the sense of smell. In legislation, substances that exclusively have a sweet, sour or salty taste are not considered flavorings. These usually include flavor enhancers, sweeteners, acidulants and salt substitutes. \nThere are different ways to divide flavorings. First by the way they are produced. A vanilla flavoring can for example be obtained naturally by extraction from vanilla seeds, or one can start with cheap chemicals and try to make a similar substance artificially (in this example vanillin). A nature-identical flavoring is chemically an exact copy of the original substance and can be either natural or artificial. Vanillin is not obtained from the vanilla plant nor an exact copy of vanilla, but a synthesized nature-identical component of the vanilla aroma. Vanillin is not vanilla, but gives a food a vanilla aroma.\nThe second division is by the effect they have on smell (aroma) or taste of the food. The effect can be the aroma of a specific fruit, almond, butter, smoke from wood, or some fantasy flavor. The aroma of the flavoring may resemble that of the source, or imitate a particular unrelated food. It may for example be the extract from vanilla seeds and smell like vanilla, or it may be the extract of a potato and smell like a banana. Irrespective of the effect, the flavoring may be natural or artificial. It may for example be the natural tissue of an animal with the aroma of a citrus, or just a chemical that smells like a citrus.\nDivision by production method.\nFlavorings can be divided into three principal types: \"natural flavorings\", \"nature-identical flavorings\", and \"artificial flavorings\". In the United States, they are traditionally divided into natural and artificial flavorings, where the latter includes nature-identical flavorings. In contrast, European legislation does not distinguish natural and nature-identical flavorings, while only the term \"natural\" is subject to some regulation.\nNatural flavorings.\nNatural flavorings are edible aroma compounds that are found in nature, not made by man.\nIn nature, they always occur with other natural substances that also may be flavorings. By means of non-chemical technology, natural flavorings can be isolated on industrial scale, to be used as an additive.\nTechniques to obtain natural flavorings include the use of enzymes and/or micro organisms. European legislators have accepted flavorings produced by manmade genetically modified organisms (GMO's) \u2013 not found in nature \u2013 as natural flavorings.\nNature-identical flavorings.\nNature-identical flavorings are human-made aroma compounds that are chemically identical to some substance that can be found in nature. They are synthesized from chemicals or isolated by means of chemical processes.\nBecause nature-identical flavorings can be produced at low costs, the food industry will argue that nature-identical and natural flavorings are exactly the same. They have the advantage to be chemically pure, without allergens that may be coupled with natural flavorings. On the other hand, they are missing the synergy of other substances present in their natural origin, so they may lack subtlety.\nArtificial flavorings.\nArtificial flavorings are synthesized from chemical substances by man and are not found in nature. Their sensory characteristics mostly resemble that of natural or nature-identical flavorings.\nPerception of flavorings.\nOf the three chemical senses, smell is the main determinant of a food item's flavor. Aromas are the volatile components of the food. The aroma is determined by the aroma compounds it contains and the personal ability to detect them. While a flavoring primarily acts through the olfactory system, it also affects the taste at the same time. \nAlong with additives, other components like sugars determine the taste of food. The trigeminal nerves, which detect chemical irritants in the mouth and throat, as well as temperature and texture, are also important to the overall perception of food.\nMechanism.\nFlavors from food products are usually the result of a combination of natural flavors, which set up the basic smell profile of a food product, while artificial flavors modify the smell to accent it.\nUnlike smelling, which occurs upon inhalation, the sensing of flavors in the mouth occurs in the exhalation phase of breathing and is perceived differently by an individual. In other words, the smell of food is different depending on whether one is smelling it before or after it has entered one's mouth.\nTaste.\nThe taste of a food product is not only determined by the aromas present in the original material and added flavorings, but also by accompanying substances like flavor enhancers, sweeteners, acidulants and salt substitutes. Polyols like sorbitol and maltitol, are carriers in flavorings, but they themselves also have a sweet taste.\nEven the color of food can affect one's experience of the taste significantly.\nIn one study, adding more red color to a drink increased the perceived sweetness, with darker colored solutions being rated 2\u201310% better than lighter ones, though it had 1% less sucrose concentration. Food manufacturers exploit this phenomenon; for example, different colors of the US products Froot Loops cereal and most brands of Gummy Bears often use the same flavorings.\nFlavor enhancers.\nFlavor enhancers or taste enhancers, which are umami or \"savory\" compounds, are themselves not flavorings, but they intensify the taste of the food. They are largely based on amino acids and nucleotides. These are typically used as sodium or calcium salts. Umami flavorings recognized and approved by the European Union include:\nRegulations.\nIn Europe.\nUnder the EU legislation, substances which have exclusively a sweet, sour or salty taste are not considered flavorings (Article 2, Regulation (EC) No 1334/2008.&lt;ref name=\"regulation_1334/2008\"&gt;\"Regulation (EC) No 1334/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 1601/91, Regulations (EC) No 2232/96 and (EC) No 110/2008 and Directive 2000/13/EC\" (consolidated version of 24 November 2021). The preamble is reproduced here&lt;/ref&gt;\nAlso flavor enhancers are not considered flavorings under the EU legislation but additives (Point 14 of Annex I of Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008).&lt;ref name=\"regulation_1333/2008\"&gt;\"Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on food additives\" (consolidated version of 8 August 2021). The preamble is reproduced here&lt;/ref&gt;\nEU legislation defines several types of flavorings:\nIn the EU, Regulation (EC) No 1334/2008 on flavorings and certain food ingredients with flavoring properties for use in/on foods, i.e. the EU Flavouring Regulation, was adopted on 16 December 2008 and entered into force on 20 January 2009. It applies from 20 January 2011.\nRegulation (EC) No 1334/2008 lays down general requirements for safe use of flavorings and provides definitions for different types of flavorings. The Regulation sets out substances for which an evaluation and approval is required. The Union list of flavoring substances, approved for use in and on foods, was adopted on 1 October 2012 and was introduced in Annex I of this Regulation\nIn the UK.\nThe UK follows the above EU legislation which remains in force until 31 December 2020. The European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 provides that from 1 January 2021, this directly applicable EU legislation will be converted into UK law with minor corrections to enable it to operate effectively as UK law. These corrections have been made by Statutory Instrument 2019 No. 860.\nThe UK Food industry, in collaboration with the flavoring industry, has developed guidance on what to consider when declaring a pictorial representation of a food ingredient on the label of a pre-packed product.\nIn the United States.\nIn the United States, flavorings are regulated in \"Title 21\" of the Code of Federal Regulations. They are divided into artificial and natural flavorings.\nIn Australia and New Zealand.\nIn Australia and New Zealand regulation of flavorings is covered by the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code of November 2000, entered into force in December 2002.\nNatural flavorings are obtained from plant or animal raw materials, by physical, microbiological, or enzymatic processes. They can be either used in their natural state or processed for human consumption, but cannot contain any nature-identical or artificial flavoring substances.\nNature-identical flavorings are obtained by synthesis or isolated through chemical processes, which are chemically and organoleptically identical to flavoring substances naturally present in products intended for human consumption. They cannot contain any artificial flavoring substances.\nArtificial flavorings are \"flavouring substances not identified in a natural product intended for human consumption, whether or not the product is processed.\"\nRegulations on natural flavoring.\nIn the EU, in order to be labeled as natural flavoring substance, many conditions have to be fulfilled: \"Natural flavouring substance\" shall mean a flavoring substance obtained by appropriate physical, enzymatic or microbiological processes from material of vegetable, animal or microbiological origin either in the raw state or after processing for human consumption by one or more of the traditional food preparation processes listed in Annex II. Natural flavoring substances correspond to substances that are naturally present and have been identified in nature (Article 3).\nMore detailed information on the Production of Natural Flavouring Substances and (Natural) Flavouring Preparations can be found on the European Flavour Association (EFFA) Guidance Document\nUK Food Law defines a natural flavor as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A flavouring substance (or flavouring substances) which is (or are) obtained, by physical, enzymatic, or microbiological processes, from material of vegetable or animal origin which material is either raw or has been subjected to a process normally used in preparing food for human consumption and to no process other than one normally so used\nThe U.S. Code of Federal Regulations describes a \"natural flavoring\" as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDietary restrictions.\nFood manufacturers are sometimes reluctant to inform consumers about the source and identity of flavor ingredients and whether they have been produced with the incorporation of substances such as animal byproducts. Some flavor ingredients, such as gelatin, are produced from animal products. Some, such as glycerin can be derived from either animal or vegetable sources. And some extracts, such as vanilla, may contain alcohol. Many groups such as Jews, Jains, Hindus, and Muslims, as well as vegans follow dietary restrictions which disallow the use of animal byproducts and/or alcohol in certain contexts. In many Western countries, some consumers rely on a Jewish kosher pareve certification mark to indicate that natural flavorings used in a food product are free of meat and dairy (although they can still contain fish). The Vegan Society's Sunflower symbol (which is currently used by over 260 companies worldwide) can also be used to see which products do not use any animal ingredients (including flavorings and colorings).\nSimilarly, persons with known sensitivities or allergies to food products are advised to avoid foods that contain generic \"natural flavors\" or to first determine the source of the flavoring before consuming the food. Such flavors may be derived from a variety of source products that are themselves common allergens, such as dairy, soy, sesame, eggs, and nuts.\nIn the EU, nevertheless, this information is available in the labeling. Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 on the provision of food information to consumers, states in article 9 that any ingredient or processing aid listed in Annex II (of the aforementioned Regulation) or derived from a substance or product listed in Annex II causing allergies or intolerances used in the manufacture or preparation of a food and still present in the finished product, even if in an altered form must be included in the labeling.\nFlavor creation.\nMost artificial flavors are specific and often complex mixtures of singular naturally occurring flavor compounds combined to either imitate or enhance a natural flavor. These mixtures are formulated by flavorists to give a food product a unique flavor and to maintain flavor consistency between different product batches or after recipe changes. The list of known flavoring agents includes thousands of molecular compounds, and flavor chemists (flavorists) can often mix these together to produce many of the common flavors. Many flavorings consist of esters, which are often described as being sweet or fruity.\nThe compounds used to produce artificial flavors are almost identical to those that occur naturally. It has been suggested that artificial flavors may be safer to consume than natural flavors due to the standards of purity and mixture consistency that are enforced either by the company or by law. Natural flavors, in contrast, may contain impurities from their sources, while artificial flavors are typically more pure and are required to undergo more testing before being sold for consumption.\nFood and beverage companies may require flavors for new products, product line extensions (e.g., low fat versions of existing products), or changes in formula or processing for existing products. In 2011, about US$10.6 billion were generated with the sale of flavors; the majority of the flavors used are consumed in processed and packaged food.\nThe number of food smells is unbounded; a food's flavor, therefore, can be easily altered by changing its smell while keeping its taste similar. This is exemplified in artificially flavored jellies, soft drinks and candies, which, while made of bases with a similar taste, have dramatically different flavors due to the use of different scents or fragrances.\nMost flavors represent a mixture of aroma compounds, the raw material that is produced by flavor companies. In rare cases, a single synthetic compound is used in pure form. Artificial vanilla flavors vanillin and ethylvanillin are a notable exception, as well as the artificial strawberry flavor (ethyl methylphenylglycidate). The ubiquitous \"green apple\" aroma is based on hexyl acetate.\nDetermination.\nFew standards are available or being prepared for sensory analysis of flavors. In chemical analysis of flavors, solid phase extraction, solid phase microextraction, and headspace gas chromatography are applied to extract and separate the flavor compounds in the sample. The determination is typically done by various mass spectrometric techniques. A flavor lexicon can aid the development of objective language for food.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10593", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10593", "title": "FielDs", "text": ""}
{"id": "10594", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10594", "title": "FrisianLanguage", "text": ""}
{"id": "10595", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10595", "title": "Film Theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "10596", "revid": "42089642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10596", "title": "Frisian languages", "text": "Group of Germanic languages\nThe Frisian (, ) languages are a closely related group of West Germanic languages, spoken by about 500,000 Frisian people, who live on the southern fringes of the North Sea in the Netherlands and Germany. The Frisian languages are the closest living language group to the Anglic languages; the two groups make up the Anglo-Frisian languages group and together with the Low German dialects these form the North Sea Germanic languages. However, modern English and Frisian are not mutually intelligible, nor are Frisian languages intelligible among themselves, owing to independent linguistic innovations and foreign influences.\nThere are three different Frisian branches, which are usually called the Frisian languages, despite the fact that their so-called dialects are often not mutually intelligible even within these branches. These branches are: West Frisian, which is by far the most spoken of the three and is an official language in the Dutch province of Friesland, where it is spoken on the mainland and on two of the West Frisian Islands: Terschelling and Schiermonnikoog. It is also spoken in four villages in the Westerkwartier of the neighbouring province of Groningen. North Frisian, the second branch, is spoken in the northernmost German district of Nordfriesland in the state of Schleswig-Holstein: on the North Frisian mainland, and on the North Frisian Islands of Sylt, F\u00f6hr, Amrum, and the Halligs. It is also spoken on the islands of Heligoland, in the North Sea. The third Frisian branch, East Frisian, has only one remaining variant, Sater Frisian, spoken in the municipality of Saterland in the Lower Saxon district of Cloppenburg. Surrounded by bogs, the four Saterlandic villages lie just outside the borders of East Frisia, in the Oldenburg M\u00fcnsterland region. In East Frisia proper, East Frisian Low Saxon is spoken today, which is not a Frisian language, but a variant of Low German/Low Saxon.\nDepending upon their location, the six Frisian languages have been heavily influenced by and bear similarities to Dutch and Low German/Low Saxon, and in addition North Frisian has a Danish substrate. However, Frisian is still unintelligible to Dutch; a cloze test in 2005 revealed that Dutch respondents understood 31.9% of a West Frisian newspaper, 66.4% of an Afrikaans newspaper and 97.1% of a Dutch newspaper. Additional shared linguistic characteristics between Friesland and the Great Yarmouth area in England are likely to have resulted from the close trading relationship these areas maintained during the centuries-long Hanseatic League of the Late Middle Ages.\nDivision.\nThere are three main groups of Frisian varieties: West Frisian, Saterland Frisian, and North Frisian. Some linguists consider these three varieties, despite their mutual unintelligibility, to be dialects of one single Frisian language, whereas others consider them to be a number of separate languages equal to or greater than the number of main branches discussed here. Indeed, the insular varieties of West Frisian are not intelligible to the mainland, and by that standard are additional languages, and North Frisian is also divided into several strongly diverse dialects, which are not all mutually intelligible among themselves. West Frisian is strongly influenced by Dutch. The other Frisian languages, meanwhile, have been influenced by Low German and German. Stadsfries and West Frisian Dutch are not Frisian, but Dutch dialects influenced by West Frisian. Frisian is called \"Frysk\" in West Frisian, \"Fr\u00e4isk\" in Saterland Frisian, and \"Friisk\", \"fresk\", \"freesk\", \"frasch\", \"fr\u00e4isch\", and \"freesch\" in the varieties of North Frisian.\nThe situation in the Dutch province of Groningen and the German region of East Frisia is similar: The local Low German/Low Saxon dialects of Gronings and East Frisian Low Saxon still bear some Frisian elements due to East Frisian substrate. Frisian was spoken there at one time, only to have been gradually replaced by Low Saxon since the Middle Ages. This local language is now, like Frisian, under threat by standard Dutch and German.\nSpeakers.\nMost Frisian speakers live in the Netherlands, primarily in the province of Friesland, which since 1997 officially uses its West Frisian name of Frysl\u00e2n, where the number of native speakers is about 400,000, which is about 75% of the inhabitants of Friesland. An increasing number of native Dutch speakers in the province are learning Frisian as a second language.\nIn Germany, there are about 2,000 speakers of Saterland Frisian in the marshy Saterland region of Lower Saxony. Saterland Frisian has resisted encroachment from Low German and Standard German, but Saterland Frisian still remains seriously endangered because of the small size of the speech community and of the lack of institutional support to help preserve and spread the language.\nIn the North Frisia (\"Nordfriesland\") region of the German state of Schleswig-Holstein, there were 10,000 North Frisian speakers. Although many of these live on the mainland, most are found on the islands, notably Sylt, F\u00f6hr, Amrum, and Heligoland. The local corresponding North Frisian dialects are still in use.\nWest Frisian-Dutch bilinguals are split into two categories: Speakers who had Dutch as their first language tended to maintain the Dutch system of homophony between plural and linking suffixes when speaking West Frisian, by using the West Frisian plural as a linking morpheme. Speakers who had West Frisian as their first language often maintained the West Frisian system of no homophony when speaking West Frisian.\nStatus.\nSaterland and North Frisian are officially recognised and protected as minority languages in Germany, and West Frisian is one of the two official languages in the Netherlands, the other being Dutch.\nISO 639-1 code codice_1 and ISO 639-2 code codice_2 were assigned to \"Frisian\", but that was changed in November 2005 to \"Western Frisian\". According to the ISO 639 Registration Authority the \"previous usage of [this] code has been for Western Frisian, although [the] language name was 'Frisian'\".\nThe new ISO 639 code codice_3 is used for the Saterland Frisian language, a variety of Eastern Frisian (not to be confused with East Frisian Low Saxon, a West Low German dialect). The new ISO 639 code codice_4 is used for the North Frisian language variants spoken in parts of Schleswig-Holstein.\nThe Ried fan de Fryske Beweging is an organization which works for the preservation of the West Frisian language and culture in the Dutch province of Friesland. The Fryske Academy also plays a large role, since its foundation in 1938, to conduct research on Frisian language, history, and society, including attempts at forming a larger dictionary. Recent attempts have allowed Frisian be used somewhat more in some of the domains of education, media and public administration. Nevertheless, Saterland Frisian and most dialects of North Frisian are seriously endangered and West Frisian is considered as vulnerable to being endangered. Moreover, for all advances in integrating Frisian in daily life, there is still a lack of education and media awareness of the Frisian language, perhaps reflecting its rural origins and its lack of prestige Therefore, in a sociological sense it is considered more a dialect than a standard language, even though linguistically it is a separate language.\nFor L2 speakers, both the quality and amount of time Frisian is taught in the classroom is low, concluding that Frisian lessons do not contribute meaningfully to the linguistic and cultural development of the students. Moreover, Frisian runs the risk of dissolving into Dutch, especially in Friesland, where both languages are used.\nHistory.\nOld Frisian.\nIn the Early Middle Ages the Frisian lands stretched from the area around Bruges, in what is now Belgium, to the river Weser, in northern Germany. At that time, the Frisian language was spoken along the entire southern North Sea coast. Today this region is sometimes referred to as Great Frisia or Frisia Magna, and many of the areas within it still treasure their Frisian heritage, even though in most places the Frisian languages have been lost.\nFrisian is the language most closely related to English and Scots, but after at least five hundred years of being subject to the influence of Dutch, modern Frisian in some aspects bears a greater similarity to Dutch than to English; one must also take into account the centuries-long drift of English away from Frisian. Thus the two languages have become less mutually intelligible over time, partly due to the marks which Dutch and Low German have left on Frisian, and partly due to the vast influence some languages (in particular Norman French) have had on English throughout the centuries.\nOld Frisian, however, was very similar to Old English. Historically, both English and Frisian are marked by the loss of the Germanic nasal in words like \"us\" (\"\u00fas\"; \"uns\" in German), \"soft\" (\"s\u00eaft\"; \"sanft\") or \"goose\" (\"goes\"; \"Gans\"): see Anglo-Frisian nasal spirant law. Also, when followed by some vowels, the Germanic \"k\" softened to a \"ch\" sound; for example, the Frisian for \"cheese\" and \"church\" is \"tsiis\" and \"tsjerke\", whereas in Dutch it is \"kaas\" and \"kerk\", and in High German the respective words are \"K\u00e4se\" and \"Kirche\". Contrarily, this did not happen for \"chin\" and \"choose\", which are \"kin\" and \"kieze\".\nOne rhyme demonstrates the palpable similarity between Frisian and English: \"Butter, bread and green cheese is good English and good Frisian,\" which is pronounced more or less the same in both languages (West Frisian: \"B\u00fbter, brea en griene tsiis is goed Ingelsk en goed Frysk.\")\nOne major difference between Old Frisian and modern Frisian is that in the Old Frisian period (c.1150-c.1550) grammatical cases still existed. Some of the texts that are preserved from this period are from the 12th or 13th, but most are from the 14th and 15th centuries. Generally, all these texts are restricted to legalistic writings. Although the earliest definite written examples of Frisian are from approximately the 9th century, there are a few examples of runic inscriptions from the region which are probably older and possibly in the Frisian language. These runic writings however usually do not amount to more than single- or few-word inscriptions, and cannot be said to constitute literature as such. The transition from the Old Frisian to the Middle Frisian period (c.1550-c.1820) in the 16th century is based on the fairly abrupt halt in the use of Frisian as a written language.\nMiddle West Frisian.\nUp until the 15th century, Frisian was a language widely spoken and written, but from 1500 onwards it became an almost exclusively oral language, mainly used in rural areas. This was in part due to the occupation of its stronghold, the Dutch province of Friesland (Frysl\u00e2n), in 1498, by Albert III, Duke of Saxony, who replaced West Frisian as the language of government with Dutch.\nAfterwards this practice was continued under the Habsburg rulers of the Netherlands (the German Emperor Charles V and his son, the Spanish King Philip II), and even when the Netherlands became independent, in 1585, West Frisian did not regain its former status. The reason for this was the rise of Holland as the dominant part of the Netherlands, and its language, Dutch, as the dominant language in judicial, administrative and religious affairs.\nIn this period the great Frisian poet Gysbert Japiks (1603\u201366), a schoolteacher and cantor from the city of Bolsward, who largely fathered modern West Frisian literature and orthography, was really an exception to the rule.\nHis example was not followed until the 19th century, when entire generations of West Frisian authors and poets appeared. This coincided with the introduction of the so-called newer breaking system, a prominent grammatical feature in almost all West Frisian dialects, with the notable exception of Southwest Frisian. Therefore, the Modern West Frisian period is considered to have begun at this point in time, around 1820.\nModern West Frisian.\nThe revival of the West Frisian Language was led by the poet Gysbert Japiks, who had begun to write in the language as a way to show that it was possible, and created a collective West Frisian identity and West Frisian standard of writing through his poetry. Later on, Johannes Hilarides would build off Gysbert Japik's work by building on West Frisian orthography, particularly on its pronunciation; he also, unlike Japiks, set a standard of the West Frisian language that focused more heavily on how the common people used it as an everyday language.\nPerhaps the most important figure in the spreading of the West Frisian language was J. H. Halbertsma (1789\u20131869), who translated many works into the West Frisian language, such as the New Testament He had however, like Hilarides, focused mostly on the vernacular of the West Frisian language, where he focused on translating texts, plays and songs for the lower and middle classes in order to teach and expand the West Frisian language. This had begun the effort to continuously preserve the West Frisian language, which continues unto this day. It was however not until the first half of the 20th century that the West Frisian revival movement began to gain strength, not only through its language, but also through its culture and history, supporting singing and acting in West Frisian in order to facilitate West Frisian speaking.\nIt was not until 1960 that Dutch began to dominate West Frisian in Friesland; with many non-Frisian immigrants into Friesland, the language gradually began to diminish, and only survives now due to the constant effort of scholars and organisations. In recent years, it has been the province of Friesland, rather than the language itself, that has become a more important part of the West Frisian identity; as such, the language has become less important for cultural preservation purposes. It is especially written West Frisian that seems to have trouble surviving, with only 30% of the West Frisian population competent in it; it went out of use in the 16th century and continues to be barely taught today.\nFamily tree.\nFrisian languages belong to the West Germanic branch of the Indo-European languages, the most widespread language family in Europe and the world. Its closest living genealogical relatives are the Anglic languages, i.e. English and Scots (Anglo-Frisian languages); together with the also closely related Low Saxon dialects the two groups make up the group of North Sea Germanic languages.\nText samples.\nThe Lord's Prayer.\nNB: * See also West Frisian language#Sample text. ** \"Which\" was changed to \"who\", \"in earth\" to \"on earth,\" and \"them that\" to \"those who\" in the 1928 version of the Church of England prayer book and used in other later Anglican prayer books too. However, the words given here are those of the original 1662 book as stated.\nComparative Germanic sentences.\nNB: These are not always literal translations of each other.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10597", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10597", "title": "French language", "text": "Romance language\nFrench ( ] or ]) is a Romance language of the Indo-European family. It descended from the Vulgar Latin of the Roman Empire, as did all Romance languages. French evolved from Gallo-Romance, the Latin spoken in Gaul, and more specifically in Northern Gaul. Its closest relatives are the other langues d'o\u00efl\u2014languages historically spoken in northern France and in southern Belgium, which French (Francien) largely supplanted. French was also influenced by native Celtic languages of Northern Roman Gaul like Gallia Belgica and by the (Germanic) Frankish language of the post-Roman Frankish invaders. Today, owing to the French colonial empire, there are numerous French-based creole languages, most notably Haitian Creole. A French-speaking person or nation may be referred to as Francophone in both English and French.\nFrench is an official language in 29 countries across multiple continents, most of which are members of the \"Organisation internationale de la Francophonie\" (OIF), the community of 84 countries which share the official use or teaching of French. French is also one of six official languages used in the United Nations. It is spoken as a first language (in descending order of the number of speakers) in France; Canada (especially in the provinces of Quebec, Ontario, and New Brunswick, as well as other Francophone regions); Belgium (Wallonia and the Brussels-Capital Region); western Switzerland (specifically the cantons forming the Romandy region); parts of Luxembourg; parts of the United States (the states of Louisiana, Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont); Monaco; the Aosta Valley region of Italy; and various communities elsewhere.\nIn 2015, approximately 40% of the francophone population (including L2 and partial speakers) lived in Europe, 36% in sub-Saharan Africa and the Indian Ocean, 15% in North Africa and the Middle East, 8% in the Americas, and 1% in Asia and Oceania. French is the second-most widely spoken mother tongue in the European Union. Of Europeans who speak other languages natively, approximately one-fifth are able to speak French as a second language. French is the second-most taught foreign language in the EU. All institutions of the EU use French as a working language along with English and German; in certain institutions, French is the sole working language (e.g. at the Court of Justice of the European Union). French is also the 18th most natively spoken language in the world, fifth most spoken language by total number of speakers and the second or third most studied language worldwide (with about 120 million learners as of 2017). As a result of French and Belgian colonialism from the 16th century onward, French was introduced to new territories in the Americas, Africa and Asia. Most second-language speakers reside in Francophone Africa, in particular Gabon, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Mauritius, Senegal and Ivory Coast.\nFrench is estimated to have about 76 million native speakers; about 235 million daily, fluent speakers; and another 77\u2013110 million secondary speakers who speak it as a second language to varying degrees of proficiency, mainly in Africa. According to the OIF, approximately 321 million people worldwide are \"able to speak the language\", without specifying the criteria for this estimation or whom it encompasses. According to a demographic projection led by the and the R\u00e9seau D\u00e9mographie de l'Agence universitaire de la Francophonie, the total number of French speakers will reach approximately 500 million in 2025 and 650 million by 2050. OIF estimates 700 million by 2050, 80% of whom will be in Africa.\nFrench has a long history as an international language of literature and scientific standards and is a primary or second language of many international organisations including the United Nations, the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the World Trade Organization, the International Olympic Committee, and the International Committee of the Red Cross. In 2011, \"Bloomberg Businessweek\" ranked French the third most useful language for business, after English and Standard Mandarin Chinese.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nFrench is a Romance language (meaning that it is descended primarily from Vulgar Latin) that evolved out of the Gallo-Romance dialects spoken in northern France. The language's early forms include Old French and Middle French.\nVulgar Latin in Gaul.\nDue to Roman rule, Latin was gradually adopted by the inhabitants of Gaul, and as the language was learned by the common people it developed a distinct local character, with grammatical differences from Latin as spoken elsewhere, some of which being attested on graffiti. This local variety evolved into the Gallo-Romance tongues, which include French and its closest relatives, such as Arpitan.\nThe evolution of Latin in Gaul was shaped by its coexistence for over half a millennium beside the native Celtic Gaulish language, which did not go extinct until the late sixth century, long after the fall of the Western Roman Empire. The population remained 90% indigenous in origin; the Romanizing class were the local native elite (not Roman settlers), whose children learned Latin in Roman schools. At the time of the collapse of the Empire, this local elite had been slowly abandoning Gaulish entirely, but the rural and lower class populations remained Gaulish speakers who could sometimes also speak Latin or Greek. The final language shift from Gaulish to Vulgar Latin among rural and lower class populations occurred later, when both they and the incoming Frankish ruler/military class adopted the Gallo-Roman Vulgar Latin speech of the urban intellectual elite.\nThe Gaulish language likely survived into the sixth century in France despite considerable Romanization. Coexisting with Latin, Gaulish helped shape the Vulgar Latin dialects that developed into French contributing loanwords and calques (including \"oui\", the word for \"yes\"), sound changes shaped by Gaulish influence, and influences in conjugation and word order. Recent computational studies suggest that early gender shifts may have been motivated by the gender of the corresponding word in Gaulish.\nThe estimated number of French words that can be attributed to Gaulish is placed at 154 by the \"Petit Robert\", which is often viewed as representing standardized French, while if non-standard dialects are included, the number increases to 240. Known Gaulish loans are skewed toward certain semantic fields, such as plant life (\"ch\u00eane\", \"bille\", etc.), animals (\"mouton\", \"cheval\", etc.), nature (\"boue\", etc.), domestic activities (ex. \"berceau\"), farming and rural units of measure (\"arpent\", \"lieue\", \"borne\", \"boisseau\"), weapons, and products traded regionally rather than further afield. This semantic distribution has been attributed to peasants being the last to hold onto Gaulish.\nOld French.\nThe beginning of French in Gaul was greatly influenced by Germanic invasions into the country. These invasions had the greatest impact on the northern part of the country and on the language there. A language divide began to grow across the country. The population in the north spoke while the population in the south spoke . Langue d'o\u00efl grew into what is known as Old French. The period of Old French spanned between the 8th and 14th centuries. Old French shared many characteristics with Latin. For example, Old French made use of different possible word orders just as Latin did because it had a case system that retained the difference between nominative subjects and oblique non-subjects. The period is marked by a heavy superstrate influence from the Germanic Frankish language, which non-exhaustively included the use in upper-class speech and higher registers of V2 word order, a large percentage of the vocabulary (now at around 15% of modern French vocabulary) including the impersonal singular pronoun \"on\" (a calque of Germanic \"man\"), and the name of the language itself.\nUp until its later stages, Old French, alongside Old Occitan, maintained a relic of the old nominal case system of Latin longer than most other Romance languages (with the notable exception of Romanian which still currently maintains a case distinction), differentiating between an oblique case and a nominative case. The phonology was characterized by heavy syllabic stress, which led to the emergence of various complicated diphthongs such as \"-eau\" which would later be leveled to monophthongs.\nThe earliest evidence of what became Old French can be seen in the Oaths of Strasbourg and the \"Sequence of Saint Eulalia\", while Old French literature began to be produced in the eleventh century, with major early works often focusing on the lives of saints (such as the \"Vie de Saint Alexis\"), or wars and royal courts, notably including the \"Chanson de Roland\", epic cycles focused on King Arthur and his court, as well as a cycle focused on William of Orange.\nMiddle French.\nWithin Old French many dialects emerged but the Francien dialect is one that not only continued but also thrived during the Middle French period (14th\u201317th centuries). Modern French grew out of this Francien dialect. Grammatically, during the period of Middle French, noun declensions were lost and there began to be standardized rules. Robert Estienne published the first Latin-French dictionary, which included information about phonetics, etymology, and grammar. Politically, the Ordinance of Villers-Cotter\u00eats (1539) named French the language of law.\nModern French.\nDuring the 17th century, French replaced Latin as the most important language of diplomacy and international relations (lingua franca). It retained this role until approximately the middle of the 20th century, when it was replaced by English as the United States became the dominant global power following the Second World War. Stanley Meisler of the \"Los Angeles Times\" said that the fact that the Treaty of Versailles was written in English as well as French was the \"first diplomatic blow\" against the language.\nDuring the Grand Si\u00e8cle (17th century), France, under the rule of powerful leaders such as Cardinal Richelieu and Louis XIV, enjoyed a period of prosperity and prominence among European nations. Richelieu established the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise to protect the French language. By the early 1800s, Parisian French had become the primary language of the aristocracy in France.\nNear the beginning of the 19th century, the French government began to pursue policies with the end goal of eradicating the many minorities and regional languages (\"patois\") spoken in France. This began in 1794 with Henri Gr\u00e9goire's \"Report on the necessity and means to annihilate the patois and to universalize the use of the French language\". When public education was made compulsory, only French was taught and the use of any other (\"patois\") language was punished. The goals of the public school system were made especially clear to the French-speaking teachers sent to teach students in regions such as Occitania and Brittany. Instructions given by a French official to teachers in the department of Finist\u00e8re, in western Brittany, included the following: \"And remember, Gents: you were given your position in order to kill the Breton language\". The prefect of Basses-Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es in the French Basque Country wrote in 1846: \"Our schools in the Basque Country are particularly meant to replace the Basque language with French...\" Students were taught that their ancestral languages were inferior and they should be ashamed of them; this process was known in the Occitan-speaking region as Vergonha.\nGeographic distribution.\nEurope.\nSpoken by 19.71% of the European Union's population, French is the third most widely spoken language in the EU, after English and German and the second-most-widely taught language after English.\nUnder the Constitution of France, French has been the official language of the Republic since 1992, although the Ordinance of Villers-Cotter\u00eats made it mandatory for legal documents in 1539. France mandates the use of French in official government publications, public education except in specific cases, and legal contracts; advertisements must bear a translation of foreign words.\nIn Belgium, French is an official language at the federal level along with Dutch and German. At the regional level, French is the sole official language of Wallonia (excluding a part of the East Cantons, which are German-speaking) and one of the two official languages\u2014along with Dutch\u2014of the Brussels-Capital Region, where it is spoken by the majority of the population (approx. 80%), often as their primary language.\nFrench is one of the four official languages of Switzerland, along with German, Italian, and Romansh, and is spoken in the western part of Switzerland, called Romandy, of which Geneva is the largest city. The language divisions in Switzerland do not coincide with political subdivisions, and some cantons have bilingual status: for example, cities such as Biel/Bienne and cantons such as Valais, Fribourg and Berne. French is the native language of about 23% of the Swiss population, and is spoken by 50% of the population.\nAlong with Luxembourgish and German, French is one of the three official languages of Luxembourg, where it is generally the preferred language of business as well as of the different public administrations. It is also the official language of Monaco.\nAt a regional level, French is acknowledged as an official language in the Aosta Valley region of Italy where it is the first language of approximately 30% of the population, while French dialects remain spoken by minorities on the Channel Islands. It is also spoken in Andorra and is the main language after Catalan in El Pas de la Casa. The language is taught as the primary second language in the German state of Saarland, with French being taught from pre-school and over 43% of citizens being able to speak French.\nAfrica.\nThe majority of the world's French-speaking population lives in Africa. According to a 2018 estimate from the , an estimated 141 million African people spread across 34 countries and territories can speak French as either a first or a second language. This number does not include the people living in non-Francophone African countries who have learned French as a foreign language. Due to the rise of French in Africa, the total French-speaking population worldwide is expected to reach 700 million people in 2050. French is the fastest growing language on the continent (in terms of either official or foreign languages).\nFrench is mostly a second language in Africa, but it has become a first language in some urban areas, such as the region of Abidjan, Ivory Coast and in Libreville, Gabon. There is not a single African French, but multiple forms that diverged through contact with various indigenous African languages.\nSub-Saharan Africa is the region where the French language is most likely to expand, because of the expansion of education and rapid population growth. It is also where the language has evolved the most in recent years. Some vernacular forms of French in Africa can be difficult to understand for French speakers from other countries, but written forms of the language are very closely related to those of the rest of the French-speaking world.\nAmericas.\nCanada.\nFrench is the second-most common language in Canada, after English, and both are official languages at the federal level. It is the first language of 9.5 million people or 29% and the second language for 2.07 million or 6% of the entire population of Canada. French is the sole official language in the province of Quebec, being the mother tongue for some 7 million people, or almost 80% (2006 Census) of the province. About 95% of the people of Quebec speak French as either their first or second language, and for some as their third language. Quebec is also home to the city of Montreal, which is the world's fourth-largest French-speaking city, by number of first language speakers. New Brunswick and Manitoba are the only officially bilingual provinces, though full bilingualism is enacted only in New Brunswick, where about one third of the population is Francophone. French is also an official language of all of the territories (Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and Yukon). Out of the three, Yukon has the most French speakers, making up just under 4% of the population. Furthermore, while French is not an official language in Ontario, the French Language Services Act ensures that provincial services are to be available in the language. The Act applies to areas of the province where there are significant Francophone communities, namely Eastern Ontario and Northern Ontario. Elsewhere, sizable French-speaking minorities are found in southern Manitoba, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and the Port au Port Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, where the unique Newfoundland French dialect was historically spoken. Smaller pockets of French speakers exist in all other provinces. The Ontarian city of Ottawa, the Canadian capital, is also effectively bilingual, as it has a large population of federal government workers, who are required to offer services in both French and English, and is across a river from Quebec, opposite the major city of Gatineau with which it forms a single metropolitan area.\nUnited States.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau (2011), French is the fourth most spoken language in the United States after English, Spanish, and Chinese, when all forms of French are considered together and all dialects of Chinese are similarly combined. French is the second-most spoken language (after English) in the states of Maine and Vermont. In Louisiana, it is tied with Spanish for second-most spoken if Louisiana French and all creoles such as Haitian are included. French is the third most spoken language (after English and Spanish) in the states of Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire. Louisiana is home to many distinct French dialects, collectively known as Louisiana French. New England French, essentially a variant of Canadian French, is spoken in parts of New England. Missouri French was historically spoken in Missouri and Illinois (formerly known as Upper Louisiana), but is nearly extinct today. French also survived in isolated pockets along the Gulf Coast of what was previously French Lower Louisiana, such as Mon Louis Island, Alabama and DeLisle, Mississippi (the latter only being discovered by linguists in the 1990s) but these varieties are severely endangered or presumed extinct.\nCaribbean.\nFrench is one of two official languages in Haiti alongside Haitian Creole. It is the principal language of education, administration, business, and public signage and is spoken by all educated Haitians. It is also used for ceremonial events such as weddings, graduations, and church masses. The vast majority of the population speaks Haitian Creole as their first language; the rest largely speak French as a first language. As a French Creole language, Haitian Creole draws the large majority of its vocabulary from French, with influences from West African languages, as well as several European languages. It is closely related to Louisiana Creole and the creole from the Lesser Antilles.\nFrench is the sole official language of all the overseas territories of France in the Caribbean that are collectively referred to as the French West Indies, namely Guadeloupe, Saint Barth\u00e9lemy, Saint Martin, and Martinique.\nOther territories.\nFrench is the official language of both French Guiana on the South American continent, and of Saint Pierre and Miquelon, an archipelago off the coast of Newfoundland in North America.\nAsia.\nSoutheast Asia.\nFrench was the official language of the colony of French Indochina, comprising modern-day Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. It continues to be an administrative language in Laos and Cambodia, although its influence has waned in recent decades. In colonial Vietnam, the elites primarily spoke French, while many servants who worked in French households spoke a French pidgin known as \"T\u00e2y B\u1ed3i\" (now extinct). After French rule ended, South Vietnam continued to use French in administration, education, and trade. However, since the Fall of Saigon and the opening of a unified Vietnam's economy, French has gradually been effectively displaced as the first foreign language of choice by English in Vietnam. Nevertheless, it continues to be taught as the other main foreign language in the Vietnamese educational system and is regarded as a cultural language.\nAll three countries are full members of La Francophonie (OIF).\nIndia.\nFrench was the official language of French India, consisting of the geographically separate enclaves referred to as Puducherry. It continued to be an official language of the territory even after its cession to India in 1956 until 1965. A small number of older locals still retain knowledge of the language, although it has now given way to Tamil and English.\nWestern Asia.\nLebanon.\nA former French mandate, Lebanon designates Arabic as the sole official language, while a special law regulates cases when French can be publicly used. Article 11 of Lebanon's Constitution states that \"Arabic is the official national language. A law determines the cases in which the French language is to be used\". The French language in Lebanon is a widespread second language among the Lebanese people, and is taught in many schools along with Arabic and English. French is used on Lebanese pound banknotes, on road signs, on Lebanese license plates, and on official buildings (alongside Arabic).\nToday, French and English are secondary languages of Lebanon, with about 40% of the population being Francophone and 40% Anglophone. The use of English is growing in the business and media environment. Out of about 900,000 students, about 500,000 are enrolled in Francophone schools, public or private, in which the teaching of mathematics and scientific subjects is provided in French. Actual usage of French varies depending on the region and social status. One-third of high school students educated in French go on to pursue higher education in English-speaking institutions. English is the language of business and communication, with French being an element of social distinction, chosen for its emotional value.\nUnited Arab Emirates and Qatar.\nThe UAE has the status in the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie as an observer state, and Qatar has the status in the organization as an associate state. However, in both countries, French is not spoken by almost any of the general population or migrant workers, but spoken by a small minority of those who invest in Francophone countries or have other financial or family ties. Their entrance as observer and associate states respectively into the organization was aided a good deal by their investments into the Organisation and France itself. A country's status as an observer state in the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie gives the country the right to send representatives to organization meetings and make formal requests to the organization but they do not have voting rights within the OIF. A country's status as an associate state also does not give a country voting abilities but associate states can discuss and review organization matters.\nOceania and Australasia.\nFrench is an official language of the Pacific Island nation of Vanuatu, where 31% of the population was estimated to speak it in 2018. In the French special collectivity of New Caledonia, 97% of the population can speak, read and write French while in French Polynesia this figure is 95%, and in the French collectivity of Wallis and Futuna, it is 84%.\nIn French Polynesia and to a lesser extent Wallis and Futuna, where oral and written knowledge of the French language has become almost universal (95% and 84% respectively), French increasingly tends to displace the native Polynesian languages as the language most spoken at home. In French Polynesia, the percentage of the population who reported that French was the language they use the most at home rose from 67% at the 2007 census to 74% at the 2017 census. In Wallis and Futuna, the percentage of the population who reported that French was the language they use the most at home rose from 10% at the 2008 census to 13% at the 2018 census.\nFuture.\nThe future of the French language is often discussed in the news. For example, in 2014, \"The New York Times\" documented an increase in the teaching of French in New York, especially in K-12 dual-language programs where Spanish and Mandarin are the only second-language options more popular than French. In a study published in March 2014 by \"Forbes\", the investment bank Natixis said that French could become the world's most spoken language by 2050. It noted that French is spreading in areas where the population is rapidly increasing, especially in sub-Saharan Africa.\nIn the European Union, French was the dominant language within all institutions until the 1990s. After several enlargements of the EU (1995, 2004), French significantly lost ground in favour of English, which is more widely spoken and taught in most EU countries. French currently remains one of the three working languages, or \"procedural languages\", of the EU, along with English and German. It is the second-most widely used language within EU institutions after English, but remains the preferred language of certain institutions or administrations such as the Court of Justice of the European Union, where it is the sole internal working language, or the Directorate-General for Agriculture. Since 2016, Brexit has rekindled discussions on whether or not French should again hold greater role within the institutions of the European Union.\nVarieties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCurrent status and importance.\nA leading world language, French is taught in universities around the world, and is one of the world's most influential languages because of its wide use in the worlds of journalism, jurisprudence, education, and diplomacy.\nIn diplomacy, French is one of the six official languages of the United Nations (and one of the UN Secretariat's only two working languages), one of twenty official and three procedural languages of the European Union, an official language of NATO, the International Olympic Committee, the Council of Europe, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Organization of American States (alongside Spanish, Portuguese and English), the Eurovision Song Contest, one of eighteen official languages of the European Space Agency, World Trade Organization and the least used of the three official languages in the North American Free Trade Agreement countries. It is also a working language in nonprofit organisations such as the Red Cross (alongside English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Arabic and Russian), Amnesty International (alongside 32 other languages of which English is the most used, followed by Spanish, Portuguese, German, and Italian), M\u00e9decins sans Fronti\u00e8res (used alongside English, Spanish, Portuguese and Arabic), and M\u00e9decins du Monde (used alongside English). Given the demographic prospects of the French-speaking nations of Africa, researcher Pascal-Emmanuel Gobry wrote in 2014 that French \"could be the language of the future\".\nSignificant as a judicial language, French is one of the official languages of such major international and regional courts, tribunals, and dispute-settlement bodies as the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights, the Caribbean Court of Justice, the Court of Justice for the Economic Community of West African States, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the International Court of Justice, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea the International Criminal Court and the World Trade Organization Appellate Body. It is the sole internal working language of the Court of Justice of the European Union, and makes with English the European Court of Human Rights's two working languages.\nIn 1997, George Weber published, in \"Language Today\", a comprehensive academic study entitled \"The World's 10 most influential languages\". In the article, Weber ranked French as, after English, the second-most \"influential\" language of the world, ahead of Spanish. His criteria were the numbers of native speakers, the number of secondary speakers (especially high for French among fellow world languages), the number of countries using the language and their respective populations, the economic power of the countries using the language, the number of major areas in which the language is used, and the linguistic prestige associated with the mastery of the language (Weber highlighted that French in particular enjoys considerable linguistic prestige). In a 2008 reassessment of his article, Weber concluded that his findings were still correct since \"the situation among the top ten remains unchanged.\"\nKnowledge of French is often considered to be a useful skill by business owners in the United Kingdom; a 2014 study found that 50% of British managers considered French to be a valuable asset for their business, thus ranking French as the most sought-after foreign language there, ahead of German (49%) and Spanish (44%). MIT economist Albert Saiz calculated a 2.3% premium for those who have French as a foreign language in the workplace.\nIn English-speaking Canada, the United Kingdom, and Ireland, French is the first foreign language taught and in number of pupils is far ahead of other languages. In the United States, French is the second-most commonly taught foreign language in schools and universities, although well behind Spanish. In some areas of the country near French-speaking Quebec, however, it is the foreign language more commonly taught.\nPhonology.\nVowel phonemes in French\nAlthough there are many French regional accents, foreign learners normally use only one variety of the language.\nFrench pronunciation follows strict rules based on spelling, but French spelling is often based more on history than phonology. The rules for pronunciation vary between dialects, but the standard rules are:\nWriting system.\nAlphabet.\nFrench is written with the 26 letters of the basic Latin script, with four diacritics appearing on vowels (circumflex accent, acute accent, grave accent, diaeresis) and the cedilla appearing in \"\u00e7\".\nThere are two ligatures, \"\u0153\" and \"\u00e6\", but they are often replaced in contemporary French with \"oe\" and \"ae\", because the ligatures do not appear on the AZERTY keyboard layout used in French-speaking countries. However this is nonstandard in formal and literary texts.\nOrthography.\nFrench spelling, like English spelling, tends to preserve obsolete pronunciation rules. This is mainly due to extreme phonetic changes since the Old French period, without a corresponding change in spelling. Moreover, some conscious changes were made to restore Latin orthography (as with some English words such as \"debt\"):\nFrench orthography is morphophonemic. While it contains 130 graphemes that denote only 36 phonemes, many of its spelling rules are likely due to a consistency in morphemic patterns such as adding suffixes and prefixes. Many given spellings of common morphemes usually lead to a predictable sound. In particular, a given vowel combination or diacritic generally leads to one phoneme. However, there is not a one-to-one relation of a phoneme and a single related grapheme, which can be seen in how \"tomber\" and \"tomb\u00e9\" both end with the /e/ phoneme. Additionally, there are many variations in the pronunciation of consonants at the end of words, demonstrated by how the \"x\" in \"paix\" is not pronounced though at the end of \"Aix\" it is\".\"\nAs a result, it can be difficult to predict the spelling of a word based on the sound. Final consonants are generally silent, except when the following word begins with a vowel (see Liaison (French)). For example, the following words end in a vowel sound: \"pied\", \"aller\", \"les\", \"\", \"beaux\". The same words followed by a vowel, however, may sound the consonants, as they do in these examples: \"beaux-arts\", \"les amis\", \"pied-\u00e0-terre\".\nFrench writing, as with any language, is affected by the spoken language. In Old French, the plural for \"animal\" was \"animals\". The /als/ sequence was unstable and was turned into a diphthong /aus/. This change was then reflected in the orthography: \"animaus\". The \"us\" ending, very common in Latin, was then abbreviated by copyists (monks) by the letter \"x\", resulting in a written form \"animax\". As the French language further evolved, the pronunciation of \"au\" turned into /o/ so that the \"u\" was reestablished in orthography for consistency, resulting in modern French \"animaux\" (pronounced first /animos/ before the final /s/ was dropped in contemporary French). The same is true for \"cheval\" pluralized as \"chevaux\" and many others. In addition, \"castel\" pl. \"castels\" became \"ch\u00e2teau\" pl. \"ch\u00e2teaux\".\nSome proposals exist to simplify the existing writing system, but they still fail to gather interest.\nIn 1990, a reform accepted some changes to French orthography. At the time the proposed changes were considered to be suggestions. In 2016, schoolbooks in France began to use the newer recommended spellings, with instruction to teachers that both old and new spellings be deemed correct.\nGrammar.\nFrench is a moderately inflected language. Nouns and most pronouns are inflected for number (singular or plural, though in most nouns the plural is pronounced the same as the singular even if spelled differently); adjectives, for number and gender (masculine or feminine) of their nouns; personal pronouns and a few other pronouns, for person, number, gender, and case; and verbs, for tense, aspect, mood, and the person and number of their subjects. Case is primarily marked using word order and prepositions, while certain verb features are marked using auxiliary verbs. According to the French lexicogrammatical system, French has a rank-scale hierarchy with clause as the top rank, which is followed by group rank, word rank, and morpheme rank. A French clause is made up of groups, groups are made up of words, and lastly, words are made up of morphemes.\nFrench grammar shares several notable features with most other Romance languages, including\nNouns.\nEvery French noun is either masculine or feminine. Because French nouns are not inflected for gender, a noun's form cannot specify its gender. For nouns regarding the living, their grammatical genders often correspond to that which they refer to. For example, a male teacher is an \"enseignant\" while a female teacher is an \"enseignante\". However, plural nouns that refer to a group that includes both masculine and feminine entities are always masculine. So a group of two male teachers would be \"enseignants\". A group of two male teachers and two female teachers would still be \"enseignants\". In many situations, and in the case of \"enseignant\", both the singular and plural form of a noun are pronounced identically. The article used for singular nouns is different from that used for plural nouns and the article provides a distinguishing factor between the two in speech. For example, the singular \"le professeur\" or \"la professeur(e)\" (the male or female teacher, professor) can be distinguished from the plural \"les professeurs\" because \"le\", \"la\", and \"les\" are all pronounced differently. There are some situations where both the feminine and masculine form of a noun are the same and the article provides the only difference. For example, \"le dentiste\" refers to a male dentist while \"la dentiste\" refers to a female dentist.\nVerbs.\nMoods and tense-aspect forms.\nThe French language consists of both finite and non-finite moods. The finite moods include the indicative mood (indicatif), the subjunctive mood (subjonctif), the imperative mood (imp\u00e9ratif), and the conditional mood (conditionnel). The non-finite moods include the infinitive mood (infinitif), the present participle (participe pr\u00e9sent), and the past participle (participe pass\u00e9).\nFinite moods.\nIndicative (Indicatif).\nThe indicative mood makes use of eight tense-aspect forms. These include the present (), the simple past ( and ), the past imperfective (), the pluperfect (), the simple future (), the future perfect (), and the past perfect (). Some forms are less commonly used today. In today's spoken French, the is used while the is reserved for formal situations or for literary purposes. Similarly, the is used for speaking rather than the older seen in literary works.\nWithin the indicative mood, the , , , and all use auxiliary verbs in their forms.\nSubjunctive (Subjonctif).\nThe subjunctive mood only includes four of the tense-aspect forms found in the indicative: present (pr\u00e9sent), simple past (pass\u00e9 compos\u00e9), past imperfective (imparfait), and pluperfect (plus-que-parfait).\nWithin the subjunctive mood, the pass\u00e9 compos\u00e9 and plus-que-parfait use auxiliary verbs in their forms.\nImperative (Imperatif).\nThe imperative is used in the present tense (with the exception of a few instances where it is used in the perfect tense). The imperative is used to give commands to you (tu), we/us (nous), and plural you (vous).\nConditional (Conditionnel).\nThe conditional makes use of the present (pr\u00e9sent) and the past (pass\u00e9).\nThe pass\u00e9 uses auxiliary verbs in its forms.\nVoice.\nFrench uses both the active voice and the passive voice. The active voice is unmarked while the passive voice is formed by using a form of verb \"\u00eatre\" (\"to be\") and the past participle.\nExample of the active voice:\nExample of the passive voice:\nSyntax.\nWord order.\nFrench declarative word order is subject\u2013verb\u2013object although a pronoun object precedes the verb. Some types of sentences allow for or require different word orders, in particular inversion of the subject and verb, as in \"Parlez-vous fran\u00e7ais ?\" when asking a question rather than \"Vous parlez fran\u00e7ais ?\" Both formulations are used, and carry a rising inflection on the last word. The literal English translations are \"Do you speak French?\" and \"You speak French?\", respectively. To avoid inversion while asking a question, \"Est-ce que\" (literally \"is it that\") may be placed at the beginning of the sentence. \"Parlez-vous fran\u00e7ais ?\" may become \"Est-ce que vous parlez fran\u00e7ais ?\" French also uses verb\u2013object\u2013subject (VOS) and object\u2013subject\u2013verb (OSV) word order. OSV word order is not used often and VOS is reserved for formal writings.\nVocabulary.\nRoot languages of loanwords\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0English (25.10%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Italian (16.83%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Germanic (20.65%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Romance (15.26%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Celtic (3.81%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Persian and Sanskrit (2.67%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Native American (2.41%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Other Asian languages (2.12%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Afro-Asiatic (6.45%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Balto-Slavic (1.31%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Basque (0.24%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Other languages (3.43%)\nThe majority of French words derive from Vulgar Latin or were constructed from Latin or Greek roots. In many cases, a single etymological root appears in French in a \"popular\" or native form, inherited from Vulgar Latin, and a learned form, borrowed later from Classical Latin. The following pairs consist of a native noun and a learned adjective:\nHowever, a historical tendency to Gallicise Latin roots can be identified, whereas English conversely leans towards a more direct incorporation of the Latin:\nThere are also noun-noun and adjective-adjective pairs:\nIt can be difficult to identify the Latin source of native French words because in the evolution from Vulgar Latin, unstressed syllables were severely reduced and the remaining vowels and consonants underwent significant modifications.\nMore recently (1994) the linguistic policy (Toubon Law) of the French language academies of France and Quebec has been to provide French equivalents to (mainly English) imported words, either by using existing vocabulary, extending its meaning or deriving a new word according to French morphological rules. The result is often two (or more) co-existing terms for describing the same phenomenon.\nIt is estimated that 12% (4,200) of common French words found in a typical dictionary such as the \"Petit Larousse\" or \"Micro-Robert Plus\" (35,000 words) are of foreign origin (where Greek and Latin learned words are not seen as foreign). About 25% (1,054) of these foreign words come from English and are fairly recent borrowings. The others are some 707 words from Italian, 550 from ancient Germanic languages, 481 from other Gallo-Romance languages, 215 from Arabic, 164 from German, 160 from Celtic languages, 159 from Spanish, 153 from Dutch, 112 from Persian and Sanskrit, 101 from Native American languages, 89 from other Asian languages, 56 from other Afro-Asiatic languages, 55 from Balto-Slavic languages, 10 from Basque and 144 (about 3%) from other languages.\nOne study analyzing the degree of differentiation of Romance languages in comparison to Latin estimated that among the languages analyzed French has the greatest distance from Latin. Lexical similarity is 89% with Italian, 80% with Sardinian, 78% with Rhaeto-Romance, and 75% with Romanian, Spanish and Portuguese.\nNumerals.\nThe numeral system used in the majority of Francophone countries employs both decimal and vigesimal counting. After the use of unique names for the numbers 1-16, those from 17 to 69 are counted by tens, while twenty (') is used as a base number in the names of numbers from 70 to 99. The French word for 80 is ', literally \"four twenties\", and the word for \"75\" is \"\", literally \"sixty-fifteen\". The vigesimal method of counting is analogous to the archaic English use of \"score\", as in \"fourscore and seven\" (87), or \"threescore and ten\" (70).\nBelgian, Swiss, and Aostan French as well as that used in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi, use different names for 70 and 90, namely ' and '. In Switzerland, depending on the local dialect, 80 can be ' (Geneva, Neuch\u00e2tel, Jura) or ' (Vaud, Valais, Fribourg). The Aosta Valley similarly uses \"\" for 80. Conversely, Belgium and in its former African colonies use \"quatre-vingts\" for 80.\nIn Old French (during the Middle Ages), all numbers from 30 to 99 could be said in either base 10 or base 20, e.g. \"vint et doze\" (twenty and twelve) for 32, \"dous vinz et diz\" (two twenties and ten) for 50, \"uitante\" for 80, or \"nonante\" for 90.\nThe term \"octante\" was historically used in Switzerland for 80, but is now considered archaic. \nFrench, like most European languages, uses a space to separate thousands. The comma () is used in French numbers as a decimal point, i.e. \"2,5\" instead of \"2.5\". In the case of currencies, the currency markers are substituted for decimal point, i.e. \"5$7\" for \"5 dollars and 7 cents\".\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in French:\n\"Tous les \u00eatres humains naissent libres et \u00e9gaux en dignit\u00e9 et en droits. Ils sont dou\u00e9s de raison et de conscience et doivent agir les uns envers les autres dans un esprit de fraternit\u00e9.\"\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:\n\"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10599", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10599", "title": "Formalist Film Theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "10600", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10600", "title": "Formula fiction", "text": "In popular culture, formula fiction is literature in which the storylines and plots have been reused to the extent that the narratives are predictable. It is similar to genre fiction, which identifies a number of specific settings that are frequently reused. The label of \"formula fiction\" is used in literary criticism as a mild pejorative to imply lack of originality.\nVarieties.\nThe \"formula\" is defined specifically by predictable narrative structure. Formulaic tales incorporate plots that have been reused so often as to be easily recognizable. Perhaps the most clearly formulaic plots characterize the romantic comedy genre; in a book or film labeled as such, viewers already know its most basic central plot, including to some extent the ending. This does not always prove to be detrimental to a given work's reception however, as the popularity of the aforementioned genre demonstrates.\nFormula fiction is often stereotypically associated with early pulp magazine markets, though some works published in that medium, such as \"The Cold Equations\", subvert the supposed expectations of the common narrative formula of that time.\nDistinct from genre conventions.\nThe \"formula\" is limited to structure of the plot itself. It does not include conventional, stereotypical elements of the genre used for the story background.\nGenres like high fantasy, westerns, and space opera (an adventure story in a science fiction setting) often have specific settings, such as a pseudo-Medieval European setting, the Old West, or outer space.\nFor any given genre, certain assumed background information covers the nature and purpose of predictable elements of the story, such as the appearance of dragons and wizards in high fantasy, warp drives and rayguns in science fiction, or shootouts at high noon in Westerns. These are taken as conventional in the genre and do not need to be explained anew to the reader, they may be included implicitly as part of the genre's formula, but they do not constitute the plot structure that makes a story formulaic.\nNote however that stereotypical elements can also easily be treated subversively, to contradict some of the expectations inherent in the genre's formula.\nDistinct from \"pastiche\" fiction.\n\"Formula fiction\" should not be confused with \"pastiche\": Fiction mimicking another work or author's style.\nComedy as a whole \u2013 including parody, satire, and subgenres such as romantic comedy \u2013 often relies on either formulaic elements, or mocking contradiction of such elements.\nThough pastiche may naturally include formulaic elements, the same holds true of parody and satire. All may well include formulaic elements such as common stereotypes or caricatures, or which may use formulaic elements in order to mock them or point out their supposedly clich\u00e9 or unrealistic natures."}
{"id": "10603", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10603", "title": "Field (mathematics)", "text": "Algebraic structure with addition, multiplication, and division\nIn mathematics, a field is a set on which addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division are defined and behave as the corresponding operations on rational and real numbers do. A field is thus a fundamental algebraic structure which is widely used in algebra, number theory, and many other areas of mathematics.\nThe best known fields are the field of rational numbers, the field of real numbers and the field of complex numbers. Many other fields, such as fields of rational functions, algebraic function fields, algebraic number fields, and \"p\"-adic fields are commonly used and studied in mathematics, particularly in number theory and algebraic geometry. Most cryptographic protocols rely on finite fields, i.e., fields with finitely many elements.\nThe relation of two fields is expressed by the notion of a field extension. Galois theory, initiated by \u00c9variste Galois in the 1830s, is devoted to understanding the symmetries of field extensions. Among other results, this theory shows that angle trisection and squaring the circle cannot be done with a compass and straightedge. Moreover, it shows that quintic equations are, in general, algebraically unsolvable.\nFields serve as foundational notions in several mathematical domains. This includes different branches of mathematical analysis, which are based on fields with additional structure. Basic theorems in analysis hinge on the structural properties of the field of real numbers. Most importantly for algebraic purposes, any field may be used as the scalars for a vector space, which is the standard general context for linear algebra. Number fields, the siblings of the field of rational numbers, are studied in depth in number theory. Function fields can help describe properties of geometric objects.\nDefinition.\nInformally, a field is a set, along with two operations defined on that set: an addition operation written as \"a\" + \"b\", and a multiplication operation written as \"a\" \u22c5 \"b\", both of which behave similarly as they behave for rational numbers and real numbers, including the existence of an additive inverse \u2212\"a\" for all elements a, and of a multiplicative inverse \"b\"\u22121 for every nonzero element b. This allows one to also consider the so-called \"inverse\" operations of subtraction, \"a\" \u2212 \"b\", and division, \"a\" / \"b\", by defining:\n\"a\" \u2212 \"b\" := \"a\" + (\u2212\"b\"),\n\"a\" / \"b\" := \"a\" \u22c5 \"b\"\u22121.\nClassic definition.\nFormally, a field is a set \"F\" together with two binary operations on F called \"addition\" and \"multiplication\". A binary operation on F is a mapping \"F\" \u00d7 \"F\" \u2192 \"F\", that is, a correspondence that associates with each ordered pair of elements of F a uniquely determined element of F. The result of the addition of \"a\" and \"b\" is called the sum of \"a\" and \"b\", and is denoted \"a\" + \"b\". Similarly, the result of the multiplication of \"a\" and \"b\" is called the product of \"a\" and \"b\", and is denoted \"ab\" or \"a\" \u22c5 \"b\". These operations are required to satisfy the following properties, referred to as \"field axioms\" (in these axioms, a, b, and c are arbitrary elements of the field F):\nThis may be summarized by saying: a field has two commutative operations, called addition and multiplication; it is a group under addition with 0 as the additive identity; the nonzero elements are a group under multiplication with 1 as the multiplicative identity; and multiplication distributes over addition.\nEven more summarized: a field is a commutative ring where formula_1 and all nonzero elements are invertible under multiplication.\nAlternative definition.\nFields can also be defined in different, but equivalent ways. One can alternatively define a field by four binary operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) and their required properties. Division by zero is, by definition, excluded. In order to avoid existential quantifiers, fields can be defined by two binary operations (addition and multiplication), two unary operations (yielding the additive and multiplicative inverses respectively), and two nullary operations (the constants 0 and 1). These operations are then subject to the conditions above. Avoiding existential quantifiers is important in constructive mathematics and computing. One may equivalently define a field by the same two binary operations, one unary operation (the multiplicative inverse), and two (not necessarily distinct) constants 1 and \u22121, since 0 = 1 + (\u22121) and \u2212\"a\" = (\u22121)\"a\".\nExamples.\nRational numbers.\nRational numbers have been widely used a long time before the elaboration of the concept of field.\nThey are numbers that can be written as fractions\n\"a\"/\"b\", where \"a\" and \"b\" are integers, and \"b\" \u2260 0. The additive inverse of such a fraction is \u2212\"a\"/\"b\", and the multiplicative inverse (provided that \"a\" \u2260 0) is \"b\"/\"a\", which can be seen as follows:\n formula_2\nThe abstractly required field axioms reduce to standard properties of rational numbers. For example, the law of distributivity can be proven as follows:\nformula_3\nReal and complex numbers.\nThe real numbers R, with the usual operations of addition and multiplication, also form a field. The complex numbers C consist of expressions\n\"a\" + \"bi\", with \"a\", \"b\" real,\nwhere \"i\" is the imaginary unit, i.e., a (non-real) number satisfying \"i\"2 = \u22121.\nAddition and multiplication of real numbers are defined in such a way that expressions of this type satisfy all field axioms and thus hold for C. For example, the distributive law enforces\n(\"a\" + \"bi\")(\"c\" + \"di\") = \"ac\" + \"bci\" + \"adi\" + \"bdi\"2 = \"ac\"\u2212\"bd\" + (\"bc\" + \"ad\")\"i\".\nIt is immediate that this is again an expression of the above type, and so the complex numbers form a field. Complex numbers can be geometrically represented as points in the plane, with Cartesian coordinates given by the real numbers of their describing expression, or as the arrows from the origin to these points, specified by their length and an angle enclosed with some distinct direction. Addition then corresponds to combining the arrows to the intuitive parallelogram (adding the Cartesian coordinates), and the multiplication is \u2013 less intuitively \u2013 combining rotating and scaling of the arrows (adding the angles and multiplying the lengths). The fields of real and complex numbers are used throughout mathematics, physics, engineering, statistics, and many other scientific disciplines.\nConstructible numbers.\nIn antiquity, several geometric problems concerned the (in)feasibility of constructing certain numbers with compass and straightedge. For example, it was unknown to the Greeks that it is, in general, impossible to trisect a given angle in this way. These problems can be settled using the field of constructible numbers. Real constructible numbers are, by definition, lengths of line segments that can be constructed from the points 0 and 1 in finitely many steps using only compass and straightedge. These numbers, endowed with the field operations of real numbers, restricted to the constructible numbers, form a field, which properly includes the field Q of rational numbers. The illustration shows the construction of square roots of constructible numbers, not necessarily contained within Q. Using the labeling in the illustration, construct the segments \"AB\", \"BD\", and a semicircle over \"AD\" (center at the midpoint \"C\"), which intersects the perpendicular line through \"B\" in a point \"F\", at a distance of exactly formula_4 from \"B\" when \"BD\" has length one.\nNot all real numbers are constructible. It can be shown that formula_5 is not a constructible number, which implies that it is impossible to construct with compass and straightedge the length of the side of a cube with volume 2, another problem posed by the ancient Greeks.\nA field with four elements.\nIn addition to familiar number systems such as the rationals, there are other, less immediate examples of fields. The following example is a field consisting of four elements called \"O\", \"I\", \"A\", and \"B\". The notation is chosen such that \"O\" plays the role of the additive identity element (denoted 0 in the axioms above), and \"I\" is the multiplicative identity (denoted 1 in the axioms above). The field axioms can be verified by using some more field theory, or by direct computation. For example,\n \"A\" \u22c5 (\"B\" + \"A\") = \"A\" \u22c5 \"I\" = \"A\", which equals \"A\" \u22c5 \"B\" + \"A\" \u22c5 \"A\" = \"I\" + \"B\" = \"A\", as required by the distributivity.\nThis field is called a finite field with four elements, and is denoted F4 or GF(4). The subset consisting of \"O\" and \"I\" (highlighted in red in the tables at the right) is also a field, known as the \"binary field\" F2 or GF(2). In the context of computer science and Boolean algebra, \"O\" and \"I\" are often denoted respectively by \"false\" and \"true\", and the addition is then denoted XOR (exclusive or). In other words, the structure of the binary field is the basic structure that allows computing with bits.\nElementary notions.\nIn this section, \"F\" denotes an arbitrary field and \"a\" and \"b\" are arbitrary elements of \"F\".\nConsequences of the definition.\nOne has \"a\" \u22c5 0 = 0 and \u2212\"a\" = (\u22121) \u22c5 \"a\". In particular, one may deduce the additive inverse of every element as soon as one knows \u22121.\nIf \"ab\" = 0 then \"a\" or \"b\" must be 0, since, if \"a\" \u2260 0, then\n\"b\" = (\"a\"\u22121\"a\")\"b\" = \"a\"\u22121(\"ab\") = \"a\"\u22121 \u22c5 0 = 0. This means that every field is an integral domain.\nIn addition, the following properties are true for any elements \"a\" and \"b\":\n\u22120 = 0\n1\u22121 = 1\n(\u2212(\u2212\"a\")) = \"a\"\n(\u2212\"a\") \u22c5 \"b\" = \"a\" \u22c5 (\u2212\"b\") = \u2212(\"a\" \u22c5 \"b\")\n(\"a\"\u22121)\u22121 = \"a\" if \"a\" \u2260 0\nThe additive and the multiplicative group of a field.\nThe axioms of a field \"F\" imply that it is an abelian group under addition. This group is called the additive group of the field, and is sometimes denoted by (\"F\", +) when denoting it simply as \"F\" could be confusing.\nSimilarly, the \"nonzero\" elements of \"F\" form an abelian group under multiplication, called the multiplicative group, and denoted by (\"F\" \\ {0}, \u22c5) or just \"F\" \\ {0} or \"F\"*.\nA field may thus be defined as set \"F\" equipped with two operations denoted as an addition and a multiplication such that \"F\" is an abelian group under addition, \"F\" \\ {0} is an abelian group under multiplication (where 0 is the identity element of the addition), and multiplication is distributive over addition. Some elementary statements about fields can therefore be obtained by applying general facts of groups. For example, the additive and multiplicative inverses \u2212\"a\" and \"a\"\u22121 are uniquely determined by \"a\".\nThe requirement 1 \u2260 0 follows, because 1 is the identity element of a group that does not contain 0. Thus, the trivial ring, consisting of a single element, is not a field.\nEvery finite subgroup of the multiplicative group of a field is cyclic (see ).\nCharacteristic.\nIn addition to the multiplication of two elements of \"F\", it is possible to define the product \"n\" \u22c5 \"a\" of an arbitrary element \"a\" of \"F\" by a positive integer \"n\" to be the \"n\"-fold sum\n\"a\" + \"a\" + \u22ef + \"a\" (which is an element of \"F\".)\nIf there is no positive integer such that\n\"n\" \u22c5 1 = 0,\nthen \"F\" is said to have characteristic 0. For example, the field of rational numbers Q has characteristic 0 since no positive integer \"n\" is zero. Otherwise, if there \"is\" a positive integer \"n\" satisfying this equation, the smallest such positive integer can be shown to be a prime number. It is usually denoted by \"p\" and the field is said to have characteristic \"p\" then.\nFor example, the field F4 has characteristic 2 since (in the notation of the above addition table) I + I = O.\nIf \"F\" has characteristic \"p\", then \"p\" \u22c5 \"a\" = 0 for all \"a\" in \"F\". This implies that\n(\"a\" + \"b\")\"p\" = \"a\"\"p\" + \"b\"\"p\",\nsince all other binomial coefficients appearing in the binomial formula are divisible by \"p\". Here, \"a\"\"p\" := \"a\" \u22c5 \"a\" \u22c5 \u22ef \u22c5 \"a\" (\"p\" factors) is the \"p\"-th power, i.e., the \"p\"-fold product of the element \"a\". Therefore, the Frobenius map\nFr: \"F\" \u2192 \"F\", \"x\" \u27fc \"x\"\"p\"\nis compatible with the addition in \"F\" (and also with the multiplication), and is therefore a field homomorphism. The existence of this homomorphism makes fields in characteristic \"p\" quite different from fields of characteristic 0.\nSubfields and prime fields.\nA \"subfield\" \"E\" of a field \"F\" is a subset of \"F\" that is a field with respect to the field operations of \"F\". Equivalently \"E\" is a subset of \"F\" that contains 1, and is closed under addition, multiplication, additive inverse and multiplicative inverse of a nonzero element. This means that 1 \u220a \"E\", that for all \"a\", \"b\" \u220a \"E\" both \"a\" + \"b\" and \"a\" \u22c5 \"b\" are in \"E\", and that for all \"a\" \u2260 0 in \"E\", both \u2212\"a\" and 1/\"a\" are in \"E\".\nField homomorphisms are maps \"\u03c6\": \"E\" \u2192 \"F\" between two fields such that \"\u03c6\"(\"e\"1\u2009+\u00a0\"e\"2) = \"\u03c6\"(\"e\"1) + \"\u03c6\"(\"e\"2), \"\u03c6\"(\"e\"1\"e\"2) = \"\u03c6\"(\"e\"1)&amp;hairsp;\"\u03c6\"(\"e\"2), and \"\u03c6\"(1E) = 1F, where \"e\"1 and \"e\"2 are arbitrary elements of \"E\". All field homomorphisms are injective. If \"\u03c6\" is also surjective, it is called an isomorphism (or the fields \"E\" and \"F\" are called isomorphic).\nA field is called a prime field if it has no proper (i.e., strictly smaller) subfields. Any field \"F\" contains a prime field. If the characteristic of \"F\" is \"p\" (a prime number), the prime field is isomorphic to the finite field F\"p\" introduced below. Otherwise the prime field is isomorphic to Q.\nFinite fields.\n\"Finite fields\" (also called \"Galois fields\") are fields with finitely many elements, whose number is also referred to as the order of the field. The above introductory example F4 is a field with four elements. Its subfield F2 is the smallest field, because by definition a field has at least two distinct elements 1 \u2260 0.\nThe simplest finite fields, with prime order, are most directly accessible using modular arithmetic. For a fixed positive integer \"n\", arithmetic \"modulo \"n\"\" means to work with the numbers\nZ/\"n\"Z = {0, 1, ..., \"n\" \u2212 1}.\nThe addition and multiplication on this set are done by performing the operation in question in the set Z of integers, dividing by \"n\" and taking the remainder as result. This construction yields a field precisely if \"n\" is a prime number. For example, taking the prime \"n\" = 2 results in the above-mentioned field F2. For \"n\" = 4 and more generally, for any composite number (i.e., any number \"n\" which can be expressed as a product \"n\" = \"r\"\u22c5\"s\" of two strictly smaller natural numbers), Z/\"nZ is not a field: the product of two non-zero elements is zero since \"r\"\u22c5\"s\" = 0 in Z/\"nZ, which, as was explained above, prevents Z/\"nZ from being a field. The field Z/\"pZ with \"p\" elements (\"p\" being prime) constructed in this way is usually denoted by F\"p\".\nEvery finite field \"F\" has \"q\" = \"p\"\"n\" elements, where \"p\" is prime and \"n\" \u2265 1. This statement holds since \"F\" may be viewed as a vector space over its prime field. The dimension of this vector space is necessarily finite, say \"n\", which implies the asserted statement.\nA field with \"q\" = \"p\"\"n\" elements can be constructed as the splitting field of the polynomial\n\"f\"\u2009(\"x\") = \"x\"\"q\" \u2212 \"x\".\nSuch a splitting field is an extension of F\"p\" in which the polynomial \"f\" has \"q\" zeros. This means \"f\" has as many zeros as possible since the degree of \"f\" is \"q\". For \"q\" = 22 = 4, it can be checked case by case using the above multiplication table that all four elements of F4 satisfy the equation \"x\"4 = \"x\", so they are zeros of \"f\". By contrast, in F2, \"f\" has only two zeros (namely 0 and 1), so \"f\" does not split into linear factors in this smaller field. Elaborating further on basic field-theoretic notions, it can be shown that two finite fields with the same order are isomorphic. It is thus customary to speak of \"the\" finite field with \"q\" elements, denoted by F\"q\" or GF(\"q\").\nHistory.\nHistorically, three algebraic disciplines led to the concept of a field: the question of solving polynomial equations, algebraic number theory, and algebraic geometry. A first step towards the notion of a field was made in 1770 by Joseph-Louis Lagrange, who observed that permuting the zeros \"x\"1, \"x\"2, \"x\"3 of a cubic polynomial in the expression\n(\"x\"1 + \"\u03c9x\"2 + \"\u03c9\"2\"x\"3)3\n(with \"\u03c9\" being a third root of unity) only yields two values. This way, Lagrange conceptually explained the classical solution method of Scipione del Ferro and Fran\u00e7ois Vi\u00e8te, which proceeds by reducing a cubic equation for an unknown \"x\" to a quadratic equation for \"x\"3. Together with a similar observation for equations of degree 4, Lagrange thus linked what eventually became the concept of fields and the concept of groups. Vandermonde, also in 1770, and to a fuller extent, Carl Friedrich Gauss, in his \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" (1801), studied the equation\n\"x\"&amp;hairsp;\"p\" = 1\nfor a prime \"p\" and, again using modern language, the resulting cyclic Galois group. Gauss deduced that a regular \"p\"-gon can be constructed if \"p\" = 22\"k\" + 1. Building on Lagrange's work, Paolo Ruffini claimed (1799) that quintic equations (polynomial equations of degree 5) cannot be solved algebraically; however, his arguments were flawed. These gaps were filled by Niels Henrik Abel in 1824. \u00c9variste Galois, in 1832, devised necessary and sufficient criteria for a polynomial equation to be algebraically solvable, thus establishing in effect what is known as Galois theory today. Both Abel and Galois worked with what is today called an algebraic number field, but conceived neither an explicit notion of a field, nor of a group.\nIn 1871 Richard Dedekind introduced, for a set of real or complex numbers that is closed under the four arithmetic operations, the German word \"K\u00f6rper\", which means \"body\" or \"corpus\" (to suggest an organically closed entity). The English term \"field\" was introduced by .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By a field we will mean every infinite system of real or complex numbers so closed in itself and perfect that addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division of any two of these numbers again yields a number of the system.\nIn 1881 Leopold Kronecker defined what he called a \"domain of rationality\", which is a field of rational fractions in modern terms. Kronecker's notion did not cover the field of all algebraic numbers (which is a field in Dedekind's sense), but on the other hand was more abstract than Dedekind's in that it made no specific assumption on the nature of the elements of a field. Kronecker interpreted a field such as Q(\u03c0) abstractly as the rational function field Q(\"X\"). Prior to this, examples of transcendental numbers were known since Joseph Liouville's work in 1844, until Charles Hermite (1873) and Ferdinand von Lindemann (1882) proved the transcendence of \"e\" and \u03c0, respectively.\nThe first clear definition of an abstract field is due to . In particular, Heinrich Martin Weber's notion included the field F\"p\". Giuseppe Veronese (1891) studied the field of formal power series, which led to introduce the field of \"p\"-adic numbers. synthesized the knowledge of abstract field theory accumulated so far. He axiomatically studied the properties of fields and defined many important field-theoretic concepts. The majority of the theorems mentioned in the sections Galois theory, Constructing fields and Elementary notions can be found in Steinitz's work. linked the notion of orderings in a field, and thus the area of analysis, to purely algebraic properties. Emil Artin redeveloped Galois theory from 1928 through 1942, eliminating the dependency on the primitive element theorem.\nConstructing fields.\nConstructing fields from rings.\nA commutative ring is a set, equipped with an addition and multiplication operation, satisfying all the axioms of a field, except for the existence of multiplicative inverses \"a\"\u22121. For example, the integers Z form a commutative ring, but not a field: the reciprocal of an integer \"n\" is not itself an integer, unless \"n\" = \u00b11.\nIn the hierarchy of algebraic structures fields can be characterized as the commutative rings \"R\" in which every nonzero element is a unit (which means every element is invertible). Similarly, fields are the commutative rings with precisely two distinct ideals, (0) and \"R\". Fields are also precisely the commutative rings in which (0) is the only prime ideal.\nGiven a commutative ring \"R\", there are two ways to construct a field related to \"R\", i.e., two ways of modifying \"R\" such that all nonzero elements become invertible: forming the field of fractions, and forming residue fields. The field of fractions of Z is Q, the rationals, while the residue fields of Z are the finite fields F\"p\".\nField of fractions.\nGiven an integral domain \"R\", its field of fractions \"Q\"(\"R\") is built with the fractions of two elements of \"R\" exactly as Q is constructed from the integers. More precisely, the elements of \"Q\"(\"R\") are the fractions \"a\"/\"b\" where \"a\" and \"b\" are in \"R\", and \"b\" \u2260 0. Two fractions \"a\"/\"b\" and \"c\"/\"d\" are equal if and only if \"ad\" = \"bc\". The operation on the fractions work exactly as for rational numbers. For example,\nformula_6\nIt is straightforward to show that, if the ring is an integral domain, the set of the fractions form a field.\nThe field \"F\"(\"x\") of the rational fractions over a field (or an integral domain) \"F\" is the field of fractions of the polynomial ring \"F\"[\"x\"]. The field \"F\"((\"x\")) of Laurent series\nformula_7\nover a field \"F\" is the field of fractions of the ring \"F\"\"x\" of formal power series (in which \"k\" \u2265 0). Since any Laurent series is a fraction of a power series divided by a power of \"x\" (as opposed to an arbitrary power series), the representation of fractions is less important in this situation, though.\nResidue fields.\nIn addition to the field of fractions, which embeds \"R\" injectively into a field, a field can be obtained from a commutative ring \"R\" by means of a surjective map onto a field \"F\". Any field obtained in this way is a quotient , where \"m\" is a maximal ideal of \"R\". If \"R\" has only one maximal ideal \"m\", this field is called the residue field of \"R\".\nThe ideal generated by a single polynomial \"f\" in the polynomial ring \"R\" = \"E\"[\"X\"] (over a field \"E\") is maximal if and only if \"f\" is irreducible in \"E\", i.e., if \"f\" cannot be expressed as the product of two polynomials in \"E\"[\"X\"] of smaller degree. This yields a field\n\"F\" = \"E\"[\"X\"] / (\u2009\"f\"\u2009(\"X\")).\nThis field \"F\" contains an element \"x\" (namely the residue class of \"X\") which satisfies the equation\n\"f\"\u2009(\"x\") = 0.\nFor example, C is obtained from R by adjoining the imaginary unit symbol i, which satisfies \"f\"\u2009(\"i\") = 0, where \"f\"\u2009(\"X\") = \"X\"2 + 1. Moreover, \"f\" is irreducible over R, which implies that the map that sends a polynomial \"f\"\u2009(\"X\") \u220a R[\"X\"] to \"f\"\u2009(\"i\"&amp;hairsp;) yields an isomorphism\nformula_8\nConstructing fields within a bigger field.\nFields can be constructed inside a given bigger container field. Suppose given a field \"E\", and a field \"F\" containing \"E\" as a subfield. For any element \"x\" of \"F\", there is a smallest subfield of \"F\" containing \"E\" and \"x\", called the subfield of \"F\" generated by \"x\" and denoted \"E\"(\"x\"). The passage from \"E\" to \"E\"(\"x\") is referred to by \"adjoining an element\" to \"E\". More generally, for a subset \"S\" \u2282 \"F\", there is a minimal subfield of \"F\" containing \"E\" and \"S\", denoted by \"E\"(\"S\").\nThe compositum of two subfields \"E\" and \"E' \" of some field \"F\" is the smallest subfield of \"F\" containing both \"E\" and \"E'.\" The compositum can be used to construct the biggest subfield of \"F\" satisfying a certain property, for example the biggest subfield of \"F\", which is, in the language introduced below, algebraic over \"E\".\nField extensions.\nThe notion of a subfield \"E\" \u2282 \"F\" can also be regarded from the opposite point of view, by referring to \"F\" being a \"field extension\" (or just extension) of \"E\", denoted by\n\"F\" / \"E\",\nand read \"\"F\" over \"E\"\".\nA basic datum of a field extension is its degree [\"F\" : \"E\"], i.e., the dimension of \"F\" as an \"E\"-vector space. It satisfies the formula\n[\"G\" : \"E\"] = [\"G\" : \"F\"] [\"F\" : \"E\"].\nExtensions whose degree is finite are referred to as finite extensions. The extensions C / R and F4 / F2 are of degree 2, whereas R / Q is an infinite extension.\nAlgebraic extensions.\nA pivotal notion in the study of field extensions \"F\" / \"E\" are algebraic elements. An element is \"algebraic\" over E if it is a root of a polynomial with coefficients in E, that is, if it satisfies a polynomial equation\n\"e\"\"n\"&amp;hairsp;\"x\"\"n\" + \"e\"\"n\"\u22121\"x\"\"n\"\u22121 + \u22ef + \"e\"1\"x\" + \"e\"0 = 0,\nwith \"e\"\"n\", ..., \"e\"0 in E, and \"e\"\"n\" \u2260 0.\nFor example, the imaginary unit \"i\" in C is algebraic over R, and even over Q, since it satisfies the equation\n\"i\"2 + 1 = 0.\nA field extension in which every element of \"F\" is algebraic over \"E\" is called an algebraic extension. Any finite extension is necessarily algebraic, as can be deduced from the above multiplicativity formula.\nThe subfield \"E\"(\"x\") generated by an element \"x\", as above, is an algebraic extension of \"E\" if and only if \"x\" is an algebraic element. That is to say, if \"x\" is algebraic, all other elements of \"E\"(\"x\") are necessarily algebraic as well. Moreover, the degree of the extension \"E\"(\"x\") / \"E\", i.e., the dimension of \"E\"(\"x\") as an \"E\"-vector space, equals the minimal degree \"n\" such that there is a polynomial equation involving \"x\", as above. If this degree is \"n\", then the elements of \"E\"(\"x\") have the form\nformula_9\nFor example, the field Q(\"i\") of Gaussian rationals is the subfield of C consisting of all numbers of the form \"a\" + \"bi\" where both \"a\" and \"b\" are rational numbers: summands of the form \"i\"2 (and similarly for higher exponents) do not have to be considered here, since \"a\" + \"bi\" + \"ci\"2 can be simplified to \"a\" \u2212 \"c\" + \"bi\".\nTranscendence bases.\nThe above-mentioned field of rational fractions \"E\"(\"X\"), where \"X\" is an indeterminate, is not an algebraic extension of \"E\" since there is no polynomial equation with coefficients in \"E\" whose zero is \"X\". Elements, such as \"X\", which are not algebraic are called transcendental. Informally speaking, the indeterminate \"X\" and its powers do not interact with elements of \"E\". A similar construction can be carried out with a set of indeterminates, instead of just one.\nOnce again, the field extension \"E\"(\"x\") / \"E\" discussed above is a key example: if \"x\" is not algebraic (i.e., \"x\" is not a root of a polynomial with coefficients in \"E\"), then \"E\"(\"x\") is isomorphic to \"E\"(\"X\"). This isomorphism is obtained by substituting \"x\" to \"X\" in rational fractions.\nA subset \"S\" of a field \"F\" is a transcendence basis if it is algebraically independent (do not satisfy any polynomial relations) over \"E\" and if \"F\" is an algebraic extension of \"E\"(\"S\"). Any field extension \"F\" / \"E\" has a transcendence basis. Thus, field extensions can be split into ones of the form \"E\"(\"S\") / \"E\" (purely transcendental extensions) and algebraic extensions.\nClosure operations.\nA field is algebraically closed if it does not have any strictly bigger algebraic extensions or, equivalently, if any polynomial equation\n\"f\"\"n\"&amp;hairsp;\"x\"\"n\" + \"f\"\"n\"\u22121\"x\"\"n\"\u22121 + \u22ef + \"f\"1\"x\" + \"f\"0 = 0, with coefficients \"f\"\"n\", ..., \"f\"0 \u2208 \"F\", \"n\" &gt; 0,\nhas a solution \"x\" \u220a \"F\". By the fundamental theorem of algebra, C is algebraically closed, i.e., \"any\" polynomial equation with complex coefficients has a complex solution. The rational and the real numbers are \"not\" algebraically closed since the equation\n\"x\"2 + 1 = 0\ndoes not have any rational or real solution. A field containing \"F\" is called an \"algebraic closure\" of \"F\" if it is algebraic over \"F\" (roughly speaking, not too big compared to \"F\") and is algebraically closed (big enough to contain solutions of all polynomial equations).\nBy the above, C is an algebraic closure of R. The situation that the algebraic closure is a finite extension of the field \"F\" is quite special: by the Artin-Schreier theorem, the degree of this extension is necessarily 2, and \"F\" is elementarily equivalent to R. Such fields are also known as real closed fields.\nAny field \"F\" has an algebraic closure, which is moreover unique up to (non-unique) isomorphism. It is commonly referred to as \"the\" algebraic closure and denoted . For example, the algebraic closure of Q is called the field of algebraic numbers. The field is usually rather implicit since its construction requires the ultrafilter lemma, a set-theoretic axiom that is weaker than the axiom of choice. In this regard, the algebraic closure of F\"q\", is exceptionally simple. It is the union of the finite fields containing F\"q\" (the ones of order \"q\"\"n\"). For any algebraically closed field \"F\" of characteristic 0, the algebraic closure of the field \"F\"((\"t\")) of Laurent series is the field of Puiseux series, obtained by adjoining roots of \"t\".\nFields with additional structure.\nSince fields are ubiquitous in mathematics and beyond, several refinements of the concept have been adapted to the needs of particular mathematical areas.\nOrdered fields.\nA field \"F\" is called an \"ordered field\" if any two elements can be compared, so that \"x\" + \"y\" \u2265 0 and \"xy\" \u2265 0 whenever \"x\" \u2265 0 and \"y\" \u2265 0. For example, the real numbers form an ordered field, with the usual ordering\u00a0\u2265. The Artin-Schreier theorem states that a field can be ordered if and only if it is a formally real field, which means that any quadratic equation\nformula_10\nonly has the solution \"x\"1 = \"x\"2 = \u22ef = \"x\"\"n\" = 0. The set of all possible orders on a fixed field \"F\" is isomorphic to the set of ring homomorphisms from the Witt ring W(\"F\") of quadratic forms over \"F\", to Z.\nAn Archimedean field is an ordered field such that for each element there exists a finite expression\n1 + 1 + \u22ef + 1\nwhose value is greater than that element, that is, there are no infinite elements. Equivalently, the field contains no infinitesimals (elements smaller than all rational numbers); or, yet equivalent, the field is isomorphic to a subfield of R.\nAn ordered field is Dedekind-complete if all upper bounds, lower bounds (see Dedekind cut) and limits, which should exist, do exist. More formally, each bounded subset of \"F\" is required to have a least upper bound. Any complete field is necessarily Archimedean, since in any non-Archimedean field there is neither a greatest infinitesimal nor a least positive rational, whence the sequence 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, ..., every element of which is greater than every infinitesimal, has no limit.\nSince every proper subfield of the reals also contains such gaps, R is the unique complete ordered field, up to isomorphism. Several foundational results in calculus follow directly from this characterization of the reals.\nThe hyperreals R* form an ordered field that is not Archimedean. It is an extension of the reals obtained by including infinite and infinitesimal numbers. These are larger, respectively smaller than any real number. The hyperreals form the foundational basis of non-standard analysis.\nTopological fields.\nAnother refinement of the notion of a field is a topological field, in which the set \"F\" is a topological space, such that all operations of the field (addition, multiplication, the maps \"a\" \u21a6 \u2212\"a\" and \"a\" \u21a6 \"a\"\u22121) are continuous maps with respect to the topology of the space.\nThe topology of all the fields discussed below is induced from a metric, i.e., a function\n\"d\" : \"F\" \u00d7 \"F\" \u2192 R,\nthat measures a \"distance\" between any two elements of \"F\".\nThe completion of \"F\" is another field in which, informally speaking, the \"gaps\" in the original field \"F\" are filled, if there are any. For example, any irrational number \"x\", such as \"x\" = \u221a2, is a \"gap\" in the rationals Q in the sense that it is a real number that can be approximated arbitrarily closely by rational numbers \"p\"/\"q\", in the sense that distance of \"x\" and \"p\"/\"q\" given by the absolute value | \"x\" \u2212 \"p\"/\"q\" | is as small as desired.\nThe following table lists some examples of this construction. The fourth column shows an example of a zero sequence, i.e., a sequence whose limit (for \"n\" \u2192 \u221e) is zero.\nThe field Q\"p\" is used in number theory and \"p\"-adic analysis. The algebraic closure carries a unique norm extending the one on Q\"p\", but is not complete. The completion of this algebraic closure, however, is algebraically closed. Because of its rough analogy to the complex numbers, it is sometimes called the field of complex p-adic numbers and is denoted by C\"p\".\nLocal fields.\nThe following topological fields are called \"local fields\":\nThese two types of local fields share some fundamental similarities. In this relation, the elements \"p\" \u2208 Q\"p\" and \"t\" \u2208 F\"p\"((\"t\")) (referred to as uniformizer) correspond to each other. The first manifestation of this is at an elementary level: the elements of both fields can be expressed as power series in the uniformizer, with coefficients in F\"p\". (However, since the addition in Q\"p\" is done using carrying, which is not the case in F\"p\"((\"t\")), these fields are not isomorphic.) The following facts show that this superficial similarity goes much deeper:\nDifferential fields.\nDifferential fields are fields equipped with a derivation, i.e., allow to take derivatives of elements in the field. For example, the field R(\"X\"), together with the standard derivative of polynomials forms a differential field. These fields are central to differential Galois theory, a variant of Galois theory dealing with linear differential equations.\nGalois theory.\nGalois theory studies algebraic extensions of a field by studying the symmetry in the arithmetic operations of addition and multiplication. An important notion in this area is that of finite Galois extensions \"F\" / \"E\", which are, by definition, those that are separable and normal. The primitive element theorem shows that finite separable extensions are necessarily simple, i.e., of the form\n\"F\" = \"E\"[\"X\"] / \"f\"\u2009(\"X\"),\nwhere \"f\" is an irreducible polynomial (as above). For such an extension, being normal and separable means that all zeros of \"f\" are contained in \"F\" and that \"f\" has only simple zeros. The latter condition is always satisfied if \"E\" has characteristic 0.\nFor a finite Galois extension, the Galois group Gal(\"F\"/\"E\") is the group of field automorphisms of \"F\" that are trivial on \"E\" (i.e., the bijections \"\u03c3\" : \"F\" \u2192 \"F\" that preserve addition and multiplication and that send elements of \"E\" to themselves). The importance of this group stems from the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, which constructs an explicit one-to-one correspondence between the set of subgroups of Gal(\"F\"/\"E\") and the set of intermediate extensions of the extension \"F\"/\"E\". By means of this correspondence, group-theoretic properties translate into facts about fields. For example, if the Galois group of a Galois extension as above is not solvable (cannot be built from abelian groups), then the zeros of \"f\" \"cannot\" be expressed in terms of addition, multiplication, and radicals, i.e., expressions involving formula_12. For example, the symmetric groups S\"n\" is not solvable for \"n\" \u2265 5. Consequently, as can be shown, the zeros of the following polynomials are not expressible by sums, products, and radicals. For the latter polynomial, this fact is known as the Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem:\n\"f\"(\"X\") = \"X\"5 \u2212 4\"X\" + 2 (and \"E\" = Q),\n\"f\"(\"X\") = \"X\"\u2009\"n\" + \"a\"\"n\"\u22121\"X\"\u2009\"n\"\u22121 + \u22ef + \"a\"0 (where \"f\" is regarded as a polynomial in \"E\"(\"a\"0, ..., \"a\"\"n\"\u22121), for some indeterminates \"a\"\"i\", \"E\" is any field, and \"n\" \u2265 5).\nThe tensor product of fields is not usually a field. For example, a finite extension \"F\" / \"E\" of degree \"n\" is a Galois extension if and only if there is an isomorphism of \"F\"-algebras\n\"F\" \u2297\"E\" \"F\" \u2245 \"F\"\"n\".\nThis fact is the beginning of Grothendieck's Galois theory, a far-reaching extension of Galois theory applicable to algebro-geometric objects.\nInvariants of fields.\nBasic invariants of a field \"F\" include the characteristic and the transcendence degree of \"F\" over its prime field. The latter is defined as the maximal number of elements in \"F\" that are algebraically independent over the prime field. Two algebraically closed fields \"E\" and \"F\" are isomorphic precisely if these two data agree. This implies that any two uncountable algebraically closed fields of the same cardinality and the same characteristic are isomorphic. For example, and C are isomorphic (but \"not\" isomorphic as topological fields).\nModel theory of fields.\nIn model theory, a branch of mathematical logic, two fields \"E\" and \"F\" are called elementarily equivalent if every mathematical statement that is true for \"E\" is also true for \"F\" and conversely. The mathematical statements in question are required to be first-order sentences (involving 0, 1, the addition and multiplication). A typical example, for \"n\" &gt; 0, \"n\" an integer, is\n\u03c6(\"E\") = \"any polynomial of degree \"n\" in \"E\" has a zero in \"E\"\"\nThe set of such formulas for all \"n\" expresses that \"E\" is algebraically closed.\nThe Lefschetz principle states that C is elementarily equivalent to any algebraically closed field \"F\" of characteristic zero. Moreover, any fixed statement \u03c6 holds in C if and only if it holds in any algebraically closed field of sufficiently high characteristic.\nIf \"U\" is an ultrafilter on a set \"I\", and \"F\"\"i\" is a field for every \"i\" in \"I\", the ultraproduct of the \"F\"\"i\" with respect to \"U\" is a field. It is denoted by\nulim\"i\"\u2192\u221e \"F\"\"i\",\nsince it behaves in several ways as a limit of the fields \"F\"\"i\": \u0141o\u015b's theorem states that any first order statement that holds for all but finitely many \"F\"\"i\", also holds for the ultraproduct. Applied to the above sentence \u03c6, this shows that there is an isomorphism\nformula_13\nThe Ax\u2013Kochen theorem mentioned above also follows from this and an isomorphism of the ultraproducts (in both cases over all primes \"p\")\nulim\"p\" Q\"p\" \u2245 ulim\"p\" F\"p\"((\"t\")).\nIn addition, model theory also studies the logical properties of various other types of fields, such as real closed fields or exponential fields (which are equipped with an exponential function exp : \"F\" \u2192 \"F\"x).\nThe absolute Galois group.\nFor fields that are not algebraically closed (or not separably closed), the absolute Galois group Gal(\"F\") is fundamentally important: extending the case of finite Galois extensions outlined above, this group governs \"all\" finite separable extensions of \"F\". By elementary means, the group Gal(F\"q\") can be shown to be the Pr\u00fcfer group, the profinite completion of Z. This statement subsumes the fact that the only algebraic extensions of Gal(F\"q\") are the fields Gal(F\"q\"\"n\") for \"n\" &gt; 0, and that the Galois groups of these finite extensions are given by\nGal(F\"q\"\"n\" / F\"q\") = Z/\"n\"Z.\nA description in terms of generators and relations is also known for the Galois groups of \"p\"-adic number fields (finite extensions of Q\"p\").\nRepresentations of Galois groups and of related groups such as the Weil group are fundamental in many branches of arithmetic, such as the Langlands program. The cohomological study of such representations is done using Galois cohomology. For example, the Brauer group, which is classically defined as the group of central simple \"F\"-algebras, can be reinterpreted as a Galois cohomology group, namely\nBr(\"F\") = H2(\"F\", Gm).\nK-theory.\nMilnor K-theory is defined as\nformula_14\nThe norm residue isomorphism theorem, proved around 2000 by Vladimir Voevodsky, relates this to Galois cohomology by means of an isomorphism\nformula_15\nAlgebraic K-theory is related to the group of invertible matrices with coefficients the given field. For example, the process of taking the determinant of an invertible matrix leads to an isomorphism K1(\"F\") = \"F\"\u00d7. Matsumoto's theorem shows that K2(\"F\") agrees with K2M(\"F\"). In higher degrees, K-theory diverges from Milnor K-theory and remains hard to compute in general.\nApplications.\nLinear algebra and commutative algebra.\nIf \"a\" \u2260 0, then the equation\n\"ax\" = \"b\"\nhas a unique solution \"x\" in a field \"F\", namely formula_16 This immediate consequence of the definition of a field is fundamental in linear algebra. For example, it is an essential ingredient of Gaussian elimination and of the proof that any vector space has a basis.\nThe theory of modules (the analogue of vector spaces over rings instead of fields) is much more complicated, because the above equation may have several or no solutions. In particular systems of linear equations over a ring are much more difficult to solve than in the case of fields, even in the specially simple case of the ring formula_17 of the integers.\nFinite fields: cryptography and coding theory.\nA widely applied cryptographic routine uses the fact that discrete exponentiation, i.e., computing\n\"a\"\"n\" = \"a\" \u22c5 \"a\" \u22c5 \u22ef \u22c5 \"a\" (\"n\" factors, for an integer \"n\" \u2265 1)\nin a (large) finite field F\"q\" can be performed much more efficiently than the discrete logarithm, which is the inverse operation, i.e., determining the solution \"n\" to an equation\n\"a\"\"n\" = \"b\".\nIn elliptic curve cryptography, the multiplication in a finite field is replaced by the operation of adding points on an elliptic curve, i.e., the solutions of an equation of the form\n\"y\"2 = \"x\"3 + \"ax\" + \"b\".\nFinite fields are also used in coding theory and combinatorics.\nGeometry: field of functions.\nFunctions on a suitable topological space \"X\" into a field k can be added and multiplied pointwise, e.g., the product of two functions is defined by the product of their values within the domain:\n(\"f\" \u22c5 \"g\")(\"x\") = \"f\"(\"x\") \u22c5 \"g\"(\"x\").\nThis makes these functions a k-commutative algebra.\nFor having a \"field\" of functions, one must consider algebras of functions that are integral domains. In this case the ratios of two functions, i.e., expressions of the form\nformula_18\nform a field, called field of functions.\nThis occurs in two main cases. When \"X\" is a complex manifold \"X\". In this case, one considers the algebra of holomorphic functions, i.e., complex differentiable functions. Their ratios form the field of meromorphic functions on \"X\".\nThe function field of an algebraic variety \"X\" (a geometric object defined as the common zeros of polynomial equations) consists of ratios of regular functions, i.e., ratios of polynomial functions on the variety. The function field of the \"n\"-dimensional space over a field \"k\" is \"k\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"x\"\"n\"), i.e., the field consisting of ratios of polynomials in \"n\" indeterminates. The function field of \"X\" is the same as the one of any open dense subvariety. In other words, the function field is insensitive to replacing \"X\" by a (slightly) smaller subvariety.\nThe function field is invariant under isomorphism and birational equivalence of varieties. It is therefore an important tool for the study of abstract algebraic varieties and for the classification of algebraic varieties. For example, the dimension, which equals the transcendence degree of \"k\"(\"X\"), is invariant under birational equivalence. For curves (i.e., the dimension is one), the function field \"k\"(\"X\") is very close to \"X\": if \"X\" is smooth and proper (the analogue of being compact), \"X\" can be reconstructed, up to isomorphism, from its field of functions. In higher dimension the function field remembers less, but still decisive information about \"X\". The study of function fields and their geometric meaning in higher dimensions is referred to as birational geometry. The minimal model program attempts to identify the simplest (in a certain precise sense) algebraic varieties with a prescribed function field.\nNumber theory: global fields.\nGlobal fields are in the limelight in algebraic number theory and arithmetic geometry.\nThey are, by definition, number fields (finite extensions of Q) or function fields over F\"q\" (finite extensions of F\"q\"(\"t\")). As for local fields, these two types of fields share several similar features, even though they are of characteristic 0 and positive characteristic, respectively. This function field analogy can help to shape mathematical expectations, often first by understanding questions about function fields, and later treating the number field case. The latter is often more difficult. For example, the Riemann hypothesis concerning the zeros of the Riemann zeta function (open as of 2017) can be regarded as being parallel to the Weil conjectures (proven in 1974 by Pierre Deligne).\nCyclotomic fields are among the most intensely studied number fields. They are of the form Q(\u03b6\"n\"), where \u03b6\"n\" is a primitive \"n\"-th root of unity, i.e., a complex number satisfying \u03b6\"n\" = 1 and \u03b6\"m\" \u2260 1 for all \"m\" &lt; \"n\". For \"n\" being a regular prime, Kummer used cyclotomic fields to prove Fermat's Last Theorem, which asserts the non-existence of rational nonzero solutions to the equation\n\"x\"\"n\" + \"y\"\"n\" = \"z\"\"n\".\nLocal fields are completions of global fields. Ostrowski's theorem asserts that the only completions of Q, a global field, are the local fields Q\"p\" and R. Studying arithmetic questions in global fields may sometimes be done by looking at the corresponding questions locally. This technique is called the local-global principle. For example, the Hasse\u2013Minkowski theorem reduces the problem of finding rational solutions of quadratic equations to solving these equations in R and Q\"p\", whose solutions can easily be described.\nUnlike for local fields, the Galois groups of global fields are not known. Inverse Galois theory studies the (unsolved) problem whether any finite group is the Galois group Gal(\"F\"/Q) for some number field \"F\". Class field theory describes the abelian extensions, i.e., ones with abelian Galois group, or equivalently the abelianized Galois groups of global fields. A classical statement, the Kronecker\u2013Weber theorem, describes the maximal abelian Qab extension of Q: it is the field\nQ(\u03b6\"n\", \"n\" \u2265 2)\nobtained by adjoining all primitive \"n\"-th roots of unity. Kronecker's Jugendtraum asks for a similarly explicit description of \"F\"ab of general number fields \"F\". For imaginary quadratic fields, formula_19, \"d\" &gt; 0, the theory of complex multiplication describes \"F\"ab using elliptic curves. For general number fields, no such explicit description is known.\nRelated notions.\nIn addition to the additional structure that fields may enjoy, fields admit various other related notions. Since in any field 0 \u2260 1, any field has at least two elements. Nonetheless, there is a concept of field with one element, which is suggested to be a limit of the finite fields F\"p\", as \"p\" tends to 1. In addition to division rings, there are various other weaker algebraic structures related to fields such as quasifields, near-fields and semifields.\nThere are also proper classes with field structure, which are sometimes called Fields, with a capital F. The surreal numbers form a Field containing the reals, and would be a field except for the fact that they are a proper class, not a set. The nimbers, a concept from game theory, form such a Field as well.\nDivision rings.\nDropping one or several axioms in the definition of a field leads to other algebraic structures. As was mentioned above, commutative rings satisfy all field axioms except for the existence of multiplicative inverses. Dropping instead commutativity of multiplication leads to the concept of a \"division ring\" or \"skew field\"; sometimes associativity is weakened as well. The only division rings that are finite-dimensional R-vector spaces are R itself, C (which is a field), and the quaternions H (in which multiplication is non-commutative). This result is known as the Frobenius theorem. The octonions O, for which multiplication is neither commutative nor associative, is a normed alternative division algebra, but is not a division ring. This fact was proved using methods of algebraic topology in 1958 by Michel Kervaire, Raoul Bott, and John Milnor. The non-existence of an odd-dimensional division algebra is more classical. It can be deduced from the hairy ball theorem illustrated at the right.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10604", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10604", "title": "Film Festivals", "text": ""}
{"id": "10605", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10605", "title": "FrenchMaterialism", "text": ""}
{"id": "10606", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10606", "title": "Factorial", "text": "Product of numbers from 1 to n\nIn mathematics, the factorial of a non-negative integer formula_1, denoted by formula_2, is the product of all positive integers less than or equal to formula_1. The factorial of formula_1 also equals the product of formula_1 with the next smaller factorial:\nformula_6\nFor example,\nformula_7\nThe value of 0! is 1, according to the convention for an empty product.\nFactorials have been discovered in several ancient cultures, notably in Indian mathematics in the canonical works of Jain literature, and by Jewish mystics in the Talmudic book \"Sefer Yetzirah\". The factorial operation is encountered in many areas of mathematics, notably in combinatorics, where its most basic use counts the possible distinct sequences \u2013 the permutations \u2013 of formula_1 distinct objects: there are formula_2 In mathematical analysis, factorials are used in power series for the exponential function and other functions, and they also have applications in algebra, number theory, probability theory, and computer science.\nMuch of the mathematics of the factorial function was developed beginning in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.\nStirling's approximation provides an accurate approximation to the factorial of large numbers, showing that it grows more quickly than exponential growth. Legendre's formula describes the exponents of the prime numbers in a prime factorization of the factorials, and can be used to count the trailing zeros of the factorials. Daniel Bernoulli and Leonhard Euler interpolated the factorial function to a continuous function of complex numbers, except at the negative integers, the (offset) gamma function.\nMany other notable functions and number sequences are closely related to the factorials, including the binomial coefficients, double factorials, falling factorials, primorials, and subfactorials. Implementations of the factorial function are commonly used as an example of different computer programming styles, and are included in scientific calculators and scientific computing software libraries. Although directly computing large factorials using the product formula or recurrence is not efficient, faster algorithms are known, matching to within a constant factor the time for fast multiplication algorithms for numbers with the same number of digits.\nHistory.\nThe concept of factorials has arisen independently in many cultures:\nFrom the late 15th century onward, factorials became the subject of study by western mathematicians. In a 1494 treatise, Italian mathematician Luca Pacioli calculated factorials up to 11!, in connection with a problem of dining table arrangements. Christopher Clavius discussed factorials in a 1603 commentary on the work of Johannes de Sacrobosco, and in the 1640s, French polymath Marin Mersenne published large (but not entirely correct) tables of factorials, up to 64!, based on the work of Clavius. The power series for the exponential function, with the reciprocals of factorials for its coefficients, was first formulated in 1676 by Isaac Newton in a letter to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. Other important works of early European mathematics on factorials include extensive coverage in a 1685 treatise by John Wallis, a study of their approximate values for large values of formula_1 by Abraham de Moivre in 1721, a 1729 letter from James Stirling to de Moivre stating what became known as Stirling's approximation, and work at the same time by Daniel Bernoulli and Leonhard Euler formulating the continuous extension of the factorial function to the gamma function. Adrien-Marie Legendre included Legendre's formula, describing the exponents in the factorization of factorials into prime powers, in an 1808 text on number theory.\nThe notation formula_2 for factorials was introduced by the French mathematician Christian Kramp in 1808. Many other notations have also been used. Another later notation, in which the argument of the factorial was half-enclosed by the left and bottom sides of a box, was popular for some time in Britain and America but fell out of use, perhaps because it is difficult to typeset. The word \"factorial\" (originally French: \"factorielle\") was first used in 1800 by Louis Fran\u00e7ois Antoine Arbogast, in the first work on Fa\u00e0 di Bruno's formula, but referring to a more general concept of products of arithmetic progressions. The \"factors\" that this name refers to are the terms of the product formula for the factorial.\nDefinition.\nThe factorial function of a positive integer formula_1 is defined by the product of all positive integers not greater than formula_1\nformula_14\nThis may be written more concisely in product notation as\nformula_15\nIf this product formula is changed to keep all but the last term, it would define a product of the same form, for a smaller factorial. This leads to a recurrence relation, according to which each value of the factorial function can be obtained by multiplying the previous value \nformula_16\nFor example, \nFactorial of zero.\nThe factorial of formula_17 is formula_18, or in symbols, There are several motivations for this definition:\nApplications.\nThe earliest uses of the factorial function involve counting permutations: there are formula_2 different ways of arranging formula_1 distinct objects into a sequence. Factorials appear more broadly in many formulas in combinatorics, to account for different orderings of objects. For instance the binomial coefficients formula_26 count the formula_27-element combinations (subsets of formula_27 elements) from a set with formula_1 elements, and can be computed from factorials using the formula formula_30 The Stirling numbers of the first kind sum to the factorials, and count the permutations of formula_1 grouped into subsets with the same numbers of cycles. Another combinatorial application is in counting derangements, permutations that do not leave any element in its original position; the number of derangements of formula_1 items is the nearest integer to formula_33.\nIn algebra, the factorials arise through the binomial theorem, which uses binomial coefficients to expand powers of sums. They also occur in the coefficients used to relate certain families of polynomials to each other, for instance in Newton's identities for symmetric polynomials. Their use in counting permutations can also be restated algebraically: the factorials are the orders of finite symmetric groups. In calculus, factorials occur in Fa\u00e0 di Bruno's formula for chaining higher derivatives. In mathematical analysis, factorials frequently appear in the denominators of power series, most notably in the series for the exponential function, formula_34\nand in the coefficients of other Taylor series (in particular those of the trigonometric and hyperbolic functions), where they cancel factors of formula_2 coming from the formula_1th derivative of formula_37. This usage of factorials in power series connects back to analytic combinatorics through the exponential generating function, which for a combinatorial class with formula_38 elements of size formula_39 is defined as the power series formula_40\nIn number theory, the most salient property of factorials is the divisibility of formula_2 by all positive integers up to formula_1, described more precisely for prime factors by Legendre's formula. It follows that arbitrarily large prime numbers can be found as the prime factors of the numbers\nformula_43, leading to a proof of Euclid's theorem that the number of primes is infinite. When formula_43 is itself prime it is called a factorial prime; relatedly, Brocard's problem, also posed by Srinivasa Ramanujan, concerns the existence of square numbers of the form formula_45. In contrast, the numbers formula_46 must all be composite, proving the existence of arbitrarily large prime gaps. An elementary proof of Bertrand's postulate on the existence of a prime in any interval of the form formula_47, one of the first results of Paul Erd\u0151s, was based on the divisibility properties of factorials. The factorial number system is a mixed radix notation for numbers in which the place values of each digit are factorials.\nFactorials are used extensively in probability theory, for instance in the Poisson distribution and in the probabilities of random permutations. In computer science, beyond appearing in the analysis of brute-force searches over permutations, factorials arise in the lower bound of formula_48 on the number of comparisons needed to comparison sort a set of formula_1 items, and in the analysis of chained hash tables, where the distribution of keys per cell can be accurately approximated by a Poisson distribution. Moreover, factorials naturally appear in formulae from quantum and statistical physics, where one often considers all the possible permutations of a set of particles. In statistical mechanics, calculations of entropy such as Boltzmann's entropy formula or the Sackur\u2013Tetrode equation must correct the count of microstates by dividing by the factorials of the numbers of each type of indistinguishable particle to avoid the Gibbs paradox. Quantum physics provides the underlying reason for why these corrections are necessary.\nProperties.\nGrowth and approximation.\nAs a function of formula_1, the factorial has faster than exponential growth, but grows more slowly than a double exponential function. Its growth rate is similar to formula_51, but slower by an exponential factor. One way of approaching this result is by taking the natural logarithm of the factorial, which turns its product formula into a sum, and then estimating the sum by an integral:\nformula_52\nExponentiating the result (and ignoring the negligible formula_53 term) approximates formula_2 as formula_55.\nMore carefully bounding the sum both above and below by an integral, using the trapezoid rule, shows that this estimate needs a correction factor proportional to formula_56. The constant of proportionality for this correction can be found from the Wallis product, which expresses formula_57 as a limiting ratio of factorials and powers of two. The result of these corrections is Stirling's approximation:\nformula_58\nHere, the formula_59 symbol means that, as formula_1 goes to infinity, the ratio between the left and right sides approaches one in the limit.\nStirling's formula provides the first term in an asymptotic series that becomes even more accurate when taken to greater numbers of terms:\nformula_61\nAn alternative version uses only odd exponents in the correction terms:\nformula_62\nMany other variations of these formulas have also been developed, by Srinivasa Ramanujan, Bill Gosper, and others.\nThe binary logarithm of the factorial, used to analyze comparison sorting, can be very accurately estimated using Stirling's approximation. In the formula below, the formula_63 term invokes big O notation.\nformula_64\nDivisibility and digits.\nThe product formula for the factorial implies that formula_2 is divisible by all prime numbers that are at most formula_1, and by no larger prime numbers. More precise information about its divisibility is given by Legendre's formula, which gives the exponent of each prime formula_67 in the prime factorization of formula_2 as\nformula_69\nHere formula_70 denotes the sum of the base-formula_67 digits of formula_1, and the exponent given by this formula can also be interpreted in advanced mathematics as the p-adic valuation of the factorial. Applying Legendre's formula to the product formula for binomial coefficients produces Kummer's theorem, a similar result on the exponent of each prime in the factorization of a binomial coefficient. Grouping the prime factors of the factorial into prime powers in different ways produces the multiplicative partitions of factorials.\nThe special case of Legendre's formula for formula_73 gives the number of trailing zeros in the decimal representation of the factorials. According to this formula, the number of zeros can be obtained by subtracting the base-5 digits of formula_1 from formula_1, and dividing the result by four. Legendre's formula implies that the exponent of the prime formula_76 is always larger than the exponent for so each factor of five can be paired with a factor of two to produce one of these trailing zeros. The leading digits of the factorials are distributed according to Benford's law. Every sequence of digits, in any base, is the sequence of initial digits of some factorial number in that base.\nAnother result on divisibility of factorials, Wilson's theorem, states that formula_77 is divisible by formula_1 if and only if formula_1 is a prime number. For any given integer formula_80, the Kempner function of formula_80 is given by the smallest formula_1 for which formula_80 divides formula_2. For almost all numbers (all but a subset of exceptions with asymptotic density zero), it coincides with the largest prime factor of formula_80.\nThe product of two factorials, formula_86, always evenly divides There are infinitely many factorials that equal the product of other factorials: if formula_1 is itself any product of factorials, then formula_2 equals that same product multiplied by one more factorial, formula_89. The only known examples of factorials that are products of other factorials but are not of this \"trivial\" form are and It would follow from the abc conjecture that there are only finitely many nontrivial examples.\nThe greatest common divisor of the values of a primitive polynomial of degree formula_90 over the integers evenly divides \nContinuous interpolation and non-integer generalization.\nThere are infinitely many ways to extend the factorials to a continuous function. The most widely used of these uses the gamma function, which can be defined for positive real numbers as the integral\nformula_91\nThe resulting function is related to the factorial of a non-negative integer formula_1 by the equation\nformula_93\nwhich can be used as a definition of the factorial for non-integer arguments.\nAt all values formula_80 for which both formula_95 and formula_96 are defined, the gamma function obeys the functional equation\nformula_97\ngeneralizing the recurrence relation for the factorials.\nThe same integral converges more generally for any complex number formula_98 whose real part is positive. It can be extended to the non-integer points in the rest of the complex plane by solving for Euler's reflection formula\nformula_99\nHowever, this formula cannot be used at integers because, for them, the formula_100 term would produce a division by zero. The result of this extension process is an analytic function, the analytic continuation of the integral formula for the gamma function. It has a nonzero value at all complex numbers, except for the non-positive integers where it has simple poles. Correspondingly, this provides a definition for the factorial at all complex numbers other than the negative integers.\nOne property of the gamma function, distinguishing it from other continuous interpolations of the factorials, is given by the Bohr\u2013Mollerup theorem, which states that the gamma function (offset by one) is the only log-convex function on the positive real numbers that interpolates the factorials and obeys the same functional equation. A related uniqueness theorem of Helmut Wielandt states that the complex gamma function and its scalar multiples are the only holomorphic functions on the positive complex half-plane that obey the functional equation and remain bounded for complex numbers with real part between 1 and 2.\nOther complex functions that interpolate the factorial values include Hadamard's gamma function, which is an entire function over all the complex numbers, including the non-positive integers. In the p-adic numbers, it is not possible to continuously interpolate the factorial function directly, because the factorials of large integers (a dense subset of the p-adics) converge to zero according to Legendre's formula, forcing any continuous function that is close to their values to be zero everywhere. Instead, the p-adic gamma function provides a continuous interpolation of a modified form of the factorial, omitting the factors in the factorial that are divisible by p.\nThe digamma function is the logarithmic derivative of the gamma function. Just as the gamma function provides a continuous interpolation of the factorials, offset by one, the digamma function provides a continuous interpolation of the harmonic numbers, offset by the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant.\nComputation.\nThe factorial function is a common feature in scientific calculators. It is also included in scientific programming libraries such as the Python mathematical functions module and the Boost C++ library. If efficiency is not a concern, computing factorials is trivial: just successively multiply a variable initialized to formula_18 by the integers up to formula_1. The simplicity of this computation makes it a common example in the use of different computer programming styles and methods.\nThe computation of formula_2 can be expressed in pseudocode using iteration as\n define factorial(\"n\"):\n \"f\" := 1\n for \"i\" := 1, 2, 3, ..., \"n\":\n \"f\" := \"f\" * \"i\"\n return \"f\"\nor using recursion based on its recurrence relation as\n define factorial(\"n\"):\n if (\"n\" = 0) return 1\n return \"n\" * factorial(\"n\" \u2212 1)\nOther methods suitable for its computation include memoization, dynamic programming, and functional programming. The computational complexity of these algorithms may be analyzed using the unit-cost random-access machine model of computation, in which each arithmetic operation takes constant time and each number uses a constant amount of storage space. In this model, these methods can compute formula_2 in time formula_105, and the iterative version uses space formula_63. Unless optimized for tail recursion, the recursive version takes linear space to store its call stack. However, this model of computation is only suitable when formula_1 is small enough to allow formula_2 to fit into a machine word. The values 12! and 20! are the largest factorials that can be stored in, respectively, the 32-bit and 64-bit integers. Floating point can represent larger factorials, but approximately rather than exactly, and will still overflow for factorials larger than \nThe exact computation of larger factorials involves arbitrary-precision arithmetic, because of fast growth and integer overflow. Time of computation can be analyzed as a function of the number of digits or bits in the result. By Stirling's formula, formula_2 has formula_110 bits. The Sch\u00f6nhage\u2013Strassen algorithm can produce a formula_111-bit product in time formula_112, and faster multiplication algorithms taking time formula_113 are known. However, computing the factorial involves repeated products, rather than a single multiplication, so these time bounds do not apply directly. In this setting, computing formula_2 by multiplying the numbers from 1 to formula_1 in sequence is inefficient, because it involves formula_1 multiplications, a constant fraction of which take time formula_117 each, giving total time formula_118. A better approach is to perform the multiplications as a divide-and-conquer algorithm that multiplies a sequence of formula_39 numbers by splitting it into two subsequences of formula_120 numbers, multiplies each subsequence, and combines the results with one last multiplication. This approach to the factorial takes total time formula_121: one logarithm comes from the number of bits in the factorial, a second comes from the multiplication algorithm, and a third comes from the divide and conquer.\nEven better efficiency is obtained by computing \"n\"! from its prime factorization, based on the principle that exponentiation by squaring is faster than expanding an exponent into a product. An algorithm for this by Arnold Sch\u00f6nhage begins by finding the list of the primes up to formula_1, for instance using the sieve of Eratosthenes, and uses Legendre's formula to compute the exponent for each prime. Then it computes the product of the prime powers with these exponents, using a recursive algorithm, as follows:\nThe product of all primes up to formula_1 is an formula_105-bit number, by the prime number theorem, so the time for the first step is formula_117, with one logarithm coming from the divide and conquer and another coming from the multiplication algorithm. In the recursive calls to the algorithm, the prime number theorem can again be invoked to prove that the numbers of bits in the corresponding products decrease by a constant factor at each level of recursion, so the total time for these steps at all levels of recursion adds in a geometric series to formula_117. The time for the squaring in the second step and the multiplication in the third step are again formula_117, because each is a single multiplication of a number with formula_128 bits. Again, at each level of recursion the numbers involved have a constant fraction as many bits (because otherwise repeatedly squaring them would produce too large a final result) so again the amounts of time for these steps in the recursive calls add in a geometric series to formula_117. Consequentially, the whole algorithm takes time formula_117, proportional to a single multiplication with the same number of bits in its result.\nRelated sequences and functions.\nSeveral other integer sequences are similar to or related to the factorials:\nThe alternating factorial is the absolute value of the alternating sum of the first formula_1 factorials, These have mainly been studied in connection with their primality; only finitely many of them can be prime, but a complete list of primes of this form is not known.\nThe Bhargava factorials are a family of integer sequences defined by Manjul Bhargava with similar number-theoretic properties to the factorials, including the factorials themselves as a special case.\nThe product of all the odd integers up to some odd positive integer formula_1 is called the double factorial of formula_1, and denoted by That is, formula_134 For example, 9!! = 1 \u00d7 3 \u00d7 5 \u00d7 7 \u00d7 9 = 945. Double factorials are used in trigonometric integrals, in expressions for the gamma function at half-integers and the volumes of hyperspheres, and in counting binary trees and perfect matchings.\nJust as triangular numbers sum the numbers from formula_18 to formula_1, and factorials take their product, the exponential factorial exponentiates. The exponential factorial is defined recursively &lt;/math&gt;.}} For example, the exponential factorial of 4 is formula_137 These numbers grow much more quickly than regular factorials.\nThe notations formula_138 or formula_139 are sometimes used to represent the product of the formula_1 integers counting up to and including formula_80, equal to formula_142. This is also known as a falling factorial or backward factorial, and the formula_138 notation is a Pochhammer symbol. Falling factorials count the number of different sequences of formula_1 distinct items that can be drawn from a universe of formula_80 items. They occur as coefficients in the higher derivatives of polynomials, and in the factorial moments of random variables.\nThe hyperfactorial of formula_1 is the product formula_147. These numbers form the discriminants of Hermite polynomials. They can be continuously interpolated by the K-function, and obey analogues to Stirling's formula and Wilson's theorem.\nThe Jordan\u2013P\u00f3lya numbers are the products of factorials, allowing repetitions. Every tree has a symmetry group whose number of symmetries is a Jordan\u2013P\u00f3lya number, and every Jordan\u2013P\u00f3lya number counts the symmetries of some tree.\nThe primorial formula_148 is the product of prime numbers less than or equal to formula_1; this construction gives them some similar divisibility properties to factorials, but unlike factorials they are squarefree. As with the factorial primes formula_43, researchers have studied primorial primes \nThe subfactorial yields the number of derangements of a set of formula_1 objects. It is sometimes denoted formula_152, and equals the closest integer to formula_33.\nThe superfactorial of formula_1 is the product of the first formula_1 factorials. The superfactorials are continuously interpolated by the Barnes G-function.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10609", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10609", "title": "Film Genres", "text": ""}
{"id": "10610", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10610", "title": "Film History/France", "text": ""}
{"id": "10611", "revid": "4844128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10611", "title": "Film History/Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "10612", "revid": "33501121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10612", "title": "Cinema of Germany", "text": "The film industry in Germany can be traced back to the late 19th century. German cinema made major technical and artistic contributions to early film, broadcasting and television technology. Babelsberg became a household synonym for the early 20th century film industry in Europe, similar to Hollywood later.\nGermany witnessed major changes to its identity during the 20th and 21st century. Those changes determined the periodisation of national cinema into a succession of distinct eras and movements.\nHistory.\n1895\u20131918 German Empire.\nThe history of cinema in Germany can be traced back to the years shortly after the medium's birth. On 1 November 1895, Max Skladanowsky and his brother Emil demonstrated their self-invented film projector, the Bioscop, at the Wintergarten music hall in Berlin. A 15-minute series of eight short films were shown \u2013 the first screening of films to a paying audience. This performance pre-dated the first paying public display of the Lumi\u00e8re brothers' Cinematographe in Paris on 28 December of the same year, a performance that Max Skladanowsky attended and at which he was able to ascertain that the Cinematographe was technically superior to his Bioscop. Other German film pioneers included the Berliners Oskar Messter and Max Gliewe, two of several individuals who independently in 1896 first used a Geneva drive (which allows the film to be advanced intermittently one frame at a time) in a projector, and the cinematographer Guido Seeber.\nIn its earliest days, the cinematograph was perceived as an attraction for upper class audiences, but the novelty of moving pictures did not last long. Soon, trivial short films were being shown as fairground attractions aimed at the working class and lower-middle class. The booths in which these films were shown were known in Germany somewhat disparagingly as \"Kintopps\". Film-makers with an artistic bent attempted to counter this view of cinema with longer films based on literary models, and the first German \"artistic\" films began to be produced from around 1910, an example being the Edgar Allan Poe adaptation \"The Student of Prague\" (1913) which was co-directed by Paul Wegener and Stellan Rye, photographed by Guido Seeber and starring actors from Max Reinhardt's company.\nEarly film theorists in Germany began to write about the significance of \"Schaulust\", or \"visual pleasure\", for the audience, including the Dada movement writer Walter Serner: \"If one looks to where cinema receives its ultimate power, into these strangely flickering eyes that point far back into human history, suddenly it stands there in all its massiveness: visual pleasure.\" Visually striking sets and makeup were key to the style of the expressionist films that were produced shortly after the First World War.\nCinemas themselves began to be established landmarks in the years immediately before World War I. Before this, German filmmakers would tour with their works, travelling from fairground to fairground. The earliest ongoing cinemas were set up in cafes and pubs by owners who saw a way of attracting more customers. The storefront cinema was called a \"Kientopp\", and this is where films were viewed for the most part before the First World War broke out. The first standalone, dedicated cinema in Germany was opened in Mannheim in 1906, and by 1910, there were over 1000 cinemas operating in Germany. Henny Porten and Asta Nielsen (the latter originally from Denmark) were the first major film stars in Germany.\nPrior to 1914, however, many foreign films were imported. In the era of the silent film there were no language boundaries and Danish and Italian films were particularly popular in Germany. The public's desire to see more films with particular actors led to the development in Germany, as elsewhere, of the phenomenon of the film star; the actress Henny Porten was one of the earliest German stars. Public desire to see popular film stories being continued encouraged the production of film serials, especially in the genre of mystery films, which is where the director Fritz Lang began his illustrious career.\nThe outbreak of World War I and the subsequent boycott of, for example, French films left a noticeable gap in the market. By 1916, there already existed some 2000 fixed venues for movie performances and initially film screenings were supplemented or even replaced by variety turns. In 1917 a process of concentration and partial nationalisation of the German film industry began with the founding of Universum Film AG (UFA), which was partly a reaction to the very effective use that the Allied Powers had found for the new medium for the purpose of propaganda. Under the aegis of the military, so-called \"Vaterland\" films were produced, which equalled the Allies' films in the matter of propaganda and disparagement of the enemy. Audiences however did not care to swallow the patriotic medicine without the accompanying sugar of the light-entertainment films which, consequently, Ufa also promoted. The German film industry soon became the largest in Europe.\n1918\u20131933 Weimar Republic.\nThe German film industry, which was protected during the war by the ban on foreign films import, became exposed at the end of the war to the international film industry while having to face an embargo, this time on its own films. Many countries banned the import of German films and audiences themselves were resisting anything that was \"German\". But the ban imposed on German films involved commercial considerations as well \u2013 as an American president of one of the film companies was quoted, \"an influx of such films in the United States would throw thousands of our own... out of work, because it would be absolutely impossible for the American producers to compete with the German producers\". At home, the German film industry confronted an unstable economic situation and the devaluation of the currency made it difficult for the smaller production companies to function. Film industry financing was a fragile business and expensive productions occasionally led to bankruptcy. In 1925 UFA itself was forced to go into a disadvantageous partnership called Parufamet with the American studios Paramount and MGM, before being taken over by the nationalist industrialist and newspaper owner Alfred Hugenberg in 1927.\nNevertheless, the German film industry enjoyed an unprecedented development \u2013 during the 14 years which comprise the Weimar period, an average of 250 film were being produced each year, a total of 3,500 full-feature films. Apart from UFA, about 230 film companies were active in Berlin alone. This industry was attracting producers and directors from all over Europe. The fact that the films were silent and language was not a factor, enabled even foreign actors, like the Danish film star Asta Nielsen or the American Louise Brooks, to be hired even for leading roles. This period can also be noted for new technological developments in film making and experimentation in set design and lighting, led by UFA. Babelsberg Studio, which was incorporated into UFA, expanded massively and gave the German film industry a highly developed infrastructure. Babelsberg remained the centre of German filmmaking for many years, became the largest film studio in Europe and produced most of the films in this \"golden era\" of German cinema. In essence it was \"the German equivalent to Hollywood\".\nDue to the unstable economic condition and in an attempt to deal with modest production budgets, filmmakers were trying to reach the largest audience possible and in that, to maximize their revenues. This led to films being made in a vast array of genres and styles.\nOne of the main film genres associated with the Weimar Republic cinema is German Expressionism which was inspired by the expressionist movement in art. Expressionist movies relied heavily on symbolism and artistic imagery rather than stark realism to tell their stories. Given the grim mood in post-World War I, it was not surprising that these films focused heavily on crime and horror. The film usually credited with sparking the popularity of expressionism is Robert Wiene's \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\" (1920), produced by Erich Pommer. The film tells the story of a demented hypnotist who is using a sleepwalker to perform a series of murders. The film featured a dark and twisted visual style \u2013 the set was unrealistic with geometric images painted on the floor and shapes in light and shadow cast on walls, the acting was exaggerated and the costumes bizarre. These stylistic elements became trademarks of this cinematic movement. Other notable works of Expressionism are Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau's \"Nosferatu\" (1922), a classic period-piece horror film that remains the first feature-length film adaptation of \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\", Carl Boese and Paul Wegener's \"\" (1920), a Gothic retelling of the Jewish folktale, and \"Metropolis\" (1927), a legendary science-fiction epic directed by Fritz Lang. The Expressionist movement began to wane during the mid-1920s, but perhaps the fact that its main creators moved to Hollywood, California, allowed this style to remain influential in world cinema for years to come, particularly in American horror films and film noir and in the works of European directors such as Jean Cocteau and Ingmar Bergman.\nDespite its significance, expressionist cinema was not the dominant genre of this era. Many other genres such as period dramas, melodramas, romantic comedies, and films of social and political nature, were much more prevalent and definitely more popular.\nThe \"master\" of period-dramas was undoubtedly Ernst Lubitsch. His most notable films of this genre were \"Madame DuBarry\" (1919) which portrayed the French Revolution through the eyes of the King of France's mistress, and the film \"Anna Boleyn\" (1920) on the tragic end of King Henry VIII's second wife. In these films, Lubitsch presented prominent historic personalities who are caught up by their weaknesses and petty urges and thus, ironically, become responsible for huge historical events. Despite modest budgets, his films included extravagant scenes which were meant to appeal to a wide audience and insure a wide international distribution.\nAs the genre of expressionism began to diminish, the genre of the New Objectivity (die neue Sachlichkeit) began to take its place. It was influenced by new issues which occupied the public in those years, as the rampant inflation caused deterioration in the economic status of the middle class. These films, often called \"street films\" or \"asphalt films\", tried to reflect reality in all its complexity and ugliness. They focused on objects surrounding the characters and cynically symbolized the despair felt by the German people, whose lives were shattered after the war. The most prominent film maker who is associated with this genre is Georg Wilhelm Pabst in his films such as: \"Joyless Street\" (1925), \"Pandora's Box\" (1929), and \"The Loves of Jeanne Ney\" (1927). Pabst is also credited with innovations in film editing, such as reversing the angle of the camera or cutting between two camera angles, which enhanced film continuity and later became standards of the industry.\nPabst is also identified with another genre which branched from the New Objectivity \u2013 that of social and political films. These filmmakers dared to confront sensitive and controversial social issues which engaged the public in those days; such as anti-Semitism, prostitution and homosexuality. To a large extent, Weimar cinema was playing a vibrant and important role by leading public debate on those issues. Pabst, in his film \"Diary of a Lost Girl\" (1929), tells the story of a young woman who has a child out of wedlock, is thrown out into the street by her family and has to resort to prostitution to survive. As early as 1919, Richard Oswald's film \"Different from the Others\" portrayed a man torn between his homosexual tendencies and the moral and social conventions. It is considered to be the first German film to deal with homosexuality and some researchers even believe it to be the first in the world to examine this issue explicitly. That same year, the film \"Ritual Murder\" (1919) by Jewish film producer Max Nivelli came to the screen. This film was the first to make the German public aware of the consequences of anti-Semitism and xenophobia. It portrayed a \"pogrom\" which is carried out against the Jewish inhabitants of a village in Tsarist Russia. In the background, a love story also evolves between a young Russian student and the daughter of the leader of the Jewish community, something that was considered a taboo at the time. Later on, in an attempt to reflect the rapidly growing anti-Semitic atmosphere, Oswald confronted the same issue with his film \"Dreyfus\" (1930), which portrayed the 1894 political scandal of the \"Dreyfus affair\", which until today remains one of the most striking examples of miscarriage of justice and blatant anti-Semitism.\nThe polarised politics of the Weimar period were also reflected in some of its films. A series of patriotic films about Prussian history, starring Otto Geb\u00fchr as Frederick the Great were produced throughout the 1920s and were popular with the nationalist right-wing, who strongly criticised the \"asphalt\" films' decadence. Another dark chapter of the Weimar period was reflected in Joseph Delmont's film \"Humanity Unleashed\" (1920). The film was an adaptation of a novel by the same name, written by Max Glass and published in 1919. The novel described a dark world consumed by disease and war. The filmmakers decided to take the story to a more contemporary context by reflecting the growing fear among the German public of political radicalization. They produced what was to become the first fictional account of the events of January 1919 in Berlin, the so-called \"Spartacist Uprising\". This film is also considered one of the anti-Bolshevik films of that era.\nAnother important film genre of the Weimar years was the Kammerspiel or \"chamber drama\", which was borrowed from the theater and developed by stage director, who would later become a film producer and director himself, Max Reinhardt. This style was in many ways a reaction against the spectacle of expressionism and thus tended to revolve around ordinary people from the lower-middle-class. Films of this genre were often called \"instinct\" films because they emphasized the impulses and intimate psychology of the characters. The sets were kept to a minimum and there was abundant use of camera movements to add complexity to the rather intimate and simple spaces. Associated with this particular style is also screenwriter Carl Mayer and films such as Murnau's \"Last Laugh (1924).\"\nNature films, a genre referred to as \"Bergfilm,\" also became popular. Most known in this category are the films by director Arnold Fanck, in which individuals were shown battling against nature in the mountains. Animators and directors of experimental films such as; Lotte Reiniger, Oskar Fischinger and Walter Ruttmann, were also very active in Germany in the 1920s. Ruttman's experimental documentary \"\" (1927) epitomised the energy of 1920s Berlin.\nThe arrival of sound at the very end of the 1920s, produced a final artistic flourish of German film before the collapse of the Weimar Republic in 1933. As early as 1918, three inventors came up with the Tri-Ergon sound-on-film system and tried to introduce it to the industry between 1922 and 1926. UFA showed an interest, but possibly due to financial difficulties, never made a sound film. But in the late 1920s, sound production and distribution were starting to be adopted by the German film industry and by 1932 Germany had 3,800 cinemas equipped to play sound films. The first filmmakers who experimented with the new technology often shot the film in several versions, using several soundtracks in different languages. The film \"The Blue Angel\" (1930), directed by the Austrian Josef von Sternberg and produced by Erich Pommer, was also shot in two versions \u2013 German and English, with a different supporting cast in each version. It is considered to be Germany's first \"talkie\" and will always be remembered as the film that made an international superstar of its lead actress Marlene Dietrich. Other notable early sound films, all from 1931, include Jutzi's adaptation to Alfred D\u00f6blin's novel \"Berlin Alexanderplatz\", Pabst's Bertolt Brecht adaptation \"The Threepenny Opera\" and Lang's \"M,\" as well as Hochbaum's \"Raid in St. Pauli\" (1932). Brecht was also one of the creators of the explicitly communist film \"Kuhle Wampe\" (1932), which was banned soon after its release.\nIn addition to developments in the industry itself, the Weimar period saw the birth of film criticism as a serious discipline whose practitioners included Rudolf Arnheim in \"Die Weltb\u00fchne\" and in \"Film als Kunst\" (1932), B\u00e9la Bal\u00e1zs in \"Der Sichtbare Mensch\" (1924), Siegfried Kracauer in the Frankfurter Zeitung, and Lotte H. Eisner in the \"Filmkurier\".\n1933\u20131945 Nazi Germany.\nThe uncertain economic and political situation in Weimar Germany had already led to a number of film-makers and performers leaving the country, primarily for the United States; Ernst Lubitsch moved to Hollywood as early as 1923, the Hungarian-born Michael Curtiz in 1926. Some 1,500 directors, producers, actors and other film professionals emigrated in the years after the Nazis came to power. Among them were such key figures as the producer Erich Pommer, the studio head of Ufa, stars Marlene Dietrich and Peter Lorre, and director Fritz Lang. Lang's exodus to America is legendary; it is said that \"Metropolis\" so greatly impressed Joseph Goebbels that he asked Lang to become the head of his propaganda film unit. Lang fled to America instead, where he had a long and prosperous career. Many up-and-coming German directors also fled to the U.S., having a major influence on American film as a result. A number of the Universal Horror films of the 1930s were directed by German emigrees, including Karl Freund, Joe May and Robert Siodmak. Directors Edgar Ulmer and Douglas Sirk and the Austrian-born screenwriter (and later director) Billy Wilder also emigrated from Nazi Germany to Hollywood success. Not all those in the film industry threatened by the Nazi regime were able to escape; the actor and director Kurt Gerron, for example, perished in a concentration camp.\nWithin weeks of the \"Machtergreifung\", Alfred Hugenberg had effectively turned over Ufa to the ends of the Nazis, excluding Jews from employment in the company in March 1933, several months before the foundation in June of the \"Reichsfilmkammer\" (Reich Chamber of Film), the body of the Nazi state charged with control of the film industry, which marked the official exclusion of Jews and foreigners from employment in the German film industry. As part of the process of \"Gleichschaltung\" all film production in Germany was subordinate to the \"Reichsfilmkammer\", which was directly responsible to Goebbel's Propaganda ministry, and all those employed in the industry had to be members of the \"Reichsfachschaft Film\". \"Non-Aryan\" film professionals and those whose politics or personal life were unacceptable to the Nazis were excluded from the \"Reichsfachschaft\" and thus denied employment in the industry. Some 3,000 individuals were affected by this employment ban. In addition, as journalists were also organised as a division of the Propaganda Ministry, Goebbels was able to abolish film criticism in 1936 and replace it with \"Filmbeobachtung\" (film observation); journalists could only report on the content of a film, not offer judgement on its artistic or other worth.\nWith the German film industry now effectively an arm of the totalitarian state, no films could be made that were not ostensibly in accord with the views of the ruling regime. However, despite the existence of anti-semitic propaganda works such as \"The Eternal Jew\" (1940)\u2014which was a box-office flop\u2014and the more sophisticated but equally anti-semitic \"Jud S\u00fc\u00df\" (1940), which achieved commercial success at home and elsewhere in Europe, the majority of German films from the National Socialist period were intended principally as works of entertainment. The import of foreign films was legally restricted after 1936 and the German industry, which was effectively nationalised in 1937, had to make up for the missing foreign films (above all American productions). Entertainment also became increasingly important in the later years of World War II when the cinema provided a distraction from Allied bombing and a string of German defeats. In both 1943 and 1944 cinema admissions in Germany exceeded a billion, and the biggest box office hits of the war years were \"Die gro\u00dfe Liebe\" (1942) and \"Wunschkonzert\" (1941), which both combine elements of the musical, wartime romance and patriotic propaganda, \"Frauen sind doch bessere Diplomaten\" (1941), a comic musical which was one of the earliest German films in colour, and \"Vienna Blood\" (1942), the adaptation of a Johann Strau\u00df comic operetta. \"Titanic\" (1943) was another big-budget epic that arguably inspired other films about the ill-fated ocean liner. The importance of the cinema as a tool of the state, both for its propaganda value and its ability to keep the populace entertained, can be seen in the filming history of Veit Harlan's \"Kolberg\" (1945), the most expensive film of the Nazi era, for the shooting of which tens of thousands of soldiers were diverted from their military positions to appear as extras.\nDespite the emigration of many film-makers and the political restrictions, the period was not without technical and aesthetic innovations, the introduction of Agfacolor film production being a notable example. Technical and aesthetic achievement could also be turned to the specific ends of the Nazi state, most spectacularly in the work of Leni Riefenstahl. Riefenstahl's \"Triumph of the Will\" (1935), documenting the 1934 Nuremberg Rally, and \"Olympia\" (1938), documenting the 1936 Summer Olympics, pioneered techniques of camera movement and editing that have influenced many later films. Both films, particularly \"Triumph of the Will\", remain highly controversial, as their aesthetic merit is inseparable from their propagandising of Nazi ideals.\n1945\u20131989 East Germany.\nEast German cinema initially profited from the fact that much of the country's film infrastructure, notably the former UFA studios, lay in the Soviet occupation zone which enabled film production to get off the ground more quickly than in the Western sectors. The authorities in the Soviet Zone were keen to re-establish the film industry in their sector and an order was issued to re-open cinemas in Berlin in May 1945 within three weeks of German capitulation. The film production company DEFA was founded on 17 May 1946, and took control of the film production facilities in the Soviet Zone which had been confiscated by order of the Soviet Military Administration in Germany in October 1945. A joint-stock company on paper, the majority interest in DEFA was actually held by the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) which became the ruling party of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) after 1949, formally placing DEFA as the state-owned monopoly for film production in East Germany. A sister \"company\", Progress Film, had also been established as a similar monopoly for domestic film distribution, its principal \"competition\" being Sovexportfilm, which handled distribution of Soviet films.\nIn total, DEFA produced some 900 feature films during its existence as well as around 800 animated films and over 3000 documentaries and short films. In its early years, production was limited due to strict controls imposed by the authorities which restricted the subject-matter of films to topics that directly contributed to the Communist project of the state. Excluding newsreels and educational films, only 50 films were produced between 1948 and 1953. However, in later years numerous films were produced on a variety of themes. DEFA had particular strengths in children's films, notably fairy tale adaptations such as \"Drei Haseln\u00fcsse f\u00fcr Aschenbr\u00f6del (Three Hazelnuts for Cinderella)\" (1973), but it also attempted other genre works: science-fiction, for example \"Der schweigende Stern (The Silent Star)\" (1960), an adaptation of a Stanis\u0142aw Lem novel, or \"red westerns\" such as \"The Sons of the Great Mother Bear\" (1966) in which, in contrast to the typical American western, the heroes tended to be Native Americans. Many of these genre films were co-productions with other Warsaw Pact countries.\nNotable non-genre films produced by DEFA include Wolfgang Staudte's adaptation of Heinrich Mann's \"Der Untertan\" (1951); Konrad Wolf's \"Der geteilte Himmel (Divided Heaven)\" (1964), an adaptation of Christa Wolf's novel; Frank Beyer's adaptation of Jurek Becker's \"Jacob the Liar\" (1975), the only East German film to be nominated for an Oscar; \"The Legend of Paul and Paula\" (1973), directed by Heiner Carow from Ulrich Plenzdorf's novel; and \"Solo Sunny\" (1980), again the work of Konrad Wolf.\nHowever, film-making in the GDR was always constrained and oriented by the political situation in the country at any given time. Ernst Th\u00e4lmann, the communist leader in the Weimar period, was the subject of several hagiographical films in the 1950s (\"Ernst Th\u00e4lmann\", 1954), and although East German filmmaking moved away from this overtly Stalinist approach in the 1960s, filmmakers were still subject to the changing political positions, and indeed the whims, of the SED leadership. For example, DEFA's full slate of contemporary films from 1966 were denied distribution, among them Frank Beyer's \"Traces of Stones\" (1966) which was pulled from distribution after three days, not because it was antipathetic to communist principles, but because it showed that such principles, which it fostered, were not put into practice at all times in East Germany. The huge box-office hit \"The Legend of Paul and Paula\" was initially threatened with a distribution ban because of its satirical elements and supposedly only allowed a release on the say-so of Party General Secretary Erich Honecker.\nIn the late 1970s, numerous film-makers left the GDR for the West as a result of restrictions on their work, among them director Egon G\u00fcnther and actors Angelica Domr\u00f6se, Eva-Maria Hagen, Katharina Thalbach, Hilmar Thate, Manfred Krug and Armin Mueller-Stahl. Many had been signatories of a 1976 petition opposing the expatriation of socially critical singer-songwriter Wolf Biermann and had had their ability to work restricted as a result.\nIn the final years of the GDR, the availability of television and the programming and films on television broadcasts reaching into the GDR via the uncontrollable airwaves, reduced the influence of DEFA productions, although its continuing role in producing shows for East German television channel remained. Following the Wende, DEFA had ceased production altogether, and its studios and equipment was sold off by the Treuhand in 1992, but its intellectual property rights were handed to the charitable \"DEFA-Stiftung\" (DEFA Foundation) which exploits these rights in conjunction with a series of private companies, especially the quickly privatized Progress Film GmbH, which has issued several East German films with English subtitles since the mid-1990s.\n1945\u20131989 West Germany.\n1945\u20131960 Reconstruction.\nThe occupation and reconstruction of Germany by the Four Powers in the period immediately after the end of World War II brought a major and long-lasting change to the economic conditions under which the industry in Germany had previously operated. The holdings of Ufa were confiscated by the Allies and, as part of the process of decartelisation, licences to produce films were shared between a range of much smaller companies. In addition, the Occupation Statute of 1949, which granted partial independence to the newly created Federal Republic of Germany, specifically forbade the imposition of import quotas to protect German film production from foreign competition, the result of lobbying by the American industry as represented by the MPAA.\nAmidst the devastation of the \"Stunde Null\" year of 1945 cinema attendance was unsurprisingly down to a fraction of its wartime heights, but already by the end of the decade it had reached levels that exceeded the pre-war period. For the first time in many years, German audiences had free access to cinema from around the world and in this period the films of Charlie Chaplin remained popular, as were melodramas from the United States. Nonetheless, the share of the film market for German films in this period and into the 1950s remained relatively large, taking up some 40 percent of the total market. American films took up around 30 percent of the market despite having around twice as many films in distribution as the German industry in the same time frame.\nMany of the German films of the immediate post-war period can be characterised as belonging to the genre of the \"Tr\u00fcmmerfilm\" (literally \"rubble film\"). These films show strong affinities with the work of Italian neorealists, not least Roberto Rossellini's neorealist trilogy which included \"Germany Year Zero\" (1948), and are concerned primarily with day-to-day life in the devastated Germany and an initial reaction to the events of the Nazi period (the full horror of which was first experienced by many in documentary footage from liberated concentration camps). Such films include Wolfgang Staudte's \"Die M\u00f6rder sind unter uns (The Murderers are among us)\" (1946), the first film made in post-war Germany (produced in the soviet sector), and Wolfgang Liebeneiner's \"Liebe 47 (Love 47)\" (1949), an adaptation of Wolfgang Borchert's play \"Drau\u00dfen vor der T\u00fcr\".\nDespite the advent of a regular television service in the Federal Republic in 1952, cinema attendances continued to grow through much of the 1950s, reaching a peak of 817.5\u00a0million visits in 1956. The majority of the films of this period set out to do no more than entertain the audience and had few pretensions to artistry or active engagement with social issues. The defining genre of the period was arguably the (\"homeland film\"), in which morally simplistic tales of love and family were played out in a rural setting, often in the mountains of Bavaria, Austria or Switzerland. In their day \"Heimatfilms\" were of little interest to more scholarly film critics, but in recent years they have been the subject of study in relation to what they say about the culture of West Germany in the years of the \"Wirtschaftswunder\". Other film genres typical of this period were adaptations of operettas, hospital melodramas, comedies and musicals. Many films were remakes of earlier Ufa productions.\nRearmament and the founding of the \"Bundeswehr\" in 1955 brought with it a wave of war films which tended to depict the ordinary German soldiers of World War II as brave and apolitical. The Israeli historian Omer Bartov wrote that German films of the 1950s showed the average German soldier as a heroic victim: noble, tough, brave, honourable, and patriotic while fighting hard in a senseless war for a regime that he did not care for. The \"08/15\" film trilogy of 1954\u201355 concerns a sensitive young German soldier who would rather play the piano than fight, and who fights on the Eastern Front without understanding why; however, no mention is made of the genocidal aspects of Germany's war in East. The last of the \"08/15\" films ends with Germany occupied by a gang of American soldiers portrayed as bubble-gum chewing, slack-jawed morons and uncultured louts, totally inferior in every respect to the heroic German soldiers shown in the \"08/15\" films. The only exception is the Jewish American officer, who is shown as both hyper-intelligent and very unscrupulous, which Bartov noted seems to imply that the real tragedy of World War II was the Nazis did not get a chance to exterminate all of the Jews, who have now returned with Germany's defeat to once more exploit the German people.\nIn \"The Doctor of Stalingrad\" (1958) dealing with German POWs in the Soviet Union, Germans are portrayed as more civilized, humane and intelligent than the Soviets, who are shown for the most part as Mongol savages who brutalized the German POWs. One of the German POWs successfully seduces the beautiful and tough Red Army Captain Alexandra Kasalniskaya (Eva Bartok) who prefers him to the sadistic camp commandant, which as Bartov comments also is meant to show that even in defeat, German men were more sexually virile and potent than their Russian counterparts. In \"\" (\"Dogs, do you want to live forever?\") of 1959, which deals with the Battle of Stalingrad, the focus is on celebrating the heroism of the German soldier in that battle, who are shown as valiantly holding out against overwhelming odds with no mention at all of what those soldiers were fighting for, namely National Socialist ideology or the Holocaust. This period also saw a number of films that depicted the military resistance to Hitler. In \"Des Teufels General\" (\"The Devil's General\") of 1954, a Luftwaffe general named Harras loosely modeled after Ernst Udet, appears at first to be cynical fool, but turns out to an anti-Nazi who is secretly sabotaging the German war effort by designing faulty planes. Bartov commented that in this film, the German officer corps is shown as a group of fundamentally noble and civilized men who happened to be serving an evil regime made up of a small gang of gangsterish misfits totally unrepresentative of German society, which served to exculpate both the officer corps and by extension Germany society. Bartov wrote that no German film of the 1950s showed the deep commitment felt by many German soldiers to National Socialism, the utter ruthless way the German Army fought the war and the mindless nihilist brutality of the later Wehrmacht. Bartov wrote that German film-makers liked to show the heroic last stand of the 6th Army at Stalingrad, but none has so far showed the 6th Army's massive co-operation with the \"Einsatzgruppen\" in murdering Soviet Jews in 1941.\nEven though there are countless film adaptations of Edgar Wallace novels worldwide, the crime films produced by the German company Rialto Film between 1959 and 1972 are the best-known of those, to the extent that they form their own subgenre known as Krimis (abbreviation for the German term \"Kriminalfilm\" (or \"Kriminalroman\"). Other Edgar Wallace adaptations in a similar style were made by the Germans Artur Brauner and Kurt Ulrich, and the British producer Harry Alan Towers.\nThe international significance of the West German film industry of the 1950s could no longer measure up to that of France, Italy, or Japan. German films were only rarely distributed internationally as they were perceived as provincial. International co-productions of the kind which were becoming common in France and Italy tended to be rejected by German producers (Schneider 1990:43). However a few German films and film-makers did achieve international recognition at this time, among them Bernhard Wicki's Oscar-nominated \"Die Br\u00fccke (The Bridge)\" (1959), and the actresses Hildegard Knef and Romy Schneider.\n1960\u20131970 cinema in crisis.\nIn the late 1950s, the growth in cinema attendance of the preceding decade first stagnated and then went into freefall throughout the 1960s. By 1969 West German cinema attendance at 172.2\u00a0million visits per year was less than a quarter of its 1956 post-war peak. As a consequence of this, numerous German production and distribution companies went out of business in the 1950s and 1960s and cinemas across the Federal Republic closed their doors; the number of screens in West Germany almost halved between the beginning and the end of the decade.\nInitially, the crisis was perceived as a problem of overproduction. Consequently, the German film industry cut back on production. 123 German movies were produced in 1955, only 65 in 1965. However, many German film companies followed the 1960s trends of international co-productions with Italy and Spain in such genres as spaghetti westerns and Eurospy films with films shot in those nations or in Yugoslavia that featured German actors in the casts.\nThe roots of the problem lay deeper in changing economic and social circumstances. Average incomes in the Federal Republic rose sharply and this opened up alternative leisure activities to compete with cinema-going. At this time too, television was developing into a mass medium that could compete with the cinema. In 1953 there were only 1,000,000 sets in West Germany; by 1962 there were 7 million (Connor 1990:49) (Hoffman 1990:69).\nThe majority of films produced in the Federal Republic in the 1960s were genre works: westerns, especially the series of movies adapted from Karl May's popular genre novels which starred Pierre Brice as the Apache Winnetou and Lex Barker as his white blood brother Old Shatterhand; thrillers and crime films, notably a series of Edgar Wallace movies from Rialto Film in which Klaus Kinski, Heinz Drache, Karin Dor and Joachim Fuchsberger were among the regular players. The traditional Krimi films expanded into series based on German pulp fiction heroes such as \"Jerry Cotton\" played by George Nader and \"Kommissar X\" played by Tony Kendall and Brad Harris. West Germany also made several horror films including ones starring Christopher Lee. The two genres were combined in the return of \"Doctor Mabuse\" in a series of several films of the early 1960s.\nAt the end of the 1960s softcore sex films, both the relatively serious \"Aufkl\u00e4rungsfilme\" (sex education films) of Oswalt Kolle and such exploitation films as \"Schulm\u00e4dchen-Report (Schoolgirl Report)\" (1970) and its successors were produced into the 1970s. Such movies were commercially successful and often enjoyed international distribution, but won little acclaim from critics.\n1960\u20131980 New German Cinema.\nIn the 1960s more than three-quarters of the regular cinema audience were lost as consequence of the rising popularity of TV sets at home. As a reaction to the artistic and economic stagnation of German cinema, a group of young film-makers issued the Oberhausen Manifesto on 28 February 1962. This call to arms, which included Alexander Kluge, Edgar Reitz, Peter Schamoni and Franz-Josef Spieker among its signatories, provocatively declared \"Der alte Film ist tot. Wir glauben an den neuen\" (\"The old cinema is dead. We believe in the new cinema\"). Other up-and-coming filmmakers allied themselves to this Oberhausen group, among them Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Volker Schl\u00f6ndorff, Werner Herzog, Jean-Marie Straub, Wim Wenders, Werner Schroeter and Hans-J\u00fcrgen Syberberg in their rejection of the existing German film industry and their determination to build a new cinema founded on artistic and social measures rather than commercial success. Most of these directors organized themselves in, or partially co-operated with, the film production and distribution company \"Filmverlag der Autoren\" established in 1971, which throughout the 1970s brought forth a number of critically acclaimed films. Rosa von Praunheim, who formed the German lesbian and gay movement with his film \"It Is Not the Homosexual Who Is Perverse, But the Society in Which He Lives\" (1971), also plays an important role.\nDespite the foundation of the \"Kuratorium Junger Deutscher Film\" (Young German Film Committee) in 1965, set up under the auspices of the Federal Ministry of the Interior to support new German films financially, the directors of this New German Cinema were consequently often dependent on money from television. Young filmmakers had the opportunity to test their mettle in such programmes as the stand-alone drama and documentary series \"Das kleine Fernsehspiel\" (The Little TV Play) or the television films of the crime series \"Tatort\". However, the broadcasters sought TV premieres for the films which they had supported financially, with theatrical showings only occurring later. As a consequence, such films tended to be unsuccessful at the box office.\nThis situation changed after 1974 when the \"Film-Fernseh-Abkommen\" (Film and Television Accord) was agreed between the Federal Republic's main broadcasters, ARD and ZDF, and the German Federal Film Board (a government body created in 1968 to support film-making in Germany). This accord, which has been repeatedly extended up to the present day, provides for the television companies to make available an annual sum to support the production of films which are suitable for both theatrical distribution and television presentation. (The amount of money provided by the public broadcasters has varied between 4.5 and 12.94\u00a0million euros per year. Under the terms of the accord, films produced using these funds can only be screened on television 24 months after their theatrical release. They may appear on video or DVD no sooner than six months after cinema release. Nevertheless, the New German Cinema found it difficult to attract a large domestic or international audience.\nThe socially critical films of the New German Cinema strove to delineate themselves from what had gone before and the works of auteur film-makers such as Kluge and Fassbinder are examples of this, although Fassbinder in his use of stars from German cinema history also sought a reconciliation between the new cinema and the old. In addition, a distinction is sometimes drawn between the avantgarde \"Young German Cinema\" of the 1960s and the more accessible \"New German Cinema\" of the 1970s. For their influences the new generation of film-makers looked to Italian neorealism, the French \"Nouvelle Vague\" and the British New Wave but combined this eclectically with references to the well-established genres of Hollywood cinema. The New German Cinema dealt with contemporary German social problems in a direct way; the Nazi past, the plight of the \"Gastarbeiter\" (\"guest workers\"), and modern social developments, were all subjects prominent in New German Cinema films.\nFilms such as Kluge's \"Abschied von Gestern\" (1966), Herzog's \"Aguirre, the Wrath of God\" (1972), Fassbinder's \"Fear Eats the Soul\" (1974) and \"The Marriage of Maria Braun\" (1979), and Wenders' \"Paris, Texas\" (1984) found critical approval. Often the work of these auteurs was first recognised abroad rather than in Germany itself. The work of post-war Germany's leading novelists Heinrich B\u00f6ll and G\u00fcnter Grass provided source material for the adaptations \"The Lost Honour of Katharina Blum\" (1975) (by Schl\u00f6ndorff and Margarethe von Trotta) and \"The Tin Drum\" (1979) (by Schl\u00f6ndorff alone) respectively, the latter becoming the first German film to win the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. The New German Cinema also allowed for female directors to come to the fore and for the development of a feminist cinema which encompassed the works of directors such as Margarethe von Trotta, Helma Sanders-Brahms, Jutta Br\u00fcckner, Helke Sander and Cristina Perincioli.\nGerman production companies have been quite commonly involved in expensive French and Italian productions from Spaghetti Westerns to French comic book adaptations.\n1980\u20131989 popular productions.\nHaving achieved some of its goals, among them the establishment of state funding for the film industry and renewed international recognition for German films, the New German Cinema had begun to show signs of fatigue by the 1980s, even though many of its proponents continued to enjoy individual success.\nAmong the commercial successes for German films of the 1980s were the \"Otto\" film series beginning in 1985 starring comedian Otto Waalkes, Wolfgang Petersen's adaptation of \"The NeverEnding Story\" (1984), and the internationally successful \"Das Boot\" (1981), which still holds the record for most Academy Award nominations for a German film (six). Other notable film-makers who came to prominence in the 1980s include producer Bernd Eichinger and directors Doris D\u00f6rrie, Uli Edel, and Loriot.\nAway from the mainstream, the splatter film director J\u00f6rg Buttgereit came to prominence in the 1980s. The development of arthouse cinemas (\"Programmkinos\") from the 1970s onwards provided a venue for the works of less mainstream film-makers like Herbert Achternbusch, Hark Bohm, Dominik Graf, Oliver Herbrich, Rosa von Praunheim or Christoph Schlingensief.\nFrom the mid-1980s the spread of videocassette recorders and the arrival of private TV channels such as RTL Television provided new competition for theatrical film distribution. Cinema attendance, having rallied slightly in the late 1970s after an all-time low of 115.1\u00a0million visits in 1976, dropped sharply again from the mid-1980s to end at just 101.6\u00a0million visits in 1989. However, the availability of a back catalogue of films on video also allowed for a different relationship between the viewer and an individual film, while private TV channels brought new money into the film industry and provided a launch pad from which new talent could later move into film.\n1990\u2013Modern Germany.\nToday's biggest German production studios include Babelsberg Studio, Bavaria Film, Constantin Film and UFA. Film releases such as \"Run Lola Run\" by Tom Tykwer, \"Good Bye Lenin!\" by Wolfgang Becker, \"Head-On\" by Fatih Akin, \"\" by Tom Tykwer and \"The Lives of Others\" by Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck, have arguably managed to recapture a provocative and innovative nature. Movies like \"The Baader Meinhof Complex\" produced by Bernd Eichinger achieved some popular success.\nNotable directors working in German currently include S\u00f6nke Wortmann, Caroline Link (winner of an Academy Award), Romuald Karmakar, Dani Levy, Hans-Christian Schmid, Andreas Dresen, Dennis Gansel and Uli Edel as well as comedy directors Michael Herbig and Til Schweiger.\nInternationally, German filmmakers such as Roland Emmerich or Wolfgang Petersen built successful careers as directors and producers. Hans Zimmer, a film composer, has become one of the world's most acclaimed producers of movie scores. Michael Ballhaus became a renowned cinematographer.\nGermany has a long tradition of cooperation with the European-based film industry, which started as early as during the 1960s. Since 1990 the number of international projects financed and co-produced by German filmmakers has expanded.\nThe new millennium since 2000 has seen a general resurgence of the German film industry, with a higher output and improved returns at the German box office.\nThe collapse of the GDR had a large effect on the German cinema industry. The viewer count increased with the new population's access to western movies. The movies produced in the United States were the most popular, due to the fact that the market was dominated by them and the production was more advanced than Germany's. Some other genres that were popular consisted of Romantic Comedies, and Social Commentaries. Wolfgang Petersen and Roland Emmerich both established international success.\nInternationally though,\nGerman productions are widely unknown and unsuccessful. Even domestically, the German movies hold only a market share of about 20\u201325%. The movie culture is recognized to be underfunded, problem laden and rather inward looking. Since its golden age in the 1920s, the German film industry has never regained the technical excellence, the star system appeal, or the popular narratives suitable for a German, European or global audience.\nFilm funding.\nThe main production incentive provided by governmental authorities is the Deutscher Filmf\u00f6rderfonds (DFFF) (German Federal Film Fund). The DFFF is a grant given by the Staatsministerin f\u00fcr Kultur und Medien (Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media). To receive the grant a producer has to fulfill different requirements including a cultural eligibility test. The fund offers 50 million euros a year to film producers and or co-producers and grants can amount to up to 20% of the approved German production costs. At least 25% the production costs must be spent in Germany, or only 20%, if the production costs are higher than 20\u00a0million euros. The DFFF has been established in 2007 and supported projects in all categories and genres.\nIn 2015, the Deutsche Filmf\u00f6rderungsfond was reduced from 60 million euros to 50 million euros. To compensate, Finance minister Gabriel announced that the difference will be made up from the budget of the Bundesministerium f\u00fcr Wirtschaft und Klimaschutz (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action). For the first time in Germany high-profile tv series and digital filmmaking will be funded at a federal level in the same manner as feature films. Funding is also increasingly flowing to international co-productions.\nIn 1979, the German states also began to establish funding institutions, often with the intention of supporting their own production locations. Today, film funding by the federal states makes up the largest share of film funding in Germany. A total of more than 200 million euros in grants are distributed annually, with an upward trend.\nThe history of film funding began in Germany with the founding of the UFA GmbH (1917), which was to produce pro-German propaganda films - equipped with funds from industry and banks. During the period of National Socialism (1933-1945), the state indirectly promoted the financing of film projects by establishing the Filmkreditbank GmbH (FKB) (Film Credit Bank).\nAfter the end of World War II, many feature films were initially supported by federal guarantees. However, film funding in its current form did not develop until the 1950s, when television began to supplant motion pictures. In 1967, a film funding law was passed for the first time. The Berlin-based Filmf\u00f6rderungsanstalt (FFA) (Film Funding Agency) was the first major funding institution to be founded in 1968.\nCritics accuse film funding in Germany of being institutionally fragmented, making it virtually impossible to coordinate all measures, which would ultimately benefit the quality of productions. They also say that a blanket distribution of grants stifles the incentive to produce films that recoup their production costs.\nFilm funding institutions.\nFilm funding in Germany is provided, among others, by the following institutions:\nRegional.\nLokal:\nFestival.\nThe Berlin International Film Festival, also called \"Berlinale\", is one of the world's leading film festivals and most reputable media events. It is held in Berlin, Germany. Founded in West Berlin in 1951, the festival has been celebrated annually in February since 1978. With 274,000 tickets sold and 487,000 admissions it is considered the largest publicly attended film festival worldwide. Up to 400 films are shown in several sections, representing a comprehensive array of the cinematic world. Around twenty films compete for the awards called the Golden and Silver Bears. Since 2001 the director of the festival has been Dieter Kosslick.\nThe festival, the EFM and other satellite events are attended by around 20,000 professionals from over 130 countries. More than 4200 journalists are responsible for the media exposure in over 110 countries. At high-profile feature film premieres, movie stars and celebrities are present at the red carpet.\nGerman Film Academy.\nThe Deutsche Filmakademie was founded in 2003 in Berlin and aims to provide native filmmakers a forum for discussion and a way to promote the reputation of German cinema through publications, presentations, discussions and regular promotion of the subject in the schools.\nAwards.\nSince 2005, the winners of the Deutscher Filmpreis, also known as the \"Lolas\" are elected by the members of the Deutsche Filmakademie. With a cash prize of three million euros it is the most highly endowed German cultural award.\nFilm schools.\nSeveral institutions, both government run and private, provide formal education in various aspects of filmmaking.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10614", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10614", "title": "Film History/Poland", "text": ""}
{"id": "10615", "revid": "2580041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10615", "title": "Film History/Canada", "text": ""}
{"id": "10616", "revid": "46014135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10616", "title": "Frivolous litigation", "text": "Litigating for little to no meritful reason\nFrivolous litigation is the use of legal processes with apparent disregard for the merit of one's own arguments. It includes presenting an argument with reason to know that it would certainly fail, or acting without a basic level of diligence in researching the relevant law and facts. That a claim was lost does not imply the claim in itself was frivolous.\nFrivolous litigation may be based on absurd legal theories, may involve a superabundance or repetition of motions or additional suits, may be uncivil or harassing to the court, or may claim extreme remedies. A claim or defense may be frivolous because it had no underlying justification in fact, or because it was not presented with an argument for a reasonable extension or reinterpretation of the law. A claim may be deemed frivolous because existing laws unequivocally prohibit such a claim, such as a so-called Good Samaritan law.\nIn the United States, Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and similar state rules require that an attorney perform a due diligence investigation concerning the factual basis for any claim or defense. Jurisdictions differ on whether a claim or defense can be frivolous if the attorney acted in good faith. Because such a defense or claim wastes the court's and the other parties' time, resources and legal fees, sanctions may be imposed by a court upon the party or the lawyer who presents the frivolous defense or claim. The law firm may also be sanctioned, or even held in contempt.\nUS Federal statutes and rules of court penalizing frivolous litigation.\nIn the United States Tax Court, frivolous arguments may result in a penalty of up to $25,000 under 26 U.S.C.\u00a0\u00a7\u00a06673(a)(1). Similarly, section 7482 of the Internal Revenue Code provides that the U.S. Supreme Court and the U.S. Courts of Appeals may impose penalties in which the taxpayer's appeal of a U.S. Tax Court decision was \"maintained primarily for delay\" or where \"the taxpayer's position in the appeal is frivolous or groundless.\" A common example, as shown below, is an argument based on tax protestor claims.\nIn a noncriminal case in a U.S. District Court, a litigant (or a litigant's attorney) who presents any pleading, written motion or other paper to the court is required, under Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, to certify that, to the best of the presenter's knowledge and belief, the legal contentions \"are warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law or the establishment of new law\". Monetary civil penalties for violation of this rule may in some cases be imposed on the litigant or the attorney under Rule 11.\nIn one case, the Seventh Circuit Court issued an order giving such an attorney \"14 days to show cause why he should not be fined $10,000 for his frivolous arguments\". A similar rule penalizing frivolous litigation applies in U.S. Bankruptcy Court under Rule 9011.\nThe U.S. Congress has enacted section 1912 of Title 28 of the U.S.C. providing that in the U.S. Supreme Court and in the U.S. Courts of Appeals where litigation by the losing party has caused damage to the prevailing party, the court may impose a requirement that the losing party pay the prevailing party for those damages.\nLitigants who represent themselves (\"in forma pauperis\" and \"pro se\") sometimes make frivolous arguments due to their limited knowledge of the law and procedure. The particular tendency of prisoners to bring baseless lawsuits led to passage of the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995, which limits the ability of prisoners to bring actions without payment.\nCourt treatment of frivolous arguments.\nAn example of a Court's treatment of frivolous arguments is found in the case of \"Crain v. Commissioner\", 737 F.2d 1417 (1984), from the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Glenn Crain appeals from the dismissal of his Tax Court petition challenging the constitutional authority of that body and defying the jurisdiction of the Internal Revenue Service to levy taxes on his income. Crain asserts that he \"is not subject to the jurisdiction, taxation, nor regulation of the state,\" that the \"Internal Revenue Service, Incorporated\" lacks authority to exercise the judicial power of the United States, that the Tax Court is unconstitutionally attempting to exercise Article III powers, and that jurisdiction over his person has never been affirmatively proven.\nWe perceive no need to refute these arguments with somber reasoning and copious citation of precedent; to do so might suggest that these arguments have some colorable merit. The constitutionality of our income tax system\u2014including the role played within that system by the Internal Revenue Service and the Tax Court\u2014has long been established. We affirm the dismissal of Crain's spurious \"petition\" and the assessment of a penalty imposed by the Tax Court for instituting a frivolous proceeding. 26\u00a0U.S.C.\u00a0\u00a7\u00a06673.\nThe government asks us to assess penalties against Crain for bringing this frivolous appeal, as is authorized by Fed. R. App. P. 38. In Parker v. C. I. R., 724 F. 2d 469, 472 (5th Cir. 1984), we sounded \"a cautionary note to those who would persistently raise arguments against the income tax which have been put to rest for years. The full range of sanctions in Rule 38 hereafter shall be summoned in response to a totally frivolous appeal.\"\nWe are sensitive to the need for the courts to remain open to all who seek in good faith to invoke the protection of law. An appeal that lacks merit is not always\u2014or often\u2014frivolous. However, we are not obliged to suffer in silence the filing of baseless, insupportable appeals presenting no colorable claims of error and designed only to delay, obstruct, or incapacitate the operations of the courts or any other governmental authority. Crain's present appeal is of this sort. It is a hodgepodge of unsupported assertions, irrelevant platitudes, and legalistic gibberish. The government should not have been put to the trouble of responding to such spurious arguments, nor this court to the trouble of \"adjudicating\" this meritless appeal.\nAccordingly, we grant the government's request. The United States shall recover from appellant Crain twice its cost of this appeal. Additionally, we assess against Crain a damage award of $2000 in favor of the appellee United States.\nImpact upon filing attorney.\nFiling a claim that is ultimately deemed frivolous can be highly damaging to the attorney so filing. Most frivolous lawsuits that are successful are filed without an attorney. Attorney Daniel Evans writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[W]hen a judge calls an argument \"ridiculous\" or \"frivolous,\" it is absolutely the worst thing the judge could say. It means that the person arguing the position has absolutely no idea of what he is doing, and has completely wasted everyone's time. It doesn't mean that the case wasn't well argued, or that judge simply decided for the other side, it means that there \"was no other side\". The argument was absolutely, positively, incompetent. The judge is not telling you that you were \"wrong.\" The judge is telling you that you are out of your mind.\nExamples.\n\"Washington v. Alaimo\".\nIn \"Washington v. Alaimo\" the court listed more than seventy-five frivolous \"motions\" (a request for a court to issue an order), all of which required the attention of the Court, including the following:\nWashington, an inmate from Georgia, was eventually prohibited from filing any future lawsuits or motions in any district court unless he first posted a contempt bond of $1,500. To be deemed frivolous, a litigant's arguments must strike beyond the pale.\n\"Pearson v. Chung\".\nIn 2005, in \"Pearson v. Chung\", Roy Pearson, a Washington, D.C. judge, sued a dry cleaning business for $67 million for allegedly losing a pair of his pants. This case has been cited as an example of frivolous litigation. According to Pearson, the dry cleaners lost his pants (which he brought in for a $10.50 alteration) and refused his demands for a large refund. Pearson believed that a sign saying \"Satisfaction Guaranteed\" in the window of the shop legally entitled him to a refund for the cost of the pants, estimated at $1,000. The $54 million total also included $2.0 million in \"mental distress\" and $15,000 which he estimated to be the cost of renting a car every weekend to go to another dry cleaners. The court ultimately ruled against Pearson, whose judgeship was subsequently not renewed due to this case and several other actions he filed during his divorce, which were found to demonstrate a lack of \"judicial temperament\".\nJonathan Lee Riches.\nIn 2010, federal prosecutors asked a judge to help them stop Jonathan Lee Riches from filing any more lawsuits, arguing that his frequent filings were frivolous.\nGloria Dawn Ironbox.\nIn July 2013, the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario dismissed a complaint laid by a man posing as Gloria Dawn Ironbox, a fictional feminist attorney on television series \"Family Guy\". The claimant alleged that a marketing scheme by A&amp;W Restaurants was \"heteronormative\", \"phallocentric\" and promoted \"cross-sectional hegemony\". Citing feelings of distress and alienation over the lack of \"LGBT\" representation in A&amp;W naming conventions, he demanded $50,000 in damages for injury to dignity and self-respect as well as an order requiring A&amp;W to adopt naming conventions which include non-traditional families. One such product the claimant demanded was the \"Pillow Biter\", described by the claimant as \"a large, dark slab of meat stuffed firmly between two, white, clenched buns\".\nSirgiorgio Sanford Clardy.\nIn January 2014, Sirgiorgio Sanford Clardy, who is serving a 100-year prison sentence for a beating of a prostitute and her customer, filed \"a $100 million lawsuit against Nike\", in which he claimed that Nike was partially responsible for the assault he committed. Clardy said that Nike should have placed a label in his Jordan shoes warning consumers that they could be used as a dangerous weapon. He was wearing a pair when he repeatedly stomped the face of a client who was trying to leave a Portland hotel without paying Clardy's prostitute in June 2012. This lawsuit \nurl=https://www.oregonlive.com/portland/2014/10/pimp_whose_100_million_suit_fa.html\ngained \"considerable attention across the nation and the world\".\n\"Romine v. Stanton\".\nIn March 2016, James Romine, one-half of the independent video games developer Digital Homicide Studios, sued video game critic James Stephanie Sterling for criticizing the games published under his studios' name, seeking $10 million in damages for \"assault, libel, and slander\" to Romine's business. He claimed that Sterling's coverage of his studio's game \"The Slaughtering Grounds\" as \"Worst Game of 2014 Contender\" was not protected under fair use law because he did not believe it was \"fair\" criticism. An additional lawsuit for $18 million was filed against 100 users on the Steam gaming platform for criticizing their games and business practices, which he had interpreted as \"harassment\". The judge issued a subpoena against Valve to disclose the identities of those 100 users. This resulted in Valve removing all published games from Digital Homicide Studios. In addition, Romine filed the lawsuit as an individual and not as a corporation, so such criticism was protected under the right to freedom of speech. The case was dismissed with prejudice in February 2017. This case is also an example of abuse of DMCA takedown requests on YouTube.\n\"Erik Estavillo vs Twitch, Inc\".\nIn June 2020, Erik Estavillo filed a lawsuit against Twitch, claiming that the streaming platform was responsible for his sex addiction, with damages of $25 million, which was to be split between him, Twitch Prime subscribers, and COVID-19 charities. He claimed that Twitch's \"twisted programming and net code\" made it \"nearly impossible to use Twitch without being exposed to sexual content\". Other claims included him \"chaffing his penis every day with [a fleshlight]\" and causing a fire by ejaculating on his computer monitor. The filing contained pictures of the female Twitch streamers (such as Amouranth and Pokimane), who he wanted banned from the platform. Estavillo had previously sued Blizzard, Microsoft, Sony, and Nintendo. All of these lawsuits were dismissed with prejudice. This case was dismissed as frivolous in January of 2021. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10617", "revid": "12631596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10617", "title": "Free will and determinism", "text": ""}
{"id": "10618", "revid": "1156791638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10618", "title": "Fiddle", "text": "Bowed string instrument\nA fiddle is a bowed string musical instrument, most often a violin. It is a colloquial term for the violin, used by players in all genres, including classical music. Although in many cases violins and fiddles are essentially synonymous, the style of the music played may determine specific construction differences between fiddles and classical violins. For example, fiddles may optionally be set up with a bridge with a flatter arch to reduce the range of bow-arm motion needed for techniques such as the double shuffle, a form of bariolage involving rapid alternation between pairs of adjacent strings. To produce a \"brighter\" tone than the deep tones of gut or synthetic core strings, fiddlers often use steel strings. The fiddle is part of many traditional (folk) styles, which are typically aural traditions\u2014taught \"by ear\" rather than via written music.\nFiddling is the act of playing the fiddle, and fiddlers are musicians that play it. Among musical styles, fiddling tends to produce rhythms that focus on dancing, with associated quick note changes, whereas classical music tends to contain more vibrato and sustained notes. Fiddling is also open to improvisation and embellishment with ornamentation at the player's discretion, in contrast to orchestral performances, which adhere to the composer's notes to reproduce a work faithfully. It is less common for a classically trained violinist to play folk music, but today, many fiddlers (e.g., Alasdair Fraser, Brittany Haas, and Alison Krauss) have classical training.\nHistory.\nThe medieval fiddle emerged in 10th-century Europe, deriving from the Byzantine lira (, , ), a bowed string instrument of the Byzantine Empire and ancestor of most European bowed instruments.\nThe first recorded reference to the bowed lira was in the 9th century by the Persian geographer Ibn Khurradadhbih (d. 911); in his lexicographical discussion of instruments he cited the lira (l\u016br\u0101) as a typical instrument of the Byzantines and equivalent to the rab\u0101b played in the Islamic Empires.\nLira spread widely westward to Europe; in the 11th and 12th centuries European writers use the terms \"fiddle\" and \"lira\" interchangeably when referring to bowed instruments.\nWest African fiddlers have accompanied singing and dancing with one-string gourd fiddles since the twelfth century , and many black musicians in America learned on similar homemade fiddles before switching over to the European violin. As early as the mid-1600s, black fiddlers (\"exquisite performers on three-stringed fiddles\") were playing for both black and white dancers at street celebrations in the Dutch settlement of New Amsterdam (New York City), and by 1690 slave fiddlers were routinely providing the music at plantation balls in Virginia.\nOver the centuries, Europe continued to have two distinct types of fiddles: one, relatively square-shaped, held in the arms, became known as the viola da braccio (\"arm viol\") family and evolved into the violin; the other, with sloping shoulders and held between the knees, was the viola da gamba (\"leg viol\") group. During the Renaissance the gambas were important and elegant instruments; they eventually lost ground to the louder (and originally less aristocratic) \"viola da braccio\" family.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of \"fiddle\" is uncertain: it probably derives from the Latin \"fidula\", which is the early word for \"violin\", or it may be natively Germanic.\nThe name appears to be related to Icelandic Fi\u00f0la and also Old English \"fi\u00f0ele\". A native Germanic ancestor of \"fiddle\" might even be the ancestor of the early Romance form of \"violin\".\nIn medieval times, \"fiddle\" also referred to a predecessor of today's violin. Like the violin, it tended to have four strings, but came in a variety of shapes and sizes. Another family of instruments that contributed to the development of the modern fiddle are the viols, which are held between the legs and played vertically, and have fretted fingerboards.\nEnsembles.\nIn performance, a solo fiddler, or one or two with a group of other instrumentalists, is the norm, though twin fiddling is represented in some North American, Scandinavian, Scottish and Irish styles. Following the folk revivals of the second half of the 20th century, it became common for less formal situations to find large groups of fiddlers playing together\u2014see for example the Calgary Fiddlers, Swedish Spelmanslag folk-musician clubs, and the worldwide phenomenon of Irish sessions.\nOrchestral violins, on the other hand, are commonly grouped in sections, or \"chairs\". These contrasting traditions may be vestiges of historical performance settings: large concert halls where violins were played required more instruments, before electronic amplification, than did more intimate dance halls and houses that fiddlers played in.\nThe difference was likely compounded by the different sounds expected of violin music and fiddle music. Historically, the majority of fiddle music was dance music, while violin music had either grown out of dance music or was something else entirely. Violin music came to value a smoothness that fiddling, with its dance-driven clear beat, did not always follow. In situations that required greater volume, a fiddler (as long as they kept the beat) could push their instrument harder than could a violinist. Various fiddle traditions have differing values.\nScottish, with cello.\nIn the very late 20th century, a few artists have successfully attempted a reconstruction of the Scottish tradition of violin and \"big fiddle\", or cello. Notable recorded examples include Iain Fraser and Christine Hanson, Amelia Kaminski and Christine Hanson's Bonnie Lasses, Alasdair Fraser and Natalie Haas' Fire and Grace, and Tim Macdonald and Jeremy Ward's \"The Wilds\".\nBalkan, with \"kontra\".\nHungarian, Slovenian, and Romanian fiddle players are often accompanied by a three-stringed variant of the viola\u2014known as the \"kontra\"\u2014and by double bass, with cimbalom and clarinet being less standard yet still common additions to a band. In Hungary, a three-stringed viola variant with a flat bridge, called the \"kontra\" or \"h\u00e1romh\u00faros br\u00e1csa\" makes up part of a traditional rhythm section in Hungarian folk music. The flat bridge lets the musician play three-string chords. A three-stringed double bass variant is also used.\nStyles.\nTo a greater extent than classical violin playing, fiddle playing is characterized by a huge variety of ethnic or folk music traditions, each of which has its own distinctive sound.\nAmericas.\nUnited States.\nAmerican fiddling, a broad category including traditional and modern styles\nCanada.\nFiddling remains popular in Canada, and the various homegrown styles of Canadian fiddling are seen as an important part of the country's cultural identity, as celebrated during the opening ceremony of the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics.\nMexico.\nMexican fiddling includes\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10619", "revid": "994895459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10619", "title": "French revolution", "text": ""}
{"id": "10620", "revid": "913893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10620", "title": "List of female tennis players", "text": "This is a list of female tennis players who meet one or more of the following criteria:\nList.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10622", "revid": "37417193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10622", "title": "Flugelhorn", "text": "Brass musical instrument\nThe flugelhorn (), also spelled fluegelhorn, flugel horn, or fl\u00fcgelhorn, is a brass instrument that resembles the trumpet and cornet but has a wider, more conical bore. Like trumpets and cornets, most flugelhorns are pitched in B\u266d, though some are in C. It is a type of valved bugle, developed in Germany in the early 19th century from a traditional English valveless bugle. The first version of a valved bugle was sold by Heinrich St\u00f6lzel in Berlin in 1828. The valved bugle provided Adolphe Sax (creator of the saxophone) with the inspiration for his B\u266d soprano (contralto) saxhorns, on which the modern-day flugelhorn is modeled.\nEtymology.\nThe German word \"Fl\u00fcgel\" means \"wing\" or \"flank\" in English. In early 18th century Germany, a ducal hunt leader known as a \"Fl\u00fcgelmeister\" blew the \"Fl\u00fcgelhorn\", a large semicircular brass or silver valveless horn, to direct the wings of the hunt. Military use dates from the Seven Years' War, where this instrument was employed as a predecessor of the bugle.\nStructure and variants.\nThe flugelhorn is generally pitched in B\u266d, like most trumpets and cornets. It usually has three piston valves and employs the same fingering system as other brass instruments, although four-valve versions and rotary-valve versions also exist. It can therefore be played by trumpet and cornet players, although it has different playing characteristics. The flugelhorn's mouthpiece is more deeply conical than either trumpet or cornet mouthpieces, but not as conical as a French horn mouthpiece. The shank of the flugelhorn mouthpiece is similar in size to a cornet mouthpiece shank.\nSome modern flugelhorns feature a fourth valve that lowers the pitch by a perfect fourth (similar to the fourth valve on some euphoniums, tubas, and piccolo trumpets, or the trigger on trombones). This adds a useful low range that, coupled with the flugelhorn's dark sound, extends the instrument's abilities. Players can also use the fourth valve in place of the first and third valve combination (which is somewhat sharp).\nA compact version of the rotary valve flugelhorn is the oval shaped kuhlohorn in B\u266d. It was developed for the German protestant trombone choirs.\nA pair of bass flugelhorns in C, called fiscorns, are played in the Catalan cobla bands which provide music for sardana dancers.\nTimbre.\nThe tone is fatter and usually regarded as more mellow and dark than the trumpet or cornet. The sound of the flugelhorn has been described as halfway between a trumpet and a French horn, whereas the cornet's sound is halfway between a trumpet and a flugelhorn. The flugelhorn is as agile as the cornet but more difficult to control in the high register (from approximately written G5), where in general it locks onto notes less easily.\nUse and performances.\nThe flugelhorn is a standard member of the British-style brass band, and it is also used frequently in jazz. It also appears occasionally in orchestral and concert band music. Famous orchestral works with flugelhorn include Igor Stravinsky's \"Threni\", Ralph Vaughan Williams's Ninth Symphony, and Michael Tippett's third symphony. The flugelhorn is sometimes substituted for the post horn in Mahler's Third Symphony, and for the soprano Roman buccine in Ottorino Respighi's \"Pines of Rome\". In HK Gruber's trumpet concerto \"Busking\" (2007) the soloist is directed to play a flugelhorn in the slow middle movement. The flugelhorn figured prominently in many of Burt Bacharach's 1960s pop song arrangements. It is featured in a solo role in Bert Kaempfert's 1962 recording of \"That Happy Feeling\". Flugelhorns have occasionally been used as the alto or low soprano voice in a drum and bugle corps.\nAnother use of the flugelhorn is found in the Dutch and Belgian \"Fanfareorkesten\" or fanfare orchestras. In these orchestras the flugelhorns, often between 10 and 20 in number, have a significant role, forming the base of the orchestra. They are pitched in B\u266d, with sporadically an E\u266d soloist. Due to poor intonation, these E\u266d flugelhorns are mostly replaced by the E\u266d trumpet or cornet.\nThe 1996 film \"Brassed Off\" features a flugelhorn performance of Rodrigo's Concierto de Aranjuez, Adagio, as a key moment. The solo is played by Paul Hughes.\nNotable players.\nJoe Bishop, as a member of the Woody Herman band in 1936, was one of the earliest jazz musicians to use the flugelhorn. Shorty Rogers and Kenny Baker began playing it in the early fifties, and Clark Terry used it in Duke Ellington's orchestra in the mid-1950s. Chet Baker recorded several albums on the instrument in the 1950s and 1960s. Miles Davis further popularized the instrument in jazz on the albums \"Miles Ahead\" and \"Sketches of Spain\", (both arranged by Gil Evans) though he did not use it much on later projects. Other prominent flugelhorn players include Donald Byrd, Freddy Buzon, Freddie Hubbard, Tom Browne, Lee Morgan, Bill Dixon, Wilbur Harden, Art Farmer, Roy Hargrove, Randy Brecker, Hugh Masekela, Feya Faku, Tony Guerrero, Gary Lord, Jimmy Owens, Maynard Ferguson, Terumasa Hino, Woody Shaw, Bobby Shew, Guido Basso, Kenny Wheeler, Tom Harrell, Bill Coleman, Thad Jones, Arturo Sandoval, Lee Loughnane of the rock band Chicago, Roddy Lorimer of The Kick Horns, Mike Metheny, Harry Beckett, Till Br\u00f6nner and Ack van Rooyen. Most jazz flugelhorn players use the instrument as an auxiliary to the trumpet, but in the 1970s Chuck Mangione gave up playing the trumpet and concentrated on the flugelhorn alone, notably on his jazz-pop hit song \"Feels So Good\". Mangione, in an interview on ABC during the 1980 Winter Olympics, for which he wrote the theme \"Give It All You Got\", referred to the flugelhorn as \"the right baseball glove\".\nPop flugelhorn players include Probyn Gregory (Brian Wilson Band), Ronnie Wilson of the Gap Band, Rick Braun, Mic Gillette, Jeff Oster, Zach Condon of the band Beirut, Scott Spillane of the band Neutral Milk Hotel, Terry Kirkman of the band The Association, and Rashawn Ross of the band Dave Matthews Band. Marvin Stamm played the flugelhorn solo on \"Uncle Albert/Admiral Halsey\" by Paul and Linda McCartney.\nClassical flugelhorn players include Sergei Nakariakov and Kirill Soldatov.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10623", "revid": "1584593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10623", "title": "Folk music", "text": "Music genre\nFolk music is a music genre that includes traditional folk music and the contemporary genre that evolved from the former during the 20th-century folk revival. Some types of folk music may be called world music. Traditional folk music has been defined in several ways: as music transmitted orally, music with unknown composers, music that is played on traditional instruments, music about cultural or national identity, music that changes between generations (folk process), music associated with a people's folklore, or music performed by custom over a long period of time. It has been contrasted with commercial and classical styles. The term originated in the 19th century, but folk music extends beyond that.\nStarting in the mid-20th century, a new form of popular folk music evolved from traditional folk music. This process and period is called the (second) folk revival and reached a zenith in the 1960s. This form of music is sometimes called contemporary folk music or folk revival music to distinguish it from earlier folk forms. Smaller, similar revivals have occurred elsewhere in the world at other times, but the term folk music has typically not been applied to the new music created during those revivals. This type of folk music also includes fusion genres such as folk rock, folk metal, and others. While contemporary folk music is a genre generally distinct from traditional folk music, in U.S. English it shares the same name, and it often shares the same performers and venues as traditional folk music.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTraditional folk music.\nDefinition.\nThe terms \"folk music\", \"folk song\", and \"folk dance\" are comparatively recent expressions. They are extensions of the term \"folklore\", which was coined in 1846 by the English antiquarian William Thoms to describe \"the traditions, customs, and superstitions of the uncultured classes\". The term further derives from the German expression \"volk\", in the sense of \"the people as a whole\" as applied to popular and national music by Johann Gottfried Herder and the German Romantics over half a century earlier. Though it is understood that folk music is the music of the people, observers find a more precise definition to be elusive. Some do not even agree that the term folk music should be used. Folk music may tend to have certain characteristics but it cannot clearly be differentiated in purely musical terms. One meaning often given is that of \"old songs, with no known composers,\" another is that of music that has been submitted to an evolutionary \"process of oral transmission... the fashioning and re-fashioning of the music by the community that give it its folk character.\"\nSuch definitions depend upon \"(cultural) processes rather than abstract musical types...\", upon \"\"continuity\" and \"oral transmission\"...seen as characterizing one side of a cultural dichotomy, the other side of which is found not only in the lower layers of feudal, capitalist and some oriental societies but also in 'primitive' societies and in parts of 'popular cultures'\". One widely used definition is simply \"Folk music is what the people sing.\"\nFor Scholes, as well as for Cecil Sharp and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, there was a sense of the music of the country as distinct from that of the town. Folk music was already, \"...seen as the authentic expression of a way of life now past or about to disappear (or in some cases, to be preserved or somehow revived),\" particularly in \"a community uninfluenced by art music\" and by commercial and printed song. Lloyd rejected this in favor of a simple distinction of economic class yet for him, true folk music was, in Charles Seeger's words, \"associated with a lower class\" in culturally and socially stratified societies. In these terms, folk music may be seen as part of a \"schema comprising four musical types: 'primitive' or 'tribal'; 'elite' or 'art'; 'folk'; and 'popular'.\"\nMusic in this genre is also often called \"traditional music.\" Although the term is usually only descriptive, in some cases people use it as the name of a genre. For example, the Grammy Award previously used the terms \"traditional music\" and \"traditional folk\" for folk music that is not contemporary folk music. Folk music may include most indigenous music.\nCharacteristics.\nFrom a historical perspective, traditional folk music had these characteristics:\nAs a side-effect, the following characteristics are sometimes present:\nTune.\nIn folk music, a \"tune\" is a short instrumental piece, a melody, often with repeating sections, and usually played a number of times. A collection of tunes with structural similarities is known as a tune-family. \"America's Musical Landscape\" says \"the most common form for tunes in folk music is AABB, also known as binary form.\"\nIn some traditions, tunes may be strung together in medleys or \"sets.\"\nOrigins.\nThroughout most of human prehistory and history, listening to recorded music was not possible. Music was made by common people during both their work and leisure, as well as during religious activities. The work of economic production was often manual and communal. Manual labor often included singing by the workers, which served several practical purposes. It reduced the boredom of repetitive tasks, it kept the rhythm during synchronized pushes and pulls, and it set the pace of many activities such as planting, weeding, reaping, threshing, weaving, and milling. In leisure time, singing and playing musical instruments were common forms of entertainment and history-telling\u2014even more common than today when electrically enabled technologies and widespread literacy make other forms of entertainment and information-sharing competitive.\nSome believe that folk music originated as art music that was changed and probably debased by oral transmission while reflecting the character of the society that produced it. In many societies, especially preliterate ones, the cultural transmission of folk music requires learning by ear, although notation has evolved in some cultures. Different cultures may have different notions concerning a division between \"folk\" music on the one hand and of \"art\" and \"court\" music on the other. In the proliferation of popular music genres, some traditional folk music became also referred to as \"World music\" or \"Roots music\".\nThe English term \"folklore\", to describe traditional folk music and dance, entered the vocabulary of many continental European nations, each of which had its folk-song collectors and revivalists. The distinction between \"authentic\" folk and national and popular song in general has always been loose, particularly in America and Germany \u2013 for example, popular songwriters such as Stephen Foster could be termed \"folk\" in America. The International Folk Music Council definition allows that the term can also apply to music that, \"...has originated with an individual composer and has subsequently been absorbed into the unwritten, living tradition of a community. But the term does not cover a song, dance, or tune that has been taken over ready-made and remains unchanged.\"\nThe post\u2013World War II folk revival in America and in Britain started a new genre, Contemporary Folk Music, and brought an additional meaning to the term \"folk music\": newly composed songs, fixed in form and by known authors, which imitated some form of traditional music. The popularity of \"contemporary folk\" recordings caused the appearance of the category \"Folk\" in the Grammy Awards of 1959; in 1970 the term was dropped in favor of \"Best Ethnic or Traditional Recording (including Traditional Blues)\", while 1987 brought a distinction between \"Best Traditional Folk Recording\" and \"Best Contemporary Folk Recording\". After that, they had a \"Traditional music\" category that subsequently evolved into others. The term \"folk\", by the start of the 21st century, could cover singer-songwriters, such as Donovan from Scotland and American Bob Dylan, who emerged in the 1960s and much more. This completed a process to where \"folk music\" no longer meant only traditional folk music.\nSubject matter.\nTraditional folk music often includes sung words, although folk instrumental music occurs commonly in dance music traditions. Narrative verse looms large in the traditional folk music of many cultures. This encompasses such forms as traditional epic poetry, much of which was meant originally for oral performance, sometimes accompanied by instruments. Many epic poems of various cultures were pieced together from shorter pieces of traditional narrative verse, which explains their episodic structure, repetitive elements, and their frequent \"in medias res\" plot developments. Other forms of traditional narrative verse relate the outcomes of battles or lament tragedies or natural disasters.\nSometimes, as in the triumphant \"Song of Deborah\" found in the Biblical \"Book of Judges\", these songs celebrate victory. Laments for lost battles and wars, and the lives lost in them, are equally prominent in many traditions; these laments keep alive the cause for which the battle was fought. The narratives of traditional songs often also remember folk heroes such as John Henry or Robin Hood. Some traditional song narratives recall supernatural events or mysterious deaths.\nHymns and other forms of religious music are often of traditional and unknown origin. Western musical notation was originally created to preserve the lines of Gregorian chant, which before its invention was taught as an oral tradition in monastic communities. Traditional songs such as \"Green grow the rushes, O\" present religious lore in a mnemonic form, as do Western Christmas carols and similar traditional songs.\nWork songs frequently feature call and response structures and are designed to enable the laborers who sing them to coordinate their efforts in accordance with the rhythms of the songs. They are frequently, but not invariably, composed. In the American armed forces, a lively oral tradition preserves jody calls (\"Duckworth chants\") which are sung while soldiers are on the march. Professional sailors made similar use of a large body of sea shanties. Love poetry, often of a tragic or regretful nature, prominently figures in many folk traditions. Nursery rhymes and nonsense verse used to amuse or quiet children also are frequent subjects of traditional songs.\nFolk song transformations and variations.\nMusic transmitted by word of mouth through a community, in time, develops many variants, since this transmission cannot produce word-for-word and note-for-note accuracy. In addition, folk singers may choose to modify the songs they hear.\nFor example, the words of \"I'm a Man You Don't Meet Every Day\" (Roud 975) were written down in a broadside in the 18th century, and seem to have an Irish origin. In 1958 the song was recorded in Canada (My Name is Pat and I'm Proud of That). Scottish traveler Jeannie Robertson from Aberdeen, made the next recorded version in 1961. She has changed it to make reference to \"Jock Stewart\", one of her relatives, and there are no Irish references. In 1976 Scottish artist Archie Fisher deliberately altered the song to remove the reference to a dog being shot. In 1985 The Pogues took it full circle by restoring the Irish references.\nBecause variants proliferate naturally, there is generally no \"authoritative\" version of song. Researchers in traditional songs have encountered countless versions of the Barbara Allen ballad throughout the English-speaking world, and these versions often differ greatly from each other. The original is not known; many versions can lay an equal claim to authenticity.\nInfluential folklorist Cecil Sharp felt that these competing variants of a traditional song would undergo a process of improvement akin to biological natural selection: only those new variants that were the most appealing to ordinary singers would be picked up by others and transmitted onward in time. Thus, over time we would expect each traditional song to become more aesthetically appealing, due to incremental community improvement.\nLiterary interest in the popular ballad form dates back at least to Thomas Percy and William Wordsworth. English Elizabethan and Stuart composers had often evolved their music from folk themes, the classical suite was based upon stylised folk-dances, and Joseph Haydn's use of folk melodies is noted. But the emergence of the term \"folk\" coincided with an \"outburst of national feeling all over Europe\" that was particularly strong at the edges of Europe, where national identity was most asserted. Nationalist composers emerged in Central Europe, Russia, Scandinavia, Spain and Britain: the music of Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, Smetana, Grieg, Rimsky-Korsakov, Brahms, Liszt, de Falla, Wagner, Sibelius, Vaughan Williams, Bart\u00f3k, and many others drew upon folk melodies.\nRegional forms.\nWhile the loss of traditional folk music in the face of the rise of popular music is a worldwide phenomenon, it is not one occurring at a uniform rate throughout the world. The process is most advanced \"where industrialization and commercialisation of culture are most advanced\" but also occurs more gradually even in settings of lower technological advancement. However, the loss of traditional music is slowed in nations or regions where traditional folk music is a badge of cultural or national identity.\nEarly folk music, fieldwork and scholarship.\nMuch of what is known about folk music prior to the development of audio recording technology in the 19th century comes from fieldwork and writings of scholars, collectors and proponents.\n19th-century Europe.\nStarting in the 19th century, academics and amateur scholars, taking note of the musical traditions being lost, initiated various efforts to preserve the music of the people. One such effort was the collection by Francis James Child in the late 19th century of the texts of over three hundred ballads in the English and Scots traditions (called the Child Ballads), some of which predated the 16th century.\nContemporaneously with Child, the Reverend Sabine Baring-Gould and later Cecil Sharp worked to preserve a great body of English rural traditional song, music and dance, under the aegis of what became and remains the English Folk Dance and Song Society (EFDSS). Sharp campaigned with some success to have English traditional songs (in his own heavily edited and expurgated versions) to be taught to school children in hopes of reviving and prolonging the popularity of those songs. Throughout the 1960s and early to mid-1970s, American scholar Bertrand Harris Bronson published an exhaustive four-volume collection of the then-known variations of both the texts and tunes associated with what came to be known as the Child Canon. He also advanced some significant theories concerning the workings of oral-aural tradition.\nSimilar activity was also under way in other countries. One of the most extensive was perhaps the work done in Riga by Krisjanis Barons, who between the years 1894 and 1915 published six volumes that included the texts of 217,996 Latvian folk songs, the \"Latvju dainas\". In Norway the work of collectors such as Ludvig Mathias Lindeman was extensively used by Edvard Grieg in his \"Lyric Pieces\" for piano and in other works, which became immensely popular.\nAround this time, composers of classical music developed a strong interest in collecting traditional songs, and a number of composers carried out their own field work on traditional music. These included Percy Grainger and Ralph Vaughan Williams in England and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k in Hungary. These composers, like many of their predecessors, both made arrangements of folk songs and incorporated traditional material into original classical compositions.\nNorth America.\nThe advent of audio recording technology provided folklorists with a revolutionary tool to preserve vanishing musical forms. The earliest American folk music scholars were with the American Folklore Society (AFS), which emerged in the late 1800s. Their studies expanded to include Native American music, but still treated folk music as a historical item preserved in isolated societies as well. In North America, during the 1930s and 1940s, the Library of Congress worked through the offices of traditional music collectors Robert Winslow Gordon, Alan Lomax and others to capture as much North American field material as possible. John Lomax (the father of Alan Lomax) was the first prominent scholar to study distinctly American folk music such as that of cowboys and southern blacks. His first major published work was in 1911, \"Cowboy Songs and Other Frontier Ballads\". and was arguably the most prominent US folk music scholar of his time, notably during the beginnings of the folk music revival in the 1930s and early 1940s. Cecil Sharp also worked in America, recording the traditional songs of the Appalachian Mountains in 1916\u20131918 in collaboration with Maud Karpeles and Olive Dame Campbell and is considered the first major scholar covering American folk music. Campbell and Sharp are represented under other names by actors in the modern movie \"Songcatcher\".\nOne strong theme amongst folk scholars in the early decades of the 20th century was regionalism, the analysis of the diversity of folk music (and related cultures) based on regions of the US rather than based on a given song's historical roots. Later, a dynamic of class and circumstances was added to this. The most prominent regionalists were literary figures with a particular interest in folklore. Carl Sandburg often traveled the U.S. as a writer and a poet. He also collected songs in his travels and, in 1927, published them in the book \"The American Songbag\". Rachel Donaldson, a historian who worked for Vanderbilt, later stated this about The American Songbird in her analysis of the folk music revival. \"In his collections of folk songs, Sandburg added a class dynamic to popular understandings of American folk music. This was the final element of the foundation upon which the early folk music revivalists constructed their own view of Americanism. Sandburg's working-class Americans joined with the ethnically, racially, and regionally diverse citizens that other scholars, public intellectuals, and folklorists celebrated their own definitions of the American folk, definitions that the folk revivalists used in constructing their own understanding of American folk music, and an overarching American identity\".\nPrior to the 1930s, the study of folk music was primarily the province of scholars and collectors. The 1930s saw the beginnings of larger scale themes, commonalities, and linkages in folk music developing in the populace and practitioners as well, often related to the Great Depression. Regionalism and cultural pluralism grew as influences and themes. During this time folk music began to become enmeshed with political and social activism themes and movements. Two related developments were the U.S. Communist Party's interest in folk music as a way to reach and influence Americans, and politically active prominent folk musicians and scholars seeing communism as a possible better system, through the lens of the Great Depression. Woody Guthrie exemplifies songwriters and artists with such an outlook.\nFolk music festivals proliferated during the 1930s. President Franklin Roosevelt was a fan of folk music, hosted folk concerts at the White House, and often patronized folk festivals. One prominent festival was Sarah Gertrude Knott's National Folk Festival, established in St. Louis, Missouri in 1934. Under the sponsorship of the Washington Post, the festival was held in Washington, DC at Constitution Hall from 1937 to 1942. The folk music movement, festivals, and the wartime effort were seen as forces for social goods such as democracy, cultural pluralism, and the removal of culture and race-based barriers.\nThe American folk music revivalists of the 1930s approached folk music in different ways. Three primary schools of thought emerged: \"Traditionalists\" (e.g. Sarah Gertrude Knott and John Lomax) emphasized the preservation of songs as artifacts of deceased cultures. \"Functional\" folklorists (e.g. Botkin and Alan Lomax) maintained that songs only retain relevance when used by those cultures which retain the traditions which birthed those songs. \"Left-wing\" folk revivalists (e.g. Charles Seeger and Lawrence Gellert) emphasized music's role \"in 'people's' struggles for social and political rights\". By the end of the 1930s these and others had turned American folk music into a social movement.\nSometimes folk musicians became scholars and advocates themselves. For example, Jean Ritchie (1922\u20132015) was the youngest child of a large family from Viper, Kentucky that had preserved many of the old Appalachian traditional songs. Ritchie, living in a time when the Appalachians had opened up to outside influence, was university educated and ultimately moved to New York City, where she made a number of classic recordings of the family repertoire and published an important compilation of these songs.\nIn January 2012, the American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress, with the Association for Cultural Equity, announced that they would release Lomax's vast archive of 1946 and later recording in digital form. Lomax spent the last 20 years of his life working on an Interactive Multimedia educational computer project he called the Global Jukebox, which included 5,000 hours of sound recordings, 400,000 feet of film, 3,000 videotapes, and 5,000 photographs. As of March 2012, this has been accomplished. Approximately 17,400 of Lomax's recordings from 1946 and later have been made available free online. This material from Alan Lomax's independent archive, begun in 1946, which has been digitized and offered by the Association for Cultural Equity, is \"distinct from the thousands of earlier recordings on acetate and aluminum discs he made from 1933 to 1942 under the auspices of the Library of Congress. This earlier collection\u2014which includes the famous Jelly Roll Morton, Woody Guthrie, Lead Belly, and Muddy Waters sessions, as well as Lomax's prodigious collections made in Haiti and Eastern Kentucky (1937)\u00a0\u2014 is the provenance of the American Folklife Center\" at the library of Congress.\nNational and regional forms.\nAfrica.\nAfrica is a vast continent and its regions and nations have distinct musical traditions. The music of North Africa for the most part has a different history from Sub-Saharan African music traditions.\nThe music and dance forms of the African diaspora, including African American music and many Caribbean genres like soca, calypso and Zouk; and Latin American music genres like the samba, Cuban rumba, salsa; and other clave (rhythm)-based genres, were founded to varying degrees on the music of African slaves, which has in turn influenced African popular music.\nAsia.\nMany Asian civilizations distinguish between art/court/classical styles and \"folk\" music. For example, the late Alam Lohar is an example of a South Asian singer who was classified as a folk singer.\nKhunung Eshei/Khuland Eshei is an ancient folk song from India, a country of Asia, of Meiteis of Manipur, that is an example of Asian folk music, and how they put it into its own genre.\nFolk music of China.\nArchaeological discoveries date Chinese folk music back 7000 years; it is largely based on the pentatonic scale.\nHan traditional weddings and funerals usually include a form of oboe called a suona, and apercussive ensembles called a chuigushou. Ensembles consisting of mouth organs (sheng), shawms (suona), flutes (dizi) and percussion instruments (especially yunluo gongs) are popular in northern villages; their music is descended from the imperial temple music of Beijing, Xi'an, Wutai shan and Tianjin. Xi'an drum music, consisting of wind and percussive instruments, is popular around Xi'an, and has received some commercial popularity outside of China. Another important instrument is the sheng, a type of Chinese pipe, an ancient instrument that is ancestor of all Western free reed instruments, such as the accordion. Parades led by Western-type brass bands are common, often competing in volume with a shawm/chuigushou band.\nIn southern Fujian and Taiwan, Nanyin or Nanguan is a genre of traditional ballads. They are sung by a woman accompanied by a xiao and a pipa, as well as other traditional instruments. The music is generally sorrowful and typically deals with love-stricken people. Further south, in Shantou, Hakka and Chaozhou, zheng ensembles are popular. Sizhu ensembles use flutes and bowed or plucked string instruments to make harmonious and melodious music that has become popular in the West among some listeners. These are popular in Nanjing and Hangzhou, as well as elsewhere along the southern Yangtze area. Jiangnan Sizhu (silk and bamboo music from Jiangnan) is a style of instrumental music, often played by amateur musicians in tea houses in Shanghai. Guangdong Music or Cantonese Music is instrumental music from Guangzhou and surrounding areas. The music from this region influenced Yueju (Cantonese Opera) music, which would later grow popular during the self-described \"Golden Age\" of China under the PRC.\nFolk songs have been recorded since ancient times in China. The term Yuefu was used for a broad range of songs such as ballads, laments, folk songs, love songs, and songs performed at court. China is a vast country, with a multiplicity of linguistic and geographic regions. Folk songs are categorized by geographic region, language type, ethnicity, social function (e.g. work song, ritual song, courting song) and musical type. Modern anthologies collected by Chinese folklorists distinguish between traditional songs, revolutionary songs, and newly-invented songs. The songs of northwest China are known as \u201cflower songs\u201d (\"hua\u2019er\"), a reference to beautiful women, while in the past they were notorious for their erotic content. The village \u201cmountain songs\u201d (\"shan\u2019ge\") of Jiangsu province were also well-known for their amorous themes. Other regional song traditions include the \u201cstrummed lyrics\u201d (\"tanci\") of the Lower Yangtze Delta, the Cantonese Wooden Fish tradition (\"muyu\" or \"muk-yu\") and the Drum Songs (\"guci\") of north China.\nIn the twenty-first century many cherished Chinese folk songs have been inscribed in the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. In the process, songs once seen as vulgar are now being reconstructed as romantic courtship songs. Regional song competitions, popular in many communities, have promoted professional folk singing as a career, with some individual folk singers having gained national prominence.\nTraditional folk music of Sri Lanka.\nThe art, music and dance of Sri Lanka derive from the elements of nature, and have been enjoyed and developed in the Buddhist environment. The music is of several types and uses only a few types of instruments. The folk songs and poems were used in social gatherings to work together. The Indian influenced classical music has grown to be unique. The traditional drama, music and songs of Sinhala Light Music are typically Sri Lankan.\nThe temple paintings and carvings feature birds, elephants, wild animals, flowers, and trees, and the Traditional 18 Dances display the dancing of birds and animals. For example:\nMusical types include:\nThe classical Sinhalese orchestra consists of five categories of instruments, but among the percussion instruments, the drum is essential for dance.\nThe vibrant beat of the rhythm of the drums form the basic of the dance. The dancers' feet bounce off the floor and they leap and swirl in patterns that reflect the complex rhythms of the drum beat. This drum beat may seem simple on the first hearing but it takes a long time to master the intricate rhythms and variations, which the drummer sometimes can bring to a crescendo of intensity. There are six common types of drums falling within 3 styles (one-faced, two-faced, and flat-faced):\nOther instruments include:\nAustralia.\nFolk song traditions were taken to Australia by early settlers from England, Scotland and Ireland and gained particular foothold in the rural outback. The rhyming songs, poems and tales written in the form of bush ballads often relate to the itinerant and rebellious spirit of Australia in The Bush, and the authors and performers are often referred to as bush bards. The 19th century was the golden age of bush ballads. Several collectors have catalogued the songs including John Meredith whose recording in the 1950s became the basis of the collection in the National Library of Australia.\nThe songs tell personal stories of life in the wide open country of Australia. Typical subjects include mining, raising and droving cattle, sheep shearing, wanderings, war stories, the 1891 Australian shearers' strike, class conflicts between the landless working class and the squatters (landowners), and outlaws such as Ned Kelly, as well as love interests and more modern fare such as trucking. The most famous bush ballad is \"Waltzing Matilda\", which has been called \"the unofficial national anthem of Australia\".\nIndigenous Australian music includes the music of Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders, who are collectively called Indigenous Australians; it incorporates a variety of distinctive traditional music styles practiced by Indigenous Australian peoples, as well as a range of contemporary musical styles of and fusion with European traditions as interpreted and performed by indigenous Australian artists. Music has formed an integral part of the social, cultural and ceremonial observances of these peoples, down through the millennia of their individual and collective histories to the present day. The traditional forms include many aspects of performance and musical instruments unique to particular regions or Indigenous Australian groups. Equal elements of musical tradition are common through much of the Australian continent, and even beyond. The culture of the Torres Strait Islanders is related to that of adjacent parts of New Guinea and so their music is also related. Music is a vital part of Indigenous Australians' cultural maintenance.\nEurope.\nCeltic traditional music.\nCeltic music is a term used by artists, record companies, music stores and music magazines to describe a broad grouping of musical genres that evolved out of the folk musical traditions of the Celtic peoples. These traditions include Irish, Scottish, Manx, Cornish, Welsh, and Breton traditions. Asturian and Galician music is often included, though there is no significant research showing that this has any close musical relationship. Brittany's Folk revival began in the 1950s with the \"bagado\u00f9\" and the \"kan-ha-diskan\" before growing to world fame through Alan Stivell's work since the mid-1960s.\nIn Ireland, The Clancy Brothers and Tommy Makem (although its members were all Irish-born, the group became famous while based in New York's Greenwich Village), The Dubliners, Clannad, Planxty, The Chieftains, The Pogues, The Corrs, The Irish Rovers, and a variety of other folk bands have done much over the past few decades to revitalise and re-popularise Irish traditional music. These bands were rooted, to a greater or lesser extent, in a tradition of Irish music and benefited from the efforts of artists such as Seamus Ennis and Peter Kennedy.\nIn Scotland, The Corries, Silly Wizard, Capercaillie, Runrig, Jackie Leven, Julie Fowlis, Karine Polwart, Alasdair Roberts, Dick Gaughan, Wolfstone, Boys of the Lough, and The Silencers have kept Scottish folk vibrant and fresh by mixing traditional Scottish and Gaelic folk songs with more contemporary genres. These artists have also been commercially successful in continental Europe and North America. There is an emerging wealth of talent in the Scottish traditional music scene, with bands such as M\u00e0nran, Skipinnish, Barluath and Breabach and solo artists such as Patsy Reid, Robyn Stapleton and Mischa MacPherson gaining a lot of success in recent years.\nCentral and Eastern Europe.\nDuring the Eastern Bloc era, national folk dancing was actively promoted by the state. Dance troupes from Russia and Poland toured non-communist Europe from about 1937 to 1990. The Red Army Choir recorded many albums, becoming the most popular military band. Eastern Europe is also the origin of the Jewish Klezmer tradition.\nThe polka is a central European dance and also a genre of dance music familiar throughout Europe and the Americas. It originated in the middle of the 19th century in Bohemia. Polka is still a popular genre of folk music in many European countries and is performed by folk artists in Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, Czech Republic, Netherlands, Croatia, Slovenia, Germany, Hungary, Austria, Switzerland, Italy, Ukraine, Belarus, Russia and Slovakia. Local varieties of this dance are also found in the Nordic countries, United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland, Latin America (especially Mexico), and in the United States.\nGerman Volkslieder perpetuated by Liederhandschriften manuscripts like \"Carmina Burana\" date back to medieval Minnesang and Meistersinger traditions. Those folk songs revived in the late 18th century period of German Romanticism, first promoted by Johann Gottfried Herder and other advocates of the Enlightenment, later compiled by Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano (\"Des Knaben Wunderhorn\") as well as by Ludwig Uhland.\nThe Volksmusik and folk dances genre, especially in the Alpine regions of Bavaria, Austria, Switzerland (\"Kuhreihen\") and South Tyrol, up to today has lingered in rustic communities against the backdrop of industrialisation\u2014Low German shanties or the Wienerlied (\"Schrammelmusik\") being notable exceptions. Slovene folk music in Upper Carniola and Styria also originated from the Alpine traditions, like the prolific Lojze Slak Ensemble. Traditional \"Volksmusik\" is not to be confused with commercial \"Volkst\u00fcmliche Musik\", which is a derivation of that.\nThe Hungarian group Muzsik\u00e1s played numerous American tours and participated in the Hollywood movie \"The English Patient\" while the singer M\u00e1rta Sebesty\u00e9n worked with the band Deep Forest. The Hungarian \"t\u00e1nch\u00e1z\" movement, started in the 1970s, involves strong cooperation between musicology experts and enthusiastic amateurs. However, traditional Hungarian folk music and folk culture barely survived in some rural areas of Hungary, and it has also begun to disappear among the ethnic Hungarians in Transylvania. The t\u00e1nch\u00e1z movement revived broader folk traditions of music, dance, and costume together and created a new kind of music club. The movement spread to ethnic Hungarian communities elsewhere in the world.\nBalkan music.\nBalkan folk music was influenced by the mingling of Balkan ethnic groups in the period of the Ottoman Empire. It comprises the music of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Montenegro, Serbia, Romania, North Macedonia, Albania, some of the historical states of Yugoslavia or Serbia and Montenegro and geographical regions such as Thrace. Some music is characterised by complex rhythm.\nA notable act is the Mystery of the Bulgarian Voices, which won the Grammy Award for Best Traditional Folk Recording at the 32nd annual ceremony.\nAn important part of the whole Balkan folk music is the music of the local Romani ethnic minority, which is called tallava and brass band music.\nNordic folk music.\nNordic folk music includes a number of traditions in Northern European, especially Scandinavian, countries. The Nordic countries are generally taken to include Iceland, Norway, Finland, Sweden, Denmark and Greenland. Sometimes it is taken to include the Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.\nThe many regions of the Nordic countries share certain traditions, many of which have diverged significantly, like Psalmodicon of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. It is possible to group together the Baltic states (or, sometimes, only Estonia) and parts of northwest Russia as sharing cultural similarities, although the relationship has gone cold in recent years. Contrast with Norway, Sweden, Denmark and the Atlantic islands of Iceland and the Faroe Islands, which share virtually no similarities of that kind. Greenland's Inuit culture has its own unique musical traditions. Finland shares many cultural similarities with both the Baltic nations and the Scandinavian nations. The Sami of Sweden, Norway, Finland and Russia have their own unique culture, with ties to the neighboring cultures.\nSwedish folk music is a genre of music based largely on folkloric collection work that began in the early 19th century in Sweden. The primary instrument of Swedish folk music is the fiddle. Another common instrument, unique to Swedish traditions, is the nyckelharpa. Most Swedish instrumental folk music is dance music; the signature music and dance form within Swedish folk music is the polska. Vocal and instrumental traditions in Sweden have tended to share tunes historically, though they have been performed separately. Beginning with the folk music revival of the 1970s, vocalists and instrumentalists have also begun to perform together in folk music ensembles.\nLatin America.\nThe folk music of the Americas consists of the encounter and union of three main musical types: European traditional music, traditional music of the American natives, and tribal African music that arrived with slaves from that continent.\nThe particular case of Latin and South American music points to Andean music among other native musical styles (such as Caribbean and pampean), Iberian music of Spain and Portugal, and generally speaking African tribal music, the three of which fused together evolving in differentiated musical forms in Central and South America.\nAndean music comes from the region of the Quechuas, Aymaras, and other peoples that inhabit the general area of the Inca Empire prior to European contact. It includes folklore music of parts of Bolivia, Ecuador, Chile, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela. Andean music is popular to different degrees across Latin America, having its core public in rural areas and among indigenous populations. The Nueva Canci\u00f3n movement of the 1970s revived the genre across Latin America and brought it to places where it was unknown or forgotten.\nNueva canci\u00f3n (Spanish for 'new song') is a movement and genre within Latin American and Iberian folk music, folk-inspired music, and socially committed music. In some respects its development and role is similar to the second folk music revival in North America. This includes evolution of this new genre from traditional folk music, essentially contemporary folk music except that that English genre term is not commonly applied to it. Nueva cancion is recognized as having played a powerful role in the social upheavals in Portugal, Spain and Latin America during the 1970s and 1980s.\nNueva cancion first surfaced during the 1960s as \"The Chilean New Song\" in Chile. The musical style emerged shortly afterwards in Spain and areas of Latin America where it came to be known under similar names. Nueva canci\u00f3n renewed traditional Latin American folk music, and with its political lyrics it was soon associated with revolutionary movements, the Latin American New Left, Liberation Theology, hippie and human rights movements. It would gain great popularity throughout Latin America, and it is regarded as a precursor to Rock en espa\u00f1ol.\nCueca is a family of musical styles and associated dances from Chile, Bolivia and Peru.\nTrova and Son are styles of traditional Cuban music originating in the province of Oriente that includes influences from Spanish song and dance, such as Bolero and contradanza as well as Afro-Cuban rhythm and percussion elements.\nModa de viola is the name designated to Brazilian folk music. It is often performed with a 6-string nylon acoustic guitar, but the most traditional instrument is the viola caipira. The songs basically detailed the difficulties of life of those who work in the country. The themes are usually associated with the land, animals, folklore, impossible love and separation. Although there are some upbeat songs, most of them are nostalgic and melancholic.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nCanada's traditional folk music is particularly diverse. Even prior to liberalizing its immigration laws in the 1960s, Canada was ethnically diverse with dozens of different Indigenous and European groups present. In terms of music, academics do not speak of a Canadian tradition, but rather ethnic traditions (Acadian music, Irish-Canadian music, Blackfoot music, Innu music, Inuit music, M\u00e9tis fiddle, etc.) and later in Eastern Canada regional traditions (Newfoundland music, Cape Breton fiddling, Quebecois music, etc.)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Knowledge of the history of Canada\", wrote Isabelle Mills in 1974, \"is essential in understanding the mosaic of Canadian folk song. Part of this mosaic is supplied by the folk songs of Canada brought by European and Anglo-Saxon settlers to the new land.\" She describes how the French colony at Qu\u00e9bec brought French immigrants, followed before long by waves of immigrants from Great Britain, Germany, and other European countries, all bringing music from their homelands, some of which survives into the present day. Ethnographer and folklorist Marius Barbeau estimated that well over ten thousand French folk songs and their variants had been collected in Canada. Many of the older ones had by then died out in France.\nMusic as professionalized paid entertainment grew relatively slowly in Canada, especially remote rural areas, through the 19th and early 20th centuries. While in urban music clubs of the dance hall/vaudeville variety became popular, followed by jazz, rural Canada remained mostly a land of traditional music. Yet when American radio networks began broadcasting into Canada in the 1920s and 1930s, the audience for Canadian traditional music progressively declined in favour of American Nashville-style country music and urban styles like jazz. The Americanization of Canadian music led the Canadian Radio League to lobby for a national public broadcaster in the 1930s, eventually leading to the creation of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) in 1936. The CBC promoted Canadian music, including traditional music, on its radio and later television services, but the mid-century craze for all things \"modern\" led to the decline of folk music relative to rock and pop. Canada was however influenced by the folk music revival of the 1960s, when local venues such as the Montreal Folk Workshop, and other folk clubs and coffee houses across the country, became crucibles for emerging songwriters and performers as well as for interchange with artists visiting from abroad.\nUnited States.\nAmerican traditional music is also called roots music. Roots music is a broad category of music including bluegrass, country music, gospel, old time music, jug bands, Appalachian folk, blues, Cajun and Native American music. The music is considered American either because it is native to the United States or because it developed there, out of foreign origins, to such a degree that it struck musicologists as something distinctly new. It is considered \"roots music\" because it served as the basis of music later developed in the United States, including rock and roll, contemporary folk music, rhythm and blues, and jazz. Some of these genres are considered to be traditional folk music.\nFolk music revivals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"It's self-perpetuating, regenerative. It's what you'd call a perennial American song. I don't think it needs a revival, resuscitation. It lives and flourishes. It really just needs people who are 18 years old to get exposed to it. But it will go on with or without them. The folk song is more powerful than anything on the radio, than anything that's released...It's that distillation of the voices that goes on for a long, long time, and that's what makes them strong.\"\n\u2014 Ketch Secor\n\"Folk music revival\" refers to either a period of renewed interest in traditional folk music, or to an event or period which transforms it; the latter usually includes a social activism component. A prominent example of the former is the British folk revival of approximately 1890\u20131920. The most prominent and influential example of the latter (to the extent that it is usually called \"\"the\" folk music revival\") is the folk revival of the mid 20th century, centered in the English-speaking world which gave birth to contemporary folk music. See the \"Contemporary folk music\" article for a description of this revival.\nOne earlier revival influenced western classical music. Such composers as Percy Grainger, Ralph Vaughan Williams and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, made field recordings or transcriptions of folk singers and musicians.\nIn Spain, Isaac Alb\u00e9niz (1860\u20131909) produced piano works reflect his Spanish heritage, including the \"Suite Iberia\" (1906\u20131909). Enrique Granados (1867\u20131918) composed \"zarzuela\", Spanish light opera, and \"Danzas Espa\u00f1olas\" \u2013 Spanish Dances. Manuel de Falla (1876\u20131946) became interested in the cante jondo of Andalusian flamenco, the influence of which can be strongly felt in many of his works, which include \"Nights in the Gardens of Spain\" and \"Siete canciones populares espa\u00f1olas\" (\"Seven Spanish Folksongs\", for voice and piano). Composers such as Fernando Sor and Francisco Tarrega established the guitar as Spain's national instrument. Modern Spanish folk artists abound (Mil i Maria, Russian Red, et al.) modernizing while respecting the traditions of their forebears.\nFlamenco grew in popularity through the 20th century, as did northern styles such as the Celtic music of Galicia. French classical composers, from Bizet to Ravel, also drew upon Spanish themes, and distinctive Spanish genres became universally recognized.\nFolk music revivals or roots revivals also encompass a range of phenomena around the world where there is a renewed interest in traditional music. This is often by the young, often in the traditional music of their own country, and often included new incorporation of social awareness, causes, and evolutions of new music in the same style. Nueva canci\u00f3n, a similar evolution of a new form of socially committed music occurred in several Spanish-speaking countries.\nFestivals.\nUnited States.\nIt is sometimes claimed that the earliest United States folk music festival was the Mountain Dance and Folk Festival, 1928, in Asheville, North Carolina, founded by Bascom Lamar Lunsford. The National Folk Festival (USA) is an itinerant folk festival in the United States. Since 1934, it has been run by the National Council for the Traditional Arts (NCTA) and has been presented in 26 communities around the nation. After leaving some of these communities, the National Folk Festival has spun off several locally run folk festivals in its wake including the Lowell Folk Festival, the Richmond Folk Festival, the American Folk Festival and, most recently, the Montana Folk Festival.\nThe Newport Folk Festival is an annual folk festival held near Newport, Rhode Island. It ran most years from 1959 to 1970 and from 1985 to the present, with an attendance of approximately 10,000 people each year.\nThe four-day Philadelphia Folk Festival began in 1962. It is sponsored by the non-profit Philadelphia Folksong Society. The event hosts contemporary and traditional artists in genres including World/Fusion, Celtic, Singer-Songwriter, Folk Rock, Country, Klezmer, and Dance. It is held annually on the third weekend in August. The event now hosts approximately 12,000 visitors, presenting bands on 6 stages.\nThe Feast of the Hunters' Moon in Indiana draws approximately 60,000 visitors per year.\nUnited Kingdom.\nSidmouth Festival began in 1954, and Cambridge Folk Festival began in 1965. The Cambridge Folk Festival in Cambridge, England is noted for having a very wide definition of who can be invited as folk musicians. The \"club tents\" allow attendees to discover large numbers of unknown artists, who, for ten or 15 minutes each, present their work to the festival audience.\nAustralia.\nThe National Folk Festival is Australia's premier folk festival event and is attended by over 50,000 people. The Woodford Folk Festival and Port Fairy Folk Festival are similarly amongst Australia's largest major annual events, attracting top international folk performers as well as many local artists.\nCanada.\nStan Rogers is a lasting fixture of the Canadian folk festival Summerfolk, held annually in Owen Sound, Ontario, where the main stage and amphitheater are dedicated as the \"Stan Rogers Memorial Canopy\". The festival is firmly fixed in tradition, with Rogers' song \"The Mary Ellen Carter\" being sung by all involved, including the audience and a medley of acts at the festival. The Canmore Folk Music Festival is Alberta's longest running folk music festival.\nOther.\nUrkult N\u00e4s\u00e5ker, \u00c5ngermanland held August each year is purportedly Sweden's largest world-music festival.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"These sources are cited above with multiple abbreviated cites with varying locations.\"\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10624", "revid": "18515189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10624", "title": "Frank", "text": "Frank or Franks may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10627", "revid": "32763026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10627", "title": "Fiddle and violin", "text": ""}
{"id": "10628", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10628", "title": "Fullerene", "text": "Allotrope of carbons\nA fullerene is an allotrope of carbon whose molecule consists of carbon atoms connected by single and double bonds so as to form a closed or partially closed mesh, with fused rings of five to seven atoms. The molecule may be a hollow sphere, ellipsoid, tube, or many other shapes and sizes. Graphene (isolated atomic layers of graphite), which is a flat mesh of regular hexagonal rings, can be seen as an extreme member of the family.\nFullerenes with a closed mesh topology are informally denoted by their empirical formula C\"n\", often written C\"n\", where \"n\" is the number of carbon atoms. However, for some values of \"n\" there may be more than one isomer.\nThe family is named after buckminsterfullerene (C60), the most famous member, which in turn is named after Buckminster Fuller. The closed fullerenes, especially C60, are also informally called buckyballs for their resemblance to the standard ball of association football (\"soccer\"). Nested closed fullerenes have been named bucky onions. Cylindrical fullerenes are also called carbon nanotubes or buckytubes. The bulk solid form of pure or mixed fullerenes is called fullerite.\nFullerenes had been predicted for some time, but only after their accidental synthesis in 1985 were they detected in nature and outer space. The discovery of fullerenes greatly expanded the number of known allotropes of carbon, which had previously been limited to graphite, diamond, and amorphous carbon such as soot and charcoal. They have been the subject of intense research, both for their chemistry and for their technological applications, especially in materials science, electronics, and nanotechnology.\nHistory.\nPredictions and limited observations.\nThe icosahedral C60H60 cage was mentioned in 1965 as a possible topological structure. Eiji Osawa predicted the existence of C60 in 1970. He noticed that the structure of a corannulene molecule was a subset of the shape of a football, and hypothesised that a full ball shape could also exist. Japanese scientific journals reported his idea, but neither it nor any translations of it reached Europe or the Americas.\nAlso in 1970, R. W. Henson (then of the UK Atomic Energy Research Establishment) proposed the C60 structure and made a model of it. Unfortunately, the evidence for that new form of carbon was very weak at the time, so the proposal was met with skepticism, and was never published. It was acknowledged only in 1999.\nIn 1973, independently from Henson, a group of scientists from the USSR made a quantum-chemical analysis of the stability of C60 and calculated its electronic structure. The paper was published in 1973, but the scientific community did not give much importance to this theoretical prediction.\nAround 1980, Sumio Iijima identified the molecule of C60 from an electron microscope image of carbon black, where it formed the core of a particle with the structure of a \"bucky onion\".\nAlso in the 1980's at MIT, Mildred Dresselhaus and Morinobu Endo, collaborating with T. Venkatesan, directed studies blasting graphite with lasers, producing carbon clusters of atoms, which would be later identified as \"fullerenes.\"\nDiscovery of C60.\nIn 1985, Harold Kroto of the University of Sussex, working with James R. Heath, Sean O'Brien, Robert Curl and Richard Smalley from Rice University, discovered fullerenes in the sooty residue created by vaporising carbon in a helium atmosphere. In the mass spectrum of the product, discrete peaks appeared corresponding to molecules with the exact mass of sixty or seventy or more carbon atoms, namely C60 and C70. The team identified their structure as the now familiar \"buckyballs\".\nThe name \"buckminsterfullerene\" was eventually chosen for C60 by the discoverers as an homage to American architect Buckminster Fuller for the vague similarity of the structure to the geodesic domes which he popularized; which, if they were extended to a full sphere, would also have the icosahedral symmetry group. The \"ene\" ending was chosen to indicate that the carbons are unsaturated, being connected to only three other atoms instead of the normal four. The shortened name \"fullerene\" eventually came to be applied to the whole family.\nKroto, Curl, and Smalley were awarded the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their roles in the discovery of this class of molecules.\nFurther developments.\nKroto and the Rice team already discovered other fullerenes besides C60, and the list was much expanded in the following years. Carbon nanotubes were first discovered and synthesized in 1991.\nAfter their discovery, minute quantities of fullerenes were found to be produced in sooty flames, and by lightning discharges in the atmosphere. In 1992, fullerenes were found in a family of mineraloids known as shungites in Karelia, Russia.\nThe production techniques were improved by many scientists, including Donald Huffman, Wolfgang Kr\u00e4tschmer, Lowell D. Lamb, and Konstantinos Fostiropoulos. Thanks to their efforts, by 1990 it was relatively easy to produce gram-sized samples of fullerene powder. Fullerene purification remains a challenge to chemists and to a large extent determines fullerene prices.\nIn 2010, the spectral signatures of C60 and C70 were observed by NASA's Spitzer infrared telescope in a cloud of cosmic dust surrounding a star 6500 light years away. Kroto commented: \"This most exciting breakthrough provides convincing evidence that the buckyball has, as I long suspected, existed since time immemorial in the dark recesses of our galaxy.\" According to astronomer Letizia Stanghellini, \"It\u2019s possible that buckyballs from outer space provided seeds for life on Earth.\" In 2019, ionized C60 molecules were detected with the Hubble Space Telescope in the space between those stars.\nTypes.\nThere are two major families of fullerenes, with fairly distinct properties and applications: the closed buckyballs and the open-ended cylindrical carbon nanotubes. However, hybrid structures exist between those two classes, such as carbon nanobuds \u2014 nanotubes capped by hemispherical meshes or larger \"buckybuds\".\nBuckyballs.\nBuckminsterfullerene.\nBuckminsterfullerene is the smallest fullerene molecule containing pentagonal and hexagonal rings in which no two pentagons share an edge (which can be destabilizing, as in pentalene). It is also most common in terms of natural occurrence, as it can often be found in soot.\nThe empirical formula of buckminsterfullerene is C60 and its structure is a truncated icosahedron, which resembles an association football ball of the type made of twenty hexagons and twelve pentagons, with a carbon atom at the vertices of each polygon and a bond along each polygon edge.\nThe van der Waals diameter of a buckminsterfullerene molecule is about 1.1 nanometers (nm). The nucleus to nucleus diameter of a buckminsterfullerene molecule is about 0.71\u00a0nm.\nThe buckminsterfullerene molecule has two bond lengths. The 6:6 ring bonds (between two hexagons) can be considered \"double bonds\" and are shorter than the 6:5 bonds (between a hexagon and a pentagon). Its average bond length is 1.4 \u00c5.\nOther fullerenes.\nAnother fairly common fullerene has empirical formula C70, but fullerenes with 72, 76, 84 and even up to 100 carbon atoms are commonly obtained.\nThe smallest possible fullerene is the dodecahedral C20. There are no fullerenes with 22 vertices. The number of different fullerenes C2n grows with increasing \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a012,\u00a013,\u00a014,\u00a0..., roughly in proportion to \"n\"9 (sequence in the OEIS). For instance, there are 1812 non-isomorphic fullerenes C60. Note that only one form of C60, buckminsterfullerene, has no pair of adjacent pentagons (the smallest such fullerene). To further illustrate the growth, there are 214,127,713 non-isomorphic fullerenes C200, 15,655,672 of which have no adjacent pentagons. Optimized structures of many fullerene isomers are published and listed on the web.\nHeterofullerenes have heteroatoms substituting carbons in cage or tube-shaped structures. They were discovered in 1993 and greatly expand the overall fullerene class of compounds and can have dangling bonds on their surfaces. Notable examples include boron, nitrogen (azafullerene), oxygen, and phosphorus derivatives.\nCarbon nanotubes.\nCarbon nanotubes are cylindrical fullerenes. These tubes of carbon are usually only a few nanometres wide, but they can range from less than a micrometer to several millimeters in length. They often have closed ends, but can be open-ended as well. There are also cases in which the tube reduces in diameter before closing off. Their unique molecular structure results in extraordinary macroscopic properties, including high tensile strength, high electrical conductivity, high ductility, high heat conductivity, and relative chemical inactivity (as it is cylindrical and \"planar\" \u2014 that is, it has no \"exposed\" atoms that can be easily displaced). One proposed use of carbon nanotubes is in paper batteries, developed in 2007 by researchers at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Another highly speculative proposed use in the field of space technologies is to produce high-tensile carbon cables required by a space elevator.\nDerivatives.\nBuckyballs and carbon nanotubes have been used as building blocks for a great variety of derivatives and larger structures, such as\nHeterofullerenes and non-carbon fullerenes.\nAfter the discovery of C60, many fullerenes have been synthesized (or studied theoretically by molecular modeling methods) in which some or all the carbon atoms are replaced by other elements. Non-carbon nanotubes, in particular, have attracted much attention.\nBoron.\nA type of buckyball which uses boron atoms, instead of the usual carbon, was predicted and described in 2007. The B80 structure, with each atom forming 5 or 6 bonds, was predicted to be more stable than the C60 buckyball. However, subsequent analysis found that the predicted Ih symmetric structure was vibrationally unstable and the resulting cage would undergo a spontaneous symmetry break, yielding a puckered cage with rare Th symmetry (symmetry of a volleyball). The number of six-member rings in this molecule is 20 and number of five-member rings is 12. There is an additional atom in the center of each six-member ring, bonded to each atom surrounding it. By employing a systematic global search algorithm, it was later found that the previously proposed b80 fullerene is not a global maximum for 80-atom boron clusters and hence can not be found in nature; the most stable configurations have complex. The same paper concluded that boron's energy landscape, unlike others, has many disordered low-energy structures, hence pure boron fullerenes are unlikely to exist in nature.\nHowever, an irregular B40 complex dubbed borospherene was prepared in 2014. This complex has two hexagonal faces and four heptagonal faces with in D2d symmetry interleaved with a network of 48 triangles.\nOther elements.\nInorganic (carbon-free) fullerene-type structures have been built with the molybdenum(IV) sulfide (MoS2), long used as a graphite-like lubricant, tungsten (WS2), titanium (TiS2) and niobium (NbS2). These materials were found to be stable up to at least 350 tons/cm2 (34.3 GPa).\nIcosahedral or distorted-icosahedral fullerene-like complexes have also been prepared for germanium, tin, and lead; some of these complexes are spacious enough to hold most transition metal atoms.\nMain fullerenes.\nBelow is a table of main closed carbon fullerenes synthesized and characterized so far, with their CAS number when known. Fullerenes with fewer than 60 carbon atoms have been called \"lower fullerenes\", and those with more than 70 atoms \"higher fullerenes\".\nIn the table, \"Num.Isom.\" is the number of possible isomers within the \"isolated pentagon rule\", which states that two pentagons in a fullerene should not share edges. \"Mol.Symm.\" is the symmetry of the molecule, whereas \"Cryst.Symm.\" is that of the crystalline framework in the solid state. Both are specified for the most experimentally abundant form(s). The asterisk * marks symmetries with more than one chiral form.\nWhen C76 or C82 crystals are grown from toluene solution they have a monoclinic symmetry. The crystal structure contains toluene molecules packed between the spheres of the fullerene. However, evaporation of the solvent from C76 transforms it into a face-centered cubic form. Both monoclinic and face-centered cubic (fcc) phases are known for better-characterized C60 and C70 fullerenes.\nProperties.\nTopology.\nSchlegel diagrams are often used to clarify the 3D structure of closed-shell fullerenes, as 2D projections are often not ideal in this sense.\nIn mathematical terms, the combinatorial topology (that is, the carbon atoms and the bonds between them, ignoring their positions and distances) of a closed-shell fullerene with a simple sphere-like mean surface (orientable, genus zero) can be represented as a convex polyhedron; more precisely, its one-dimensional skeleton, consisting of its vertices and edges. The Schlegel diagram is a projection of that skeleton onto one of the faces of the polyhedron, through a point just outside that face; so that all other vertices project inside that face.\nThe Schlegel diagram of a closed fullerene is a graph that is planar and 3-regular (or \"cubic\"; meaning that all vertices have degree 3).\nA closed fullerene with sphere-like shell must have at least some cycles that are pentagons or heptagons. More precisely, if all the faces have 5 or 6 sides, it follows from Euler's polyhedron formula, \"V\"\u2212\"E\"+\"F\"=2 (where \"V\", \"E\", \"F\" are the numbers of vertices, edges, and faces), that \"V\" must be even, and that there must be exactly 12 pentagons and \"V\"/2\u221210 hexagons. Similar constraints exist if the fullerene has heptagonal (seven-atom) cycles.\nOpen fullerenes, like carbon nanotubes and graphene, can consist entirely of hexagonal rings. In theory, a long nanotube with ends joined to form a closed torus-like sheet could also consist entirely of hexagons.\nBonding.\nSince each carbon atom is connected to only three neighbors, instead of the usual four, it is customary to describe those bonds as being a mixture of single and double covalent bonds. The hybridization of carbon in C60 has been reported to be sp2.01. The bonding state can be analyzed by Raman spectroscopy, IR spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.\nEncapsulation.\nAdditional atoms, ions, clusters, or small molecules can be trapped inside fullerenes to form inclusion compounds known as endohedral fullerenes. An unusual example is the egg-shaped fullerene Tb3N@C84, which violates the isolated pentagon rule. Evidence for a meteor impact at the end of the Permian period was found by analyzing noble gases preserved by being trapped in fullerenes.\nResearch.\nIn the early 2000s, the chemical and physical properties of fullerenes were a hot topic in the field of research and development. \"Popular Science\" discussed possible uses of fullerenes (graphene) in armor.\nIn the field of nanotechnology, heat resistance and superconductivity are some of the more heavily studied properties.\nThere are many calculations that have been done using ab-initio quantum methods applied to fullerenes. By DFT and TD-DFT methods one can obtain IR, Raman and UV spectra. Results of such calculations can be compared with experimental results.\nFullerene is an unusual reactant in many organic reactions such as the Bingel reaction discovered in 1993.\nAromaticity.\nResearchers have been able to increase the reactivity of fullerenes by attaching active groups to their surfaces. Buckminsterfullerene does not exhibit \"superaromaticity\": that is, the electrons in the hexagonal rings do not delocalize over the whole molecule.\nA spherical fullerene of \"n\" carbon atoms has \"n\" pi-bonding electrons, free to delocalize. These should try to delocalize over the whole molecule. The quantum mechanics of such an arrangement should be like only one shell of the well-known quantum mechanical structure of a single atom, with a stable filled shell for \"n\" = 2, 8, 18, 32, 50, 72, 98, 128, etc. (i.e., twice a perfect square number), but this series does not include 60. This 2(\"N\"\u00a0+\u00a01)2 rule (with \"N\" integer) for spherical aromaticity is the three-dimensional analogue of H\u00fcckel's rule. The 10+ cation would satisfy this rule, and should be aromatic. This has been shown to be the case using quantum chemical modelling, which showed the existence of strong diamagnetic sphere currents in the cation.\nAs a result, C60 in water tends to pick up two more electrons and become an anion. The \"n\"C60 described below may be the result of C60 trying to form a loose metallic bond.\nReactions.\nPolymerization.\nUnder high pressure and temperature, buckyballs collapse to form various one-, two-, or three-dimensional carbon frameworks. Single-strand polymers are formed using the Atom Transfer Radical Addition Polymerization (ATRAP) route.\n\"Ultrahard fullerite\" is a coined term frequently used to describe material produced by high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT) processing of fullerite. Such treatment converts fullerite into a nanocrystalline form of diamond which has been reported to exhibit remarkable mechanical properties.\nChemistry.\nFullerenes are stable, but not totally unreactive. The sp2-hybridized carbon atoms, which are at their energy minimum in planar graphite, must be bent to form the closed sphere or tube, which produces angle strain. The characteristic reaction of fullerenes is electrophilic addition at 6,6-double bonds, which reduces angle strain by changing sp2-hybridized carbons into sp3-hybridized ones. The change in hybridized orbitals causes the bond angles to decrease from about 120\u00b0 in the sp2 orbitals to about 109.5\u00b0 in the sp3 orbitals. This decrease in bond angles allows for the bonds to bend less when closing the sphere or tube, and thus, the molecule becomes more stable.\nSolubility.\nFullerenes are soluble in many organic solvents, such as toluene, chlorobenzene, and 1,2,3-trichloropropane. Solubilities are generally rather low, such as 8 g/L for C60 in carbon disulfide. Still, fullerenes are the only known allotrope of carbon that can be dissolved in common solvents at room temperature. Among the best solvents is 1-chloronaphthalene, which will dissolve 51 g/L of C60.\nSolutions of pure buckminsterfullerene have a deep purple color. Solutions of C70 are a reddish brown. The higher fullerenes C76 to C84 have a variety of colors.\nMillimeter-sized crystals of C60 and C70, both pure and solvated, can be grown from benzene solution. Crystallization of C60 from benzene solution below 30\u00a0\u00b0C (when solubility is maximum) yields a triclinic solid solvate C60\u00b74C6H6. Above 30\u00a0\u00b0C one obtains solvate-free fcc C60.\nQuantum mechanics.\nIn 1999, researchers from the University of Vienna demonstrated that wave-particle duality applied to molecules such as fullerene.\nSuperconductivity.\nFullerenes are normally electrical insulators, but when crystallized with alkali metals, the resultant compound can be conducting or even superconducting.\nChirality.\nSome fullerenes (e.g. C76, C78, C80, and C84) are inherently chiral because they are D2-symmetric, and have been successfully resolved. Research efforts are ongoing to develop specific sensors for their enantiomers.\nStability.\nTwo theories have been proposed to describe the molecular mechanisms that make fullerenes. The older, \u201cbottom-up\u201d theory proposes that they are built atom-by-atom. The alternative \u201ctop-down\u201d approach claims that fullerenes form when much larger structures break into constituent parts.\nIn 2013 researchers discovered that asymmetrical fullerenes formed from larger structures settle into stable fullerenes. The synthesized substance was a particular metallofullerene consisting of 84 carbon atoms with two additional carbon atoms and two yttrium atoms inside the cage. The process produced approximately 100 micrograms.\nHowever, they found that the asymmetrical molecule could theoretically collapse to form nearly every known fullerene and metallofullerene. Minor perturbations involving the breaking of a few molecular bonds cause the cage to become highly symmetrical and stable. This insight supports the theory that fullerenes can be formed from graphene when the appropriate molecular bonds are severed.\nSystematic naming.\nAccording to the IUPAC, to name a fullerene, one must cite the number of member atoms for the rings which comprise the fullerene, its symmetry point group in the Schoenflies notation, and the total number of atoms. For example, buckminsterfullerene C60 is systematically named (C60-\"I\"h)[5,6]fullerene. The name of the point group should be retained in any derivative of said fullerene, even if that symmetry is lost by the derivation.\nTo indicate the position of substituted or attached elements, the fullerene atoms are usually numbered in a spiral path, usually starting with the ring on one of the main axes. If the structure of the fullerene does not allow such numbering, another starting atom was chosen to still achieve a spiral path sequence.\nThe latter is the case for C70, which is (C70-\"D\"5h(6))[5,6]fullerene in IUPAC notation. The symmetry \"D\"5h(6) means that this is the isomer where the \"C\"5 axis goes through a pentagon surrounded by hexagons rather than pentagons.\nIn IUPAC's nomenclature, fully saturated analogues of fullerenes are called \"fulleranes\". If the mesh has other element(s) substituted for one or more carbons, the compound is named a \"heterofullerene\". If a double bond is replaced by a methylene bridge , the resulting structure is a \"homofullerene\". If an atom is fully deleted and missing valences saturated with hydrogen atoms, it is a \"norfullerene\". When bonds are removed (both sigma and pi), the compound becomes \"secofullerene\"; if some new bonds are added in an unconventional order, it is a \"cyclofullerene\".\nProduction.\nFullerene production generally starts by producing fullerene-rich soot. The original (and still current) method was to send a large electric current between two nearby graphite electrodes in an inert atmosphere. The resulting electric arc vaporizes the carbon into a plasma that then cools into sooty residue. Alternatively, soot is produced by laser ablation of graphite or pyrolysis of aromatic hydrocarbons. Combustion of benzene is the most efficient process, developed at MIT.\nThese processes yield a mixture of various fullerenes and other forms of carbon. The fullerenes are then extracted from the soot using appropriate organic solvents and separated by chromatography. One can obtain milligram quantities of fullerenes with 80 atoms or more. C76, C78 and C84 are available commercially.\nApplications.\nFullerenes have been extensively used for several biomedical applications including the design of high-performance MRI contrast agents, X-ray imaging contrast agents, photodynamic therapy and drug and gene delivery, summarized in several comprehensive reviews.\nTumor research.\nWhile past cancer research has involved radiation therapy, photodynamic therapy is important to study because breakthroughs in treatments for tumor cells will give more options to patients with different conditions. Recent experiments using HeLa cells in cancer research involves the development of new photosensitizers with increased ability to be absorbed by cancer cells and still trigger cell death. It is also important that a new photosensitizer does not stay in the body for a long time to prevent unwanted cell damage.\nFullerenes can be made to be absorbed by HeLa cells. The C60 derivatives can be delivered to the cells by using the functional groups L-phenylalanine, folic acid, and L-arginine among others.\nFunctionalizing the fullerenes aims to increase the solubility of the molecule by the cancer cells. Cancer cells take up these molecules at an increased rate because of an upregulation of transporters in the cancer cell, in this case amino acid transporters will bring in the L-arginine and L-phenylalanine functional groups of the fullerenes.\nOnce absorbed by the cells, the C60 derivatives would react to light radiation by turning molecular oxygen into reactive oxygen which triggers apoptosis in the HeLa cells and other cancer cells that can absorb the fullerene molecule. This research shows that a reactive substance can target cancer cells and then be triggered by light radiation, minimizing damage to surrounding tissues while undergoing treatment.\nWhen absorbed by cancer cells and exposed to light radiation, the reaction that creates reactive oxygen damages the DNA, proteins, and lipids that make up the cancer cell. This cellular damage forces the cancerous cell to go through apoptosis, which can lead to the reduction in size of a tumor. Once the light radiation treatment is finished the fullerene will reabsorb the free radicals to prevent damage of other tissues. Since this treatment focuses on cancer cells, it is a good option for patients whose cancer cells are within reach of light radiation. As this research continues, the treatment may penetrate deeper into the body and be absorbed by cancer cells more effectively.\nSafety and toxicity.\nIn 2013, a comprehensive review on the toxicity of fullerene was published reviewing work beginning in the early 1990s to present and concluded that very little evidence gathered since the discovery of fullerenes indicate that C60 is toxic. The toxicity of these carbon nanoparticles is not only dose- and time-dependent, but also depends on a number of other factors such as:\nIt was recommended to assess the pharmacology of every new fullerene- or metallofullerene-based complex individually as a different compound.\nPopular culture.\nExamples of fullerenes appear frequently in popular culture. Fullerenes appeared in fiction well before scientists took serious interest in them. In a humorously speculative 1966 column for \"New Scientist\", David Jones suggested the possibility of making giant hollow carbon molecules by distorting a plane hexagonal net with the addition of impurity atoms.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10629", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10629", "title": "Francis II", "text": "Francis II may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "10630", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10630", "title": "Foundation Trilogy", "text": ""}
{"id": "10632", "revid": "38065450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10632", "title": "Fallacies of definition", "text": "Fallacies of definition are the various ways in which definitions can fail to explain terms. The phrase is used to suggest an analogy with an informal fallacy. Definitions may fail to have merit, because they: are overly broad, use obscure or ambiguous language, or contain circular reasoning; those are called fallacies of definition. Three major fallacies are: overly broad, overly narrow, and mutually exclusive definitions, a fourth is: incomprehensible definitions, and one of the most common is circular definitions.\nCircularity.\nIf one concept is defined by another, and the other is defined by the first, this is known as a circular definition, akin to circular reasoning: neither offers enlightenment about what one wanted to know. \"It is a fallacy because by using a synonym in the \"definiens\" the reader is told nothing significantly new.\"\nA straightforward example would be to define \"Jew\" as \"a person believing in Judaism\", and \"Judaism\" as \"the religion of the Jewish people\", which would make \"Judaism\" \"the religion of the people believing in Judaism\".\nIncongruity: overly broad or narrow.\nA definition intended to describe a given set of individuals fails if its description of matching individuals is incongruous: too broad (excessively loose with parameters) or too narrow (excessively strict with parameters). For example, \"a shape with four sides of equal length\" is not a sufficient definition for \"square\", because squares are not the only shapes that can have four sides of equal length; rhombi do as well. Likewise, defining \"rectangle\" as \"a shape with four perpendicular sides of equal length\" is inappropriate because it is too narrow, as it describes only squares while excluding all other kinds of rectangles, thus being a plainly incorrect definition.\nIf a cow were defined as an animal with horns, this would be overly broad (including goats, for example), while if a cow were defined as a black-and-white quadruped, this would be both overly narrow (excluding: all-black, all-white, all-brown and white-brown cows, for example) and overly broad (including Dalmatians, for example).\nObscurity.\nDefinitions can go wrong by using ambiguous, obscure, or figurative language. This can lead to circular definitions. Definitions should be defined in the most prosaic form of language to be understood, as failure to elucidate provides fallacious definitions. Figurative language can also be misinterpreted. For example, \"golden eyes\" in a biography may lead the reader to think that the person was fictional.\nAn example of obscurity is Samuel Johnson's definition for oats: \"A grain, which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.\" The thing defined (oats) should be pointed out rather than remain obscure. (Of course, this was not seriously intended as a definition of \"oats\" but as an ironic comment on the social, cultural, and financial differences between England and Scotland.)\nMutual exclusivity.\nThe definition completely excludes what is being defined. For example, a cow might be defined as a flying animal with no legs. In reality a cow has legs and cannot fly, but this example claims to define a cow using a definition that is opposite to what a cow actually is. \"Cow\" and \"flying animal with no legs\" are mutually exclusive to each other: they cannot refer to the same thing.\nSelf-contradictory requirements.\nDefinitions may fail by imposing conflicting requirements, making it impossible for them to apply to anything at all. For example, a cow being defined as a legless quadruped, or the term \"dynamic equilibrium\" \u2013 equilibrium state cannot be dynamic. These requirements may also be mutually exclusive.\nDefinist fallacy.\nThe definist fallacy is a logical fallacy, coined by William Frankena in 1939, that involves the definition of one property in terms of another.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10633", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10633", "title": "Fredericton", "text": "Capital city of New Brunswick, Canada\nFredericton (; ]) is the capital city of the Canadian province of New Brunswick. The city is situated in the west-central portion of the province along the Saint John River, also known by its Indigenous name of Wolastoq, which flows west to east as it bisects the city. The river is the dominant natural feature of the area. One of the main urban centres in New Brunswick, the city had a population of 63,116 and a metropolitan population of 108,610 in the 2021 Canadian Census. It is the third-largest city in the province after Moncton and Saint John.\nOn 1 January 2023, Fredericton annexed parts of five local service districts; revised census figures have not been released.\nAn important cultural, artistic, and educational centre for the province, Fredericton is home to two universities, the New Brunswick College of Craft and Design, and cultural institutions such as the Beaverbrook Art Gallery, the Fredericton Region Museum, and The Playhouse, a performing arts venue. The city hosts the annual Harvest Jazz &amp; Blues Festival, attracting regional and international jazz, blues, rock, and world artists. Fredericton is also an important and vibrant centre point for the region's top visual artists; many of New Brunswick's notable artists live and work there today. Fredericton has also been home to some great historical Canadian painters as well, including Goodridge Roberts, and Molly and Bruno Bobak.\nAs a provincial capital, its economy is tied to the public sector; however, the city also contains a growing IT and commercial sector. The city has the highest percentage of residents with post-secondary education in the province and the highest per capita income of any city in New Brunswick.\nHistory.\nThere is archaeological evidence of a camp in the area 12,000 years ago, and Maliseets farmed several kilometres upriver.\nColonists from the Kingdom of France in the late 1600s built Fort Nashwaak on the north side of the Saint John River, as the capital of Acadia. It withstood a British attack in 1696, but the capital was later moved to Port Royal. In 1713, Acadians escaping the British takeover of Nova Scotia settled the site, naming it Pointe Ste-Anne. It was destroyed in 1758 when the population of about 83 were exiled during the expulsion of the Acadians.\nIt was in 1783, when United Empire Loyalists arrived from New England, that the history of modern Fredericton began. The following year, New Brunswick was partitioned from Nova Scotia and became its own colony. Pointe-Ste-Anne was renamed \"Fredericstown\", after Frederick, second son of King George III. It became the capital of the new colony, being considered to have a better defensive position than larger Saint John.\nThe streets were laid out in the typical grid pattern of the time, with the names reflecting loyalist tendencies: Charlotte, Brunswick, George, King, and Queen.\nIn 1785, it became the shire town of York County. In 1790 the New Brunswick Legislative Building was constructed. As a centre of government, it attracted educational institutions, with King's College (now the University of New Brunswick) being the first English-language university in Canada, and religious institutions, with Christ Church Cathedral being built as the seat of the Anglican Diocese of Fredericton in 1853.\nIt was a British garrison town from 1784 to 1869, and the military compound is preserved as a National Historic Site of Canada.\nWith the New Brunswick Equal Opportunity program in the 1960s, county councils were abolished, and government services were centralized provincially in Fredericton, increasing jobs and population.\nGeography.\nThe Saint John River runs through Fredericton, with most of the city's post-war suburban development occurring on the gently sloping hills on either side of the river (although the downtown core is flat and lies low to the river).\nAt an altitude of about above sea level, Fredericton is nestled in the Pennsylvanian Basin. It differs markedly from the geologically older parts of the province. There are prominently two distinct areas in the region that are divided around the area of Wilsey Road, in the east end of the city. In the west side, the bedrock underneath the earth is topographically dominant, whereas the other is controlled by Pleistocene and recent deposits leading to the rivers (resulting in the area being shallow and wide). Fredericton and its surroundings are rich in water resources, which, coupled with highly arable soil, make the Fredericton region ideal for agriculture. The Saint John River and one of its major tributaries, the Nashwaak River, come together in Fredericton. The uninhabited parts of the city are heavily forested.\nClimate.\nFredericton has a warm-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfb\" under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system), with short, warm summers and long, cold winters. The city has high humidity and precipitation year-round; on average, Fredericton receives approximately of precipitation per year.\nDemographics.\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Fredericton had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nAt the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the Fredericton CMA had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nThe 2021 census reported that immigrants (individuals born outside Canada) comprise 7,790 persons or 12.6% of the total population of Fredericton. Of the total immigrant population, the top countries of origin were United Kingdom (765 persons or 9.8%), China (645 persons or 8.3%), United States of America (570 persons or 7.3%), Syria (505 persons or 6.5%), Philippines (500 persons or 6.4%), India (460 persons or 5.9%), Egypt (300 persons or 3.9%), Iran (245 persons or 3.1%), Lebanon (205 persons or 2.6%), and Democratic Republic of the Congo (180 persons or 2.3%).\nEthnicity.\nIn 2021, Fredericton was 82.5% white/European, 3.5% Indigenous and 14.0% visible minorities. The largest visible minority groups were Black (2.9%), South Asian (2.9%), Arab (2.5%), Chinese (1.8%) and Filipino (1.0%).\nFredericton accepted the highest number of refugees from the Syrian Civil War per capita of any Canadian city.\nLanguage.\nEnglish is spoken as a mother tongue by 80.2% of residents. Other mother tongues spoken are French (6.1%), Arabic (2.1%), Chinese languages (1.4%), Spanish (0.7%), Russian (0.6%), and Persian languages (0.5%). 1.4% of the population listed both English and French as mother tongues.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2021 census, religious groups in Fredericton included:\nThose who declare a religion are predominantly Protestant. Fredericton has a synagogue, a mosque, a Hindu temple, a Unitarian fellowship, and a Shambhala Buddhist meditation centre.\nEconomy.\nThe Government of New Brunswick and the universities are the primary employers. The policies of centralizing provincial government functions during the 1960s led to an expansion of the population.\nThe 1960s also saw an expansion of the University of New Brunswick due to increased post-war university enrolment, as well as the construction of Saint Thomas University. The Law School, now the University of New Brunswick Faculty of Law moved from Saint John to the Fredericton area.\nThe city has been investing actively in IT infrastructure. The City of Fredericton won the \"Judges Innovation Award\" at the 2004 Canadian Information Productivity Awards due to their \"Fred-eZone\" free municipality wide Wi-Fi initiative. This and other innovations by the city's utelco, e-Novations, led Intel to do a case study on their successes. Fred-eZone spans much of the city's downtown and parts of surrounding residential areas, as well as peripheral commercial areas such as Fredericton's Regent Mall. In 2008 and 2009 the Intelligent Community Forum selected Fredericton as a Top 7 Intelligent Community, based partly on the city's work in the IT sector.\nArts and culture.\nThe Playhouse is the main venue for Theatre New Brunswick, the province's largest professional theatre company.\nFestivals include the Harvest Jazz &amp; Blues Festival, the New Brunswick Summer Music Festival, the Silver Wave Film Festival, the Flourish Arts &amp; Music Festival, and Symphony New Brunswick.\nFredericton has a long literary tradition, having been home to Jonathan Odell, Charles G. D. Roberts, Bliss Carman, and Francis Sherman. Writers living in Fredericton include Raymond Fraser, Herb Curtis, David Adams Richards, Mark Anthony Jarman, and Gerard Beirne.\nFredericton's beloved fountain \"Freddy the Nude Dude\", officially known as \"Putto with Fish\" sits outside City Hall at 397 Queen St. \"Freddy the Nude Dude\" was donated to the city by Mayor George Edward Fentey, in 1885. The statue depicts a nude Cherub and is a beloved fixture of downtown Fredericton. The famed statue has had some trouble since its historic arrival in 1885. In January 2013, \"Freddy the Nude Dude\" was taken south to Alabama for a replication of the original statue after 128 winters worth of damage. The original Freddy is kept safely inside City Hall where it is protected from further weather damage.\nArchitecture.\nStyles range from Victorian to modern. There are 12 National Historic Sites of Canada.\nMuseums and historic buildings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSports.\nThere are no professional sports teams in Fredericton, although both universities have extensive athletic programs. The UNB Reds play in the Atlantic University Sport conference of U Sports and St. Thomas Tommies play in the Atlantic Collegiate Athletic Association conference of the Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association for most sports, although their women's hockey team, cross-country teams, and track &amp; field teams play in the Atlantic University Sports conference of U Sports.\nFredericton's high schools compete in a variety of sports in the New Brunswick Interscholastic Athletic Association.\nUNB's men's hockey team are 8 time National Champions, and the highest attended sporting events in the city.\nThe Junior A hockey team is the Fredericton Red Wings. The former Fredericton Express and Fredericton Canadiens were American Hockey League teams.\nEach summer the Fredericton Loyalists host the New Brunswick Timber team which competes in the Rugby Canada Super League.\nParks and recreation.\nTrail system.\nFredericton has a network of 25 trails totalling more than on both sides of the Saint John and Nashwaak Rivers. Many of the city trails are rail trails that follow old railway lines. These include the Fredericton Railway Bridge that spans across the Saint John River. The rail trail system in Fredericton is part of the Sentier NB Trail system and some of these trails are also part of the larger Trans-Canada Trail network.\nGovernment.\nFredericton has a non-partisan and Mayor\u2013council government. The mayor and council serve four-year terms with elections in May. The city is divided into 12 wards, (six on each side of the river, one councillor per ward.\nThe city includes the provincial ridings of Fredericton North, Fredericton-Grand Lake, Fredericton West-Hanwell, Oromocto-Lincoln-Fredericton, New Maryland-Sunbury and Fredericton South, which in 2014 elected the first-ever MLA for the Green Party of New Brunswick, party leader David Coon.\nFederally, the city forms most of the riding of Fredericton.\nEducation and research.\nThe Anglophone West School District and the District Scolaire Francophone Sud (District 1) run schools including Fredericton High School, \u00c9cole des B\u00e2tisseurs, and the \u00c9cole Sainte-Anne. Leo Hayes High School is a public\u2013private partnership\nThere are two universities, the UNB, and St. Thomas, the province's only Catholic university.\nColleges include the New Brunswick College of Craft and Design, the New Brunswick Community College, and the Maritime College of Forest Technology.\nFor-profit universities include University of Fredericton and Yorkville University.\nThe Hugh John Flemming Forestry Centre researches in forestry management. Fredericton's Provincial Research Organization specializes in aquaculture, mining, manufacturing, energy and the environment.\nTransportation.\nAir service is provided out of the Fredericton International Airport.\nFredericton Transit provides bus service, though not on Sundays.\nFredericton started installing bicycle lanes in July 2008.\nPassenger rail service ended in the 1960s, and freight in 1996. All railway tracks have been abandoned and removed.\nFredericton is served by the Maritime Bus fleet which provides connections to points throughout Eastern Canada.\nThe Trans-Canada Highway passes along the southern municipal boundary. Routes 7 and 8 (the latter being a former alignment of the Trans-Canada) also pass through the city. Two highway bridges, the Westmorland Street Bridge and the Princess Margaret Bridge, cross the Saint John River. Those bridges feed into controlled-access roads (Routes 8 and 105 serving the city's north side).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10635", "revid": "522179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10635", "title": "Free software", "text": "Software licensed to preserve user freedoms\nFree software or libre software is computer software distributed under terms that allow users to run the software for any purpose as well as to study, change, and distribute it and any adapted versions. Free software is a matter of liberty, not price; all users are legally free to do what they want with their copies of a free software (including profiting from them) regardless of how much is paid to obtain the program. Computer programs are deemed \"free\" if they give end-users (not just the developer) ultimate control over the software and, subsequently, over their devices.\nThe right to study and modify a computer program entails that source code\u2014the preferred format for making changes\u2014be made available to users of that program. While this is often called \"access to source code\" or \"public availability\", the Free Software Foundation (FSF) recommends against thinking in those terms, because it might give the impression that users have an obligation (as opposed to a right) to give non-users a copy of the program.\nAlthough the term \"free software\" had already been used loosely in the past and other permissive software like the Berkeley Software Distribution released in 1978 existed, Richard Stallman is credited with tying it to the sense under discussion and starting the free software movement in 1983, when he launched the GNU Project: a collaborative effort to create a freedom-respecting operating system, and to revive the spirit of cooperation once prevalent among hackers during the early days of computing.\nContext.\nFree software thus differs from:\nFor software under the purview of copyright to be free, it must carry a software license whereby the author grants users the aforementioned rights. Software that is not covered by copyright law, such as software in the public domain, is free as long as the source code is in the public domain too, or otherwise available without restrictions.\nProprietary software uses restrictive software licences or EULAs and usually does not provide users with the source code. Users are thus legally or technically prevented from changing the software, and this results in reliance on the publisher to provide updates, help, and support. (\"See also vendor lock-in and abandonware\"). Users often may not reverse engineer, modify, or redistribute proprietary software. Beyond copyright law, contracts and lack of source code, there can exist additional obstacles keeping users from exercising freedom over a piece of software, such as software patents and digital rights management (more specifically, tivoization).\nFree software can be a for-profit, commercial activity or not. Some free software is developed by volunteer computer programmers while other is developed by corporations; or even by both.\nNaming and differences with open source.\nAlthough both definitions refer to almost equivalent corpora of programs, the Free Software Foundation recommends using the term \"free software\" rather than \"open-source software\" (an alternative, yet similar, concept coined in 1998), because the goals and messaging are quite dissimilar. According to the Free Software Foundation, \"Open source\" and its associated campaign mostly focus on the technicalities of the public development model and marketing free software to businesses, while taking the ethical issue of user rights very lightly or even antagonistically. Stallman has also stated that considering the practical advantages of free software is like considering the practical advantages of not being handcuffed, in that it is not necessary for an individual to consider practical reasons in order to realize that being handcuffed is undesirable in itself.\nThe FSF also notes that \"Open Source\" has exactly one specific meaning in common English, namely that \"you can look at the source code.\" It states that while the term \"Free Software\" can lead to two different interpretations, at least one of them is consistent with the intended meaning unlike the term \"Open Source\". The loan adjective \"libre\" is often used to avoid the ambiguity of the word \"free\" in English language, and the ambiguity with the older usage of \"free software\" as public-domain software. (\"See Gratis versus libre.\")\nDefinition and the Four Essential Freedoms of Free Software.\nThe first formal definition of free software was published by FSF in February 1986. That definition, written by Richard Stallman, is still maintained today and states that software is free software if people who receive a copy of the software have the following four freedoms. The numbering begins with zero, not only as a spoof on the common usage of zero-based numbering in programming languages, but also because \"Freedom 0\" was not initially included in the list, but later added first in the list as it was considered very important.\nFreedoms 1 and 3 require source code to be available because studying and modifying software without its source code can range from highly impractical to nearly impossible.\nThus, free software means that computer users have the freedom to cooperate with whom they choose, and to control the software they use. To summarize this into a remark distinguishing \"libre\" (freedom) software from \"gratis\" (zero price) software, the Free Software Foundation says: \"Free software is a matter of liberty, not price. To understand the concept, you should think of 'free' as in 'free speech', not as in 'free beer'\". (\"See Gratis versus libre.\")\nIn the late 1990s, other groups published their own definitions that describe an almost identical set of software. The most notable are \"Debian Free Software Guidelines\" published in 1997, and \"The Open Source Definition\", published in 1998.\nThe BSD-based operating systems, such as FreeBSD, OpenBSD, and NetBSD, do not have their own formal definitions of free software. Users of these systems generally find the same set of software to be acceptable, but sometimes see copyleft as restrictive. They generally advocate permissive free software licenses, which allow others to use the software as they wish, without being legally \"forced\" to provide the source code. Their view is that this permissive approach is more free. The Kerberos, X11, and Apache software licenses are substantially similar in intent and implementation.\nExamples.\nThere are thousands of free applications and many operating systems available on the Internet. Users can easily download and install those applications via a package manager that comes included with most Linux distributions.\nThe Free Software Directory maintains a large database of free-software packages. Some of the best-known examples include the Linux kernel, the BSD and Linux operating systems, the GNU Compiler Collection and C library; the MySQL relational database; the Apache web server; and the Sendmail mail transport agent. Other influential examples include the Emacs text editor; the GIMP raster drawing and image editor; the X Window System graphical-display system; the LibreOffice office suite; and the TeX and LaTeX typesetting systems.\nHistory.\nFrom the 1950s up until the early 1970s, it was normal for computer users to have the \"software freedoms\" associated with free software, which was typically public-domain software. Software was commonly shared by individuals who used computers and by hardware manufacturers who welcomed the fact that people were making software that made their hardware useful. Organizations of users and suppliers, for example, SHARE, were formed to facilitate exchange of software. As software was often written in an interpreted language such as BASIC, the source code was distributed to use these programs. Software was also shared and distributed as printed source code (Type-in program) in computer magazines (like \"Creative Computing\", \"SoftSide\", \"Compute!\", \"Byte\", etc.) and books, like the bestseller \"BASIC Computer Games\". By the early 1970s, the picture changed: software costs were dramatically increasing, a growing software industry was competing with the hardware manufacturer's bundled software products (free in that the cost was included in the hardware cost), leased machines required software support while providing no revenue for software, and some customers able to better meet their own needs did not want the costs of \"free\" software bundled with hardware product costs. In \"United States vs. IBM\", filed January 17, 1969, the government charged that bundled software was anti-competitive. While some software might always be free, there would henceforth be a growing amount of software produced primarily for sale. In the 1970s and early 1980s, the software industry began using technical measures (such as only distributing binary copies of computer programs) to prevent computer users from being able to study or adapt the software applications as they saw fit. In 1980, copyright law was extended to computer programs.\nIn 1983, Richard Stallman, one of the original authors of the popular Emacs program and a longtime member of the hacker community at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, announced the GNU Project, the purpose of which was to produce a completely non-proprietary Unix-compatible operating system, saying that he had become frustrated with the shift in climate surrounding the computer world and its users. In his initial declaration of the project and its purpose, he specifically cited as a motivation his opposition to being asked to agree to non-disclosure agreements and restrictive licenses which prohibited the free sharing of potentially profitable in-development software, a prohibition directly contrary to the traditional hacker ethic. Software development for the GNU operating system began in January 1984, and the Free Software Foundation (FSF) was founded in October 1985. He developed a free software definition and the concept of \"copyleft\", designed to ensure \"software freedom\" for all.\nSome non-software industries are beginning to use techniques similar to those used in free software development for their research and development process; scientists, for example, are looking towards more open development processes, and hardware such as microchips are beginning to be developed with specifications released under copyleft licenses (\"see the OpenCores project, for instance\"). Creative Commons and the free-culture movement have also been largely influenced by the free software movement.\n1980s: Foundation of the GNU Project.\nIn 1983, Richard Stallman, longtime member of the hacker community at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, announced the GNU Project, saying that he had become frustrated with the effects of the change in culture of the computer industry and its users. Software development for the GNU operating system began in January 1984, and the Free Software Foundation (FSF) was founded in October 1985. An article outlining the project and its goals was published in March 1985 titled the \"GNU Manifesto\". The manifesto included significant explanation of the GNU philosophy, \"Free Software Definition\" and \"copyleft\" ideas.\n1990s: Release of the Linux kernel.\nThe Linux kernel, started by Linus Torvalds, was released as freely modifiable source code in 1991. The first licence was a proprietary software licence. However, with version 0.12 in February 1992, he relicensed the project under the GNU General Public License. Much like Unix, Torvalds' kernel attracted the attention of volunteer programmers.\nFreeBSD and NetBSD (both derived from 386BSD) were released as free software when the \"USL v. BSDi\" lawsuit was settled out of court in 1993. OpenBSD forked from NetBSD in 1995. Also in 1995, The Apache HTTP Server, commonly referred to as Apache, was released under the Apache License 1.0.\nLicensing.\nAll free-software licenses must grant users all the freedoms discussed above. However, unless the applications' licenses are compatible, combining programs by mixing source code or directly linking binaries is problematic, because of license technicalities. Programs indirectly connected together may avoid this problem.\nThe majority of free software falls under a small set of licenses. The most popular of these licenses are:\nThe Free Software Foundation and the Open Source Initiative both publish lists of licenses that they find to comply with their own definitions of free software and open-source software respectively:\nThe FSF list is not prescriptive: free-software licenses can exist that the FSF has not heard about, or considered important enough to write about. So it is possible for a license to be free and not in the FSF list. The OSI list only lists licenses that have been submitted, considered and approved. All open-source licenses must meet the Open Source Definition in order to be officially recognized as open source software. Free software, on the other hand, is a more informal classification that does not rely on official recognition. Nevertheless, software licensed under licenses that do not meet the Free Software Definition cannot rightly be considered free software.\nApart from these two organizations, the Debian project is seen by some to provide useful advice on whether particular licenses comply with their Debian Free Software Guidelines. Debian does not publish a list of approved licenses, so its judgments have to be tracked by checking what software they have allowed into their software archives. That is summarized at the Debian web site.\nIt is rare that a license announced as being in-compliance with the FSF guidelines does not also meet the Open Source Definition, although the reverse is not necessarily true (for example, the NASA Open Source Agreement is an OSI-approved license, but non-free according to FSF).\nThere are different categories of free software.\nSecurity and reliability.\nThere is debate over the security of free software in comparison to proprietary software, with a major issue being security through obscurity. A popular quantitative test in computer security is to use relative counting of known unpatched security flaws. Generally, users of this method advise avoiding products that lack fixes for known security flaws, at least until a fix is available.\nFree software advocates strongly believe that this methodology is biased by counting more vulnerabilities for the free software systems, since their source code is accessible and their community is more forthcoming about what problems exist, (This is called \"Security Through Disclosure\") and proprietary software systems can have undisclosed societal drawbacks, such as disenfranchising less fortunate would-be users of free programs. As users can analyse and trace the source code, many more people with no commercial constraints can inspect the code and find bugs and loopholes than a corporation would find practicable. According to Richard Stallman, user access to the source code makes deploying free software with undesirable hidden spyware functionality far more difficult than for proprietary software.\nSome quantitative studies have been done on the subject.\nBinary blobs and other proprietary software.\nIn 2006, OpenBSD started the first campaign against the use of binary blobs in kernels. Blobs are usually freely distributable device drivers for hardware from vendors that do not reveal driver source code to users or developers. This restricts the users' freedom effectively to modify the software and distribute modified versions. Also, since the blobs are undocumented and may have bugs, they pose a security risk to any operating system whose kernel includes them. The proclaimed aim of the campaign against blobs is to collect hardware documentation that allows developers to write free software drivers for that hardware, ultimately enabling all free operating systems to become or remain blob-free.\nThe issue of binary blobs in the Linux kernel and other device drivers motivated some developers in Ireland to launch gNewSense, a Linux-based distribution with all the binary blobs removed. The project received support from the Free Software Foundation and stimulated the creation, headed by the Free Software Foundation Latin America, of the Linux-libre kernel. As of October 2012, Trisquel is the most popular FSF endorsed Linux distribution ranked by Distrowatch (over 12 months). While Debian is not endorsed by the FSF and does not use Linux-libre, it is also a popular distribution available without kernel blobs by default since 2011.\nBusiness model.\nSelling software under any free-software licence is permissible, as is commercial use. This is true for licenses with or without copyleft.\nSince free software may be freely redistributed, it is generally available at little or no fee. Free software business models are usually based on adding value such as customization, accompanying hardware, support, training, integration, or certification. Exceptions exist however, where the user is charged to obtain a copy of the free application itself.\nFees are usually charged for distribution on compact discs and bootable USB drives, or for services of installing or maintaining the operation of free software. Development of large, commercially used free software is often funded by a combination of user donations, crowdfunding, corporate contributions, and tax money. The SELinux project at the United States National Security Agency is an example of a federally funded free-software project.\nProprietary software, on the other hand, tends to use a different business model, where a customer of the proprietary application pays a fee for a license to legally access and use it. This license may grant the customer the ability to configure some or no parts of the software themselves. Often some level of support is included in the purchase of proprietary software, but additional support services (especially for enterprise applications) are usually available for an additional fee. Some proprietary software vendors will also customize software for a fee.\nThe Free Software Foundation encourages selling free software. As the Foundation has written, \"distributing free software is an opportunity to raise funds for development. Don't waste it!\". For example, the FSF's own recommended license (the GNU GPL) states that \"[you] may charge any price or no price for each copy that you convey, and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee.\"\nMicrosoft CEO Steve Ballmer stated in 2001 that \"open source is not available to commercial companies. The way the license is written, if you use any open-source software, you have to make the rest of your software open source.\" This misunderstanding is based on a requirement of copyleft licenses (like the GPL) that if one distributes modified versions of software, they must release the source and use the same license. This requirement does not extend to other software from the same developer. The claim of incompatibility between commercial companies and free software is also a misunderstanding. There are several large companies, e.g. Red Hat and IBM (IBM acquired RedHat in 2019), which do substantial commercial business in the development of free software.\nEconomic aspects and adoption.\nFree software played a significant part in the development of the Internet, the World Wide Web and the infrastructure of dot-com companies. Free software allows users to cooperate in enhancing and refining the programs they use; free software is a pure public good rather than a private good. Companies that contribute to free software increase commercial innovation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We migrated key functions from Windows to Linux because we needed an operating system that was stable and reliable\u00a0\u2013 one that would give us in-house control. So if we needed to patch, adjust, or adapt, we could.\"\nOfficial statement of the United Space Alliance, which manages the computer systems for the International Space Station (ISS), regarding their May 2013 decision to migrate ISS computer systems from Windows to Linux\nThe economic viability of free software has been recognized by large corporations such as IBM, Red Hat, and Sun Microsystems. Many companies whose core business is not in the IT sector choose free software for their Internet information and sales sites, due to the lower initial capital investment and ability to freely customize the application packages. Most companies in the software business include free software in their commercial products if the licenses allow that.\nFree software is generally available at no cost and can result in permanently lower TCO (total cost of ownership) compared to proprietary software. With free software, businesses can fit software to their specific needs by changing the software themselves or by hiring programmers to modify it for them. Free software often has no warranty, and more importantly, generally does not assign legal liability to anyone. However, warranties are permitted between any two parties upon the condition of the software and its usage. Such an agreement is made separately from the free software license.\nA report by Standish Group estimates that adoption of free software has caused a drop in revenue to the proprietary software industry by about $60\u00a0billion per year. Eric S. Raymond argued that the term \"free software\" is too ambiguous and intimidating for the business community. Raymond promoted the term \"open-source software\" as a friendlier alternative for the business and corporate world.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10636", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10636", "title": "Free", "text": "Free may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10638", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10638", "title": "Free software movement", "text": "Social movement\nThe free software movement is a social movement with the goal of obtaining and guaranteeing certain freedoms for software users, namely the freedoms to run, study, modify, and share copies of software. Software which meets these requirements, The Four Essential Freedoms of Free Software, is termed free software.\nAlthough drawing on traditions and philosophies among members of the 1970s hacker culture and academia, Richard Stallman formally founded the movement in 1983 by launching the GNU Project. Stallman later established the Free Software Foundation in 1985 to support the movement.\nPhilosophy.\nThe philosophy of the Free Software Movement is based on promoting collaboration between programmers and computer users. This process necessitates the rejection of\nproprietary software and the promotion of free software. Stallman notes that this action would not hinder the progression of technology, as he states, \"Wasteful duplication of system programming effort will be avoided. This effort can go instead into advancing the state of the art.\"\nMembers of the Free Software Movement believe that all software users should have the freedoms listed in The Free Software Definition. Members hold the belief that it is immoral to prohibit or prevent people from exercising these freedoms, and that they are required in creating a community where software users can help each other and have control over their technology. Regarding proprietary software, some believe that it is not strictly immoral, citing increased profitability in the business models available for proprietary software, along with technical features and convenience.\nThe Free Software Foundation believes all software needs free documentation, as programmers should have the ability to update manuals to reflect modifications made to the software. Within the movement, the FLOSS Manuals foundation specializes in providing such documentation.\nActions.\nWriting and spreading free software.\nThe core work of the free software movement is focused on software development. The free software movement also rejects proprietary software, refusing to install software that does not give them the freedoms of free software. According to Stallman, \"The only thing in the software field that is worse than an unauthorised copy of a proprietary program, is an authorised copy of the proprietary program because this does the same harm to its whole community of users, and in addition, usually the developer, the perpetrator of this evil, profits from it.\"\nBuilding awareness.\nSome supporters of the free software movement take up public speaking, or host a stall at software-related conferences to raise awareness of software freedom. This is seen as important since people who receive free software, but who are not aware that it is free software, will later accept a non-free replacement or will add software that is not free software.\nLegislation and government.\nA lot of lobbying work has been done against software patents and expansions of copyright law. Other lobbying focuses directly on the use of free software by government agencies and government-funded projects.\nAsia.\nChina.\nIn June 1997, the Society for Study, Application, and Development of Free Software was established under the China Software Industry Association in Beijing. Through this organization, the website freesoft.cei.gov.cn was developed, though the website is currently inaccessible on IP addresses located in the United States. The use of open-source software Linux in China has moved beyond government and educational institutions and has extended to other organizations such as financial institutions, telecommunications, and public security. Several Chinese researchers and scholars have claimed that the existence of FOSS in China has been important in challenging the presence of Microsoft, which Guangnan Ni, a member of the Chinese Academy of Engineering stated, \"The monopoly of (Microsoft Windows) is even more powerful in China than other places in the world\". Yi Zhou, a professor of Mathematics at Fudan University, has also alleged that, \"Government procurement of FLOSS for a number of years in China has compelled Microsoft to put its prices of Office software substantially\" \nIndia.\nGovernment of India had issued Policy on Adoption of Open Source Software for Government of India in 2015 to drive uptake within the government. With the vision to transform India as a Software Product Nation, National Policy on Software Products-2019 was approved by the Government.\nPakistan.\nFree and Open Source Software (Foss) is crucial for countries such as Pakistan which is set up by Union of Information Technology. For the case of Pakistan, Pakistan Software Export Board (PSEB) aids in the creation and advocate of FOSS usage in various government departments in addition to curbing illegality of copying that is software piracy.Promotion of adoption of FOSS is essential however it comes with problems of proprietary anti competition software practices including indulging in bribing and corruption by government departments.Pakistan works on the introduction\u00a0 of usage of open type\u00a0 basis of source Solutions in the curricula\u00a0 in schools and colleges. This is because of FOSS uniqueness in terms of political, democratic and social varieties of aspect regarding\u00a0 information communication and technology. \nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, there have been efforts to pass legislation at the state level encouraging the use of free software by state government agencies.\nOn January 11, 2022 two bills were shown on the New Hampshire legislating floor. The first bill called \u201cHB 1273\u201d was introduced by Democratic New Hampshire representative Eric Gallager, the bill prioritized \u201creplacing proprietary software used by state agencies with free software.\u201d Gallager stated that to an extent, the proposed legislation will help distinguish \u201cfree software\" and \u201copen-source software\u201d, this will also put these two into state regulation. The second bill called \u201cHB 1581\u201d was proposed by Grafton Republican representative Lex Berezhny. The bill would\u2019ve restored a requisite forcing \u201cstate agencies to use proprietary software\u201d and as Lex put it, \u201cwhen it is the most effective solution.\u201d He also said that requisite was happening between 2012-2018. According to the Concord Monitor, the state of New Hampshire had an already \u201cthriving open source software community\u201d with a view of \u201clive free or die\u201d but they had difficulty getting that notion with the state.\nSouth America.\nPeru.\nCongressmen Edgar David Villanueva and Jacques Rodrich Ackerman have been instrumental in introducing free software in Peru, with bill 1609 on \"Free Software in Public Administration\". The incident invited the attention of Microsoft, Peru, whose general manager wrote a letter to Villanueva. His response received worldwide attention and is seen as a classic piece of argumentation favouring use of free software in governments.\nUruguay.\nUruguay has a sanctioned law requiring that the state give priority to free software. It also requires that information be exchanged in open formats.\nVenezuela.\nThe Government of Venezuela implemented a free software law in January 2006. Decree No. 3,390 mandated all government agencies to migrate to free software over a two-year period.\nEurope.\nPubliccode.eu is a campaign launched demanding a legislation requiring that publicly financed software developed for the public sector be made publicly available under a Free and Open Source Software licence. If it is public money, it should be public code as well.\nFrance.\nThe French Gendarmerie and the French National Assembly utilize the open source operating system Linux.\nUnited Kingdom.\nGov.uk keeps a list of \"key components, tools and services that have gone into the construction of GOV.UK\".[\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;title needed\"]\nEvents.\nFree Software events happening all around the world connects people to increase visibility for Free software projects and foster collaborations.\nEconomics.\nThe free software movement has been extensively analyzed using economic methodologies, including perspectives from heterodox economics. Of particular interest to economists is the willingness of programmers in the free software movement to work, .\nIn his 1998 article \"The High-Tech Gift Economy\", Richard Barbrook suggested that the then-nascent free software movement represented a return to the gift economy building on hobbyism and the absence of economic scarcity on the internet.\nGabriella Coleman has emphasized the importance of accreditation, respect, and honour within the free software community as a form of compensation for contributions to projects, over and against financial motivations.\nThe Swedish Marxian economist Johan S\u00f6derberg has argued that the free software movement represents a complete alternative to capitalism that may be expanded to create a post-work society. He argues that the combination of a manipulation of intellectual property law and private property to make goods available to the public and a thorough blend between labor and fun make the free software movement a communist economy.\nSubgroups and schisms.\nSince its inception, there is an ongoing contension between the many FLOSS organizations (FSF, OSI, Debian, Mozilla Foundation, Apache Foundation, etc.) within the free software movement, with the main conflicts centered around the organization's needs for compromise and pragmatism rather than adhering to founding values and philosophies.\nOpen source.\nThe Open Source Initiative (OSI) was founded in February 1998 by Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens to promote the term \"open-source software\" as an alternative term for free software. The OSI aimed to address the perceived shortcomings and ambiguity of the term \"free software\", as well as shifting the focus of free software from a social and ethical issue to instead emphasize open source as a superior model for software development. The latter became the view of Eric Raymond and Linus Torvalds, while Bruce Perens argued that open source was meant to popularize free software under a new brand and called for a return to basic ethical principles.\nSome free software advocates use the terms \"Free and Open-Source Software\" (FOSS) or \"Free/Libre and Open-Source Software\" (FLOSS) as a form of inclusive compromise, which brings free and open-source software advocates together to work on projects cohesively. Some users believe this is an ideal solution in order to promote both the user's freedom with the software and the pragmatic efficiency of an open-source development model. This view is reinforced by fact that majority of OSI-approved licenses and self-avowed open-source programs are also compatible with the free software formalisms and vice versa.\nWhile free and open source software are often linked together, they offer two separate ideas and values. Richard Stallman has referred to open source as \"\"a non-movement\", as it \"does not campaign for anything\"\".\n\"Open source\" addresses software being open as a practical question rather than an ethical dilemma \u2013 non-free software is not the best solution but nonetheless a solution. The free software movement views free software as a moral imperative: that proprietary software should be rejected, and that only free software should be developed and taught in order to make computing technology beneficial to the general public.\nAlthough the movements have differing values and goals, collaborations between the Free Software Movement and Open Source Initiative have taken place when it comes to practical projects. By 2005, Richard Glass considered the differences to be a \"serious fracture\" but \"vitally important to those on both sides of the fracture\" and \"of little importance to anyone else studying the movement from a software engineering perspective\" since they have had \"little effect on the field\".\nCriticism and controversy.\nPrinciple compromises.\nEric Raymond criticises the speed at which the free software movement is progressing, suggesting that temporary compromises should be made for long-term gains. Raymond argues that this could raise awareness of the software and thus increase the free software movement's influence on relevant standards and legislation.\nRichard Stallman, on the other hand, sees the current level of compromise as a greater cause for worry.\nProgrammer income.\nStallman said that this is where people get the misconception of \"free\": there is no wrong in programmers' requesting payment for a proposed project, or charging for copies of free software. Restricting and controlling the user's decisions on use is the actual violation of freedom. Stallman defends that in some cases, monetary incentive is not necessary for motivation since the pleasure in expressing creativity is a reward in itself. Conversely, Stallman admits that it is not easy to raise money for free software projects.\n\"Viral\" copyleft licensing.\nThe free software movement champions copyleft licensing schema (often pejoratively called \"viral licenses\"). In its strongest form, copyleft mandates that any works \"derived\" from copyleft-licensed software must also carry a copyleft license, so the license spreads from work to work like a computer virus might spread from machine to machine. Stallman has previously stated his opposition to describing the GNU GPL as \"viral\". These licensing terms can only be enforced through asserting copyrights.\nCritics of copyleft licensing challenge the idea that restricting modifications is in line with the free software movement's emphasis on various \"freedoms\", especially when alternatives like MIT, BSD, and Apache licenses are more permissive. Proponents enjoy the assurance that copylefted work cannot usually be incorporated into non-free software projects. They emphasize that copyleft licenses may not attach for all uses and that in any case, developers can simply choose not to use copyleft-licensed software.\nLicense proliferation and compatibility.\nFLOSS license proliferation is a serious concern in the FLOSS domain due to increased complexity of license compatibility considerations which limits and complicates source code reuse between FLOSS projects. The OSI and the FSF maintain their own lists of dozens of existing and acceptable FLOSS licenses. There is an agreement among most that the creation of new licenses should be minimized and those created should be made compatible with the major existing FLOSS licenses. Therefore, there was a strong controversy around the update of the GNU GPLv2 to the GNU GPLv3 in 2007, as the updated license is not compatible with the previous version. Several projects (mostly of the open source faction like the Linux kernel) decided to not adopt the GPLv3 while almost all of the GNU project's packages adopted it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10642", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10642", "title": "First person shooter", "text": ""}
{"id": "10644", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10644", "title": "Fixed 3D", "text": ""}
{"id": "10645", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10645", "title": "Famous Physicists", "text": ""}
{"id": "10646", "revid": "8372814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10646", "title": "Food", "text": "Substances consumed for nutrition\nFood is any substance consumed by an organism for nutritional support. Food is usually of plant, animal, or fungal origin, and contains essential nutrients, such as carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, or minerals. The substance is ingested by an organism and assimilated by the organism's cells to provide energy, maintain life, or stimulate growth. Different species of animals have different feeding behaviours that satisfy the needs of their metabolisms that have evolved to fill a specific ecological niche within specific geographical contexts.\nOmnivorous humans are highly adaptable and have adapted to obtain food in many different ecosystems. The majority of the food energy required is supplied by the industrial food industry, which produces food with intensive agriculture and distributes it through complex food processing and food distribution systems. This system of conventional agriculture relies heavily on fossil fuels, which means that the food and agricultural system is one of the major contributors to climate change, accountable for as much as 37% of total greenhouse gas emissions.\nThe food system has significant impacts on a wide range of other social and political issues including: sustainability, biological diversity, economics, population growth, water supply, and food security. Food safety and security are monitored by international agencies like the International Association for Food Protection, World Resources Institute, World Food Programme, Food and Agriculture Organization, and International Food Information Council.\nDefinition and classification.\nFood is any substance consumed to provide nutritional support and energy to an organism. It can be raw, processed or formulated and is consumed orally by animals for growth, health or pleasure. Food is mainly composed of water, lipids, proteins and carbohydrates. Minerals (e.g. salts) and organic substances (e.g. vitamins) can also be found in food. Plants, algae and some microorganisms use photosynthesis to make their own food molecules. Water is found in many foods and has been defined as a food by itself. Water and fiber have low energy densities, or calories, while fat is the most energy dense component. Some inorganic (non-food) elements are also essential for plant and animal functioning.\nHuman food can be classified in various ways, either by related content or by how the food is processed. The number and composition of food groups can vary. Most systems include four basic groups that describe their origin and relative nutritional function: Vegetables and Fruit, Cereals and Bread, Dairy, and Meat. Studies that look into diet quality group food into whole grains/cereals, refined grains/cereals, vegetables, fruits, nuts, legumes, eggs, dairy products, fish, red meat, processed meat, and sugar-sweetened beverages. The Food and Agriculture Organization and World Health Organization use a system with nineteen food classifications: cereals, roots, pulses and nuts, milk, eggs, fish and shellfish, meat, insects, vegetables, fruits, fats and oils, sweets and sugars, spices and condiments, beverages, foods for nutritional uses, food additives, composite dishes and savoury snacks.\nFood sources.\nIn a given ecosystem, food forms a web of interlocking chains with primary producers at the bottom and apex predators at the top. Other aspects of the web include detrovores (that eat detritis) and decomposers (that break down dead organisms). Primary producers include algae, plants, bacteria and protists that acquire their energy from sunlight. Primary consumers are the herbivores that consume the plants, and secondary consumers are the carnivores that consume those herbivores. Some organisms, including most mammals and birds, diet consists of both animals and plants, and they are considered omnivores. The chain ends with the apex predators, the animals that have no known predators in its ecosystem. Humans are considered apex predators.\nHumans are omnivores, finding sustenance in vegetables, fruits, cooked meat, milk, eggs, mushrooms and seaweed. Cereal grain is a staple food that provides more food energy worldwide than any other type of crop. Corn (maize), wheat, and rice account for 87% of all grain production worldwide. Just over half of the world's crops are used to feed humans (55 percent), with 36 percent grown as animal feed and 9 percent for biofuels. Fungi and bacteria are also used in the preparation of fermented foods like bread, wine, cheese and yogurt.\nSunlight and soil.\nPhotosynthesis is the ultimate source of energy and food for nearly all life on earth. It is the main food source for plants, algae and certain bacteria. Without this, all organisms which depend on these organisms further up the food chain would be unable to exist, from coral to lions. Energy from the sun is absorbed and used to transform water and carbon dioxide in the air or soil into oxygen and glucose. The oxygen is then released, and the glucose stored as an energy reserve.\nPlants also absorb important nutrients and minerals from the air, water and soil. Carbon, oxygen and hydrogen are absorbed from the air or water and are the basic nutrients needed for plant survival. The three main nutrients absorbed from the soil for plant growth are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium, with other important nutrients including calcium, sulfur, magnesium, iron boron, chlorine, manganese, zinc, copper molybdenum and nickel.\nPlants.\nPlants as a food source are divided into seeds, fruits, vegetables, legumes, grains and nuts. Where plants fall within these categories can vary, with botanically described fruits such as the tomato, squash, pepper and eggplant or seeds like peas commonly considered vegetables. Food is a fruit if the part eaten is derived from the reproductive tissue, so seeds, nuts and grains are technically fruit. From a culinary perspective, fruits are generally considered the remains of botanically described fruits after grains, nuts, seeds and fruits used as vegetables are removed. Grains can be defined as seeds that humans eat or harvest, with cereal grains (oats, wheat, rice, corn, barley, rye, sorghum and millet) belonging to the Poaceae (grass) family and pulses coming from the Fabaceae (legume) family. Whole grains are foods that contain all the elements of the original seed (bran, germ, and endosperm). Nuts are dry fruits, distinguishable by their woody shell.\nFleshy fruits (distinguishable from dry fruits like grain, seeds and nuts) can be further classified as stone fruits (cherries and peaches), pome fruits (apples, pears), berries (blackberry, strawberry), citrus (oranges, lemon), melons (watermelon, cantaloupe), Mediterranean fruits (grapes, fig), tropical fruits (banana, pineapple). Vegetables refer to any other part of the plant that can be eaten, including roots, stems, leaves, flowers, bark or the entire plant itself. These include root vegetables (potatoes and carrots), bulbs (onion family), flowers (cauliflower and broccoli), leaf vegetables (spinach and lettuce) and (celery and asparagus).\nPlants have high carbohydrate, protein and lipid content, with carbohydrates mainly in the form of starch, fructose, glucose and other sugars. Most vitamins are found from plant sources, with exceptions of vitamin D and vitamin B12. Minerals are also plentiful, although the presence of phytates can prevent their release. Fruit can consist of up to 90% water, contain high levels of simple sugars that contribute to their sweet taste, and have a high vitamin C content. Compared to fleshy fruit (excepting Bananas) vegetables are high in starch, potassium, dietary fiber, folate and vitamins and low in fat and calories. Grains are more starch based and nuts have a high protein, fibre, vitamin E and B content. Seeds are a good source of food for animals because they are abundant and contain fibre and healthful fats, such as omega-3 fats.\nAnimals that only eat plants are called herbivores, with those that mostly just eat fruits known as frugivores, leaves, while shoot eaters are folivores (pandas) and wood eaters termed xylophages (termites). Frugivores include a diverse range of species from annelids to elephants, chimpanzees and many birds. About 182 fish consume seeds or fruit. Animals (domesticated and wild) use as many types of grasses that have adapted to different locations as their main source of nutrients.\nHumans only eat about 200 out of the worlds 400 000 plant species, despite at least half of them being edible. Most human plant-based food comes from maize, rice, and wheat. Plants can be processed into breads, pasta, cereals, juices and jams or raw ingredients such as sugar, herbs, spices and oils can be extracted. Oilseeds are pressed to produce rich oils\u00a0\u2013 \u2063sunflower, flaxseed, rapeseed (including canola oil) and sesame.\nMany plants and animals have coevolved in such a way that the fruit is a good source of nutrition to the animal who then excretes the seeds some distance away, allowing greater dispersal. Even seed predation can be mutually beneficial, as some seeds can survive the digestion process. Insects are major eaters of seeds, with ants being the only real seed dispersers. Birds, although being major dispersers, only rarely eat seeds as a source of food and can be identified by their thick beak that is used to crack open the seed coat. Mammals eat a more diverse range of seeds, as they are able to crush harder and larger seeds with their teeth.\nAnimals.\nAnimals are used as food either directly or indirectly. This includes meat, eggs, shellfish and dairy products like milk and cheese. They are an important source of protein and are considered complete proteins for human consumption as they contain all the essential amino acids that the human body needs. One steak, chicken breast or pork chop contains about 30 grams of protein. One large egg has 7 grams of protein. A serving of cheese has about 15 grams of protein. And 1 cup of milk has about 8 grams of protein. Other nutrients found in animal products include calories, fat, essential vitamins (including B12) and minerals (including zinc, iron, calcium, magnesium).\nFood products produced by animals include milk produced by mammary glands, which in many cultures is drunk or processed into dairy products (cheese, butter, etc.). Eggs laid by birds and other animals are eaten and bees produce honey, a reduced nectar from flowers that is used as a popular sweetener in many cultures. Some cultures consume blood, such as in blood sausage, as a thickener for sauces, or in a cured, salted form for times of food scarcity, and others use blood in stews such as jugged hare.\nTaste.\nAnimals, specifically humans, typically have five different types of tastes: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami. The differing tastes are important for distinguishing between foods that are nutritionally beneficial and those which may contain harmful toxins. As animals have evolved, the tastes that provide the most energy are the most pleasant to eat while others are not enjoyable, although humans in particular can acquire a preference for some substances which are initially unenjoyable. Water, while important for survival, has no taste.\nSweetness is almost always caused by a type of simple sugar such as glucose or fructose, or disaccharides such as sucrose, a molecule combining glucose and fructose. Sourness is caused by acids, such as vinegar in alcoholic beverages. Sour foods include citrus, specifically lemons and limes. Sour is evolutionarily significant as it can signal a food that may have gone rancid due to bacteria. Saltiness is the taste of alkali metal ions such as sodium and potassium. It is found in almost every food in low to moderate proportions to enhance flavor. Bitter taste is a sensation considered unpleasant characterised by having a sharp, pungent taste. Unsweetened dark chocolate, caffeine, lemon rind, and some types of fruit are known to be bitter. Umami, commonly described as savory, is a marker of proteins and characteristic of broths and cooked meats. Foods that have a strong umami flavor include cheese, meat and mushrooms.\nWhile most animals taste buds are located in their mouth, some insects taste receptors are located on their legs and some fish have taste buds along their entire body. Dogs, cats and birds have relatively few taste buds (chickens have about 30), adult humans have between 2000 and 4000, while catfish can have more than a million. Herbivores generally have more than carnivores as they need to tell which plants may be poisonous. Not all mammals share the same tastes: some rodents can taste starch, cats cannot taste sweetness, and several carnivores (including hyenas, dolphins, and sea lions) have lost the ability to sense up to four of the five taste modalities found in humans.\nDigestion.\nFood is broken into nutrient components through digestive process. Proper digestion consists of mechanical processes (chewing, peristalsis) and chemical processes (digestive enzymes and microorganisms). The digestive systems of herbivores and carnivores are very different as plant matter is harder to digest. Carnivores mouths are designed for tearing and biting compared to the grinding action found in herbivores. Herbivores however have comparatively longer digestive tracts and larger stomachs to aid in digesting the cellulose in plants.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10651", "revid": "44507996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10651", "title": "Floating Point", "text": "Floating Point is an album by John McLaughlin, released in 2008 through the record label Abstract Logix. The album reached number fourteen on \"Billboard\"'s Top Jazz Albums chart.\nRegarding the recording, McLaughlin commented: \"while this CD features predominantly Indian musicians, we are in quite another form compared to the group Shakti... The music is for the most part 'Jazz-Fusion' if a label has to be put on it. But with the musicians involved in this project, it has also a 'world' kind of atmosphere.\" Concerning the album title, McLaughlin remarked: \"Every now and then a group of musicians will gel together in such an incredible way, and at that point it's like you lose normal gravity... you've got your own gravity happening and you're kind of like floating with the other guys.\"\nReception.\nMichael G. Nastos of AllMusic called the album \"a surprisingly fine effort, ebbing and flowing from track to track, with McLaughlin's high-level musicianship shining through, same as it ever was.\"\nIn a 5-star review for DownBeat, Ken Micallef commented: \"this brilliant collective plays as a\nsingle unit, not a band of hired studio guns... This is a case of Indian musicians using their extraordinary skills to explore U.S. fusion, giving the now 70-year-old guitarist an amazing platform for compositional/improvisational development. This is a landmark recording, marked by detail, subtlety and extraordinarily moving performances.\"\nJohn Kelman in All About Jazz wrote \"One of the most fluent, evocative and powerful albums in a career filled with high points,\" and concluded: \"McLaughlin's Indian friends may not have jazz in their blood the way it is in the guitarist's, but by approaching unmistakably western-informed music with an eastern mindset, they make \"Floating Point\" an album that, in McLaughlin's lengthy discography, is one of his most successful fusion records\".\nWriting for The Guardian, John Fordham awarded the album 5 stars, and stated: \"this boiling new set sounds as if it's driven at least as much by cutting-edge Indian crossover musicians as by McLaughlin himself... this is 99% an absolute cracker, and not just for guitar nuts either.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10652", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10652", "title": "Fixed Point", "text": ""}
{"id": "10653", "revid": "36678092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10653", "title": "Fantasy sport", "text": "Imaginary sport teams ownership game\nA fantasy sport (also known less commonly as rotisserie or roto) is a game, often played using the Internet, where participants assemble imaginary or virtual teams composed of proxies of real players of a professional sport. These teams compete based on the statistical performance of those players in actual games. This performance is converted into points that are compiled and totaled according to a roster selected by each fantasy team's manager. These point systems can be simple enough to be manually calculated by a \"league commissioner\" who coordinates and manages the overall league, or points can be compiled and calculated using computers tracking actual results of the professional sport. In fantasy sports, as in real sports team owners draft, trade, and cut (drop) players.\nHistory.\nEarly simulations.\nThe history of fantasy games can be traced to the 19th century. The tabletop game \"Sebring Parlor Base Ball\", introduced in 1866, allowed participants to simulate games by propelling a coin into slots on a wooden board. Later games featured outcomes determined by dice rolls or spinners. In 1930, Clifford Van Beek designed the board game \"National Pastime\", which contained customized baseball cards of Major League Baseball (MLB) players. After rolling a pair of dice, participants would consult the card of the MLB player \"at bat\" to determine an outcome, which could range from a single, double, triple, or home run to a strikeout, putout, walk, or error. Players with better statistics in the previous season were more likely to receive favorable outcomes; this allowed \"National Pastime\" to become one of the first games to try to simulate the performances of real-life MLB players.\nAn example of such games was APBA, which was first released in 1951 and also contained cards of MLB players with in-game outcomes correlated to their stats from past seasons. Participants could compose fantasy teams from the cards and play against each other or recreate previous seasons using the statistics on the cards. Individual player cards and dice roll simulations were also emulated in the Strat-O-Matic game, which was first released in 1961. Daniel Okrent, who would later be credited with developing modern fantasy baseball, was an avid Strat-O-Matic player, telling \"Sports Illustrated\" in 2011 that \"if there hadn't been Strat-O-Matic, I still think I would have come up with rotisserie, but unquestionably it helped.\"\nIn 1961, another early form of fantasy baseball was coded for the IBM 1620 computer by John Burgeson, then working for IBM. A user would select a team from a limited roster of retired players to play against a team randomly chosen by the computer. The computer would then use random number generation and player statistics to simulate a game's outcome and print a play-by-play description of it.\nWhile some of these fantasy games produced outcomes based on the performances of real athletes, they were not designed to be played out over the course of a season, nor did they take current statistics into account, relying instead on those from previous years.\nThe first leagues.\nIn the 1950s, Oakland, California businessman and future limited partner in the Oakland Raiders Wilfred \"Bill\" Winkenbach developed a fantasy golf game in which participants would select a roster of professional golfers and compare their scores at the end of a given tournament, with the lowest combined total of strokes winning. He also created a baseball game in which players drafted hitters and pitchers, comparing their real-life statistics against each other. These early experiments, however, failed to spread to the general public.\nIn 1960, sociologist William A. Gamson developed the Baseball Seminar league, in which participants would draft rosters of active MLB players and compare results at the end of the season based on the players' final batting averages, earned run averages, runs batted in, and win totals. Gamson would go on to play the game as a professor at the University of Michigan, where another competitor was Bob Sklar. One of Sklar's students was Daniel Okrent. According to Alan Schwarz's \"The Numbers Game: Baseball\u2019s Lifelong Fascination with Statistics\", Sklar told Okrent about the Baseball Seminar league.\nTwo years later, in a New York City hotel room during a 1962 Raiders cross-country trip, Winkenbach, along with Raiders public relations employee Bill Tunnel and \"Oakland Tribune\" reporter Scotty Stirling, developed the rules that would eventually be the basis of modern fantasy football. The inaugural league was called the Greater Oakland Professional Pigskin Prognosticators League (GOPPPL), and the first draft took place at Winkenbach's home in Oakland in August 1963. One of the league's original members, Andy Mousalimas, owned a sports bar in Oakland called the King's X, where the first public fantasy football league was founded in 1969. The idea spread by word of mouth when the patrons of other Bay Area bars visited the King's X for trivia contests.\nRotisserie League Baseball.\nModern fantasy baseball was developed and popularized in the 1980s by a group of journalists who created Rotisserie League Baseball in 1980. The league was named after the New York City restaurant La Rotisserie Fran\u00e7aise, where its founders met for lunch and first played the game. Magazine writer-editor Daniel Okrent is credited with introducing the rotisserie league concept to the group and inventing the scoring system. Players in the Rotisserie League drafted teams of active MLB players and tracked their statistics during the season to compile their scores. Like the Baseball Seminar league, rather than using statistics for seasons whose outcomes were already known to simulate in-game outcomes, team owners would have to make predictions about the statistics that MLB players would accumulate during the upcoming season.\nRotisserie baseball, nicknamed \"roto\", proved to be popular despite the difficulties of compiling statistics by hand, which was an early drawback to participation. Okrent credits the idea's rapid spread to the fact that the initial league was created by sports journalists, telling \"Vanity Fair\" in 2008 that \"most of us in the league were in the media, and we got a lot of press coverage that first season. The second season, there were rotisserie leagues in every Major League press box.\" According to Okrent, rotisserie baseball afforded sportswriters the opportunity to write about baseball-related material during the 1981 Major League Baseball strike, saying \"the writers who were covering baseball had nothing to write about, so they began writing about the teams they had assembled in their own leagues. And that was what popularized it and spread it around very, very widely.\"\nGrowth and early participants.\nBefore the advent of the Internet, fantasy sports grew through print publications, such as magazines and newspapers. In 1987, \"Fantasy Football Index\", the first national magazine dedicated to fantasy football, was launched by Ian Allan and Bruce Taylor. \"Fantasy Sports Magazine\" debuted in 1989 as the first regular publication covering more than one fantasy sport.\nIn 1990, a pair of nationwide fantasy games, Dugout Derby and Pigskin Playoff, were launched in a variety of newspapers across the United States, including the \"Arizona Republic\", the \"Hartford Courant\", the \"Los Angeles Times\", and the \"Miami Herald\". Players chose their teams by calling a toll-free phone number and entering four-digit codes for each of their player selections. The games served as an early version of today's daily fantasy sports by rewarding each week's highest-scoring participants with prizes.\nIn 1993, the magazine \"Fantasy Football Weekly\" was launched. Also that year, \"USA Today\" added a weekly fantasy baseball columnist, John Hunt. Hunt started a league among sports personalities called the League of Alternate Baseball Reality, which first included Peter Gammons, Keith Olbermann and Bill James, among others.\nInternet expansion.\nThe growth of the Internet during the 1990s brought a \"broad demographic shift in fantasy sports participation\" because it enabled fantasy sports participants to instantaneously download tabulated statistics, rather than having to search for box scores of individual games in newspapers and keep track of cumulative statistics on paper.\nIn 1995, ESPN launched its first entirely Internet-based fantasy baseball game, with other major sports and entertainment companies following suit in the ensuing years. In October of that year, a fantasy hockey website was released by Molson Breweries as part of the company's \"I am Online\" marketing strategy centered around its I am Canadian advertising campaign. The site focused on music, entertainment and hockey in general in addition to fantasy competitions. It allowed users to register accounts and participate in fantasy leagues of nine teams. The site included updates of National Hockey League (NHL) statistics and provided content from the Hockey Hall of Fame.\nCBS Sports began offering fantasy football leagues in 1997, the same year that the fantasy news website now known as RotoWire was launched. In July 1999, Yahoo began offering its fantasy football product for free, a decision that gave the site an advantage over its competitors. The creators of \"Fantasy Football Weekly\" launched Fanball.com later that year. While some sites abandoned a paid model in the wake of Yahoo's decision, some smaller sites, such as RotoWire, began offering paid products as they started losing business to larger competitors. CBS, which had transitioned to a free model for its league commissioner services, switched back to a paid model before the 2002 MLB season.\nA trade group for the industry, the Fantasy Sports Trade Association, was formed in 1998. Now known as the Fantasy Sports &amp; Gaming Association (FSGA), the organization estimates that in 2003, there were 15.2 million fantasy sports players in the United States and Canada.\nDuring the first decade of the 2000s, fantasy sports started to become a mainstream hobby. In 2002, the National Football League (NFL) found that while the average male surveyed on its website spent 6.6 hours a week watching the league on television, fantasy players surveyed said they watched 8.4 hours of NFL football per week. \"This is the first time we've been able to demonstrate specifically that fantasy play drives TV viewing,\" said Chris Russo, the NFL's senior vice president at the time. As a result of the survey's findings, the league made fantasy offerings more prominent on its website and produced television ads for fantasy football featuring active players. Prior to these developments, fantasy sports were largely viewed negatively by major sports leagues, with Russo later recalling that \"there were concerns about whether it would be right for the fans or could it be construed as gambling.\" However, leagues began to embrace fantasy sports as their value towards increasing fans' consumption of sports became more evident.\nDaily fantasy sports.\nDaily fantasy sports are accelerated versions of the traditional fantasy format in which contests are conducted over shorter periods than a full season, often lasting one week or even a single day. Daily fantasy games are typically subject to an entry fee, a portion of which funds a prize pool that is distributed among the game's winner or winners.\nIn June 2007, Fantasy Sports Live, one of the first daily fantasy sites, was launched. In November 2008, NBC launched a daily fantasy site called SnapDraft, and FanDuel was founded in 2009 as a spin-off of a Scottish prediction market company. DraftKings was founded in 2012.\nFollowing venture capital investments from various firms, including from professional sports leagues such as MLB and the National Basketball Association (NBA), DraftKings and FanDuel launched an aggressive marketing campaign prior to the 2015 NFL season. At its peak, the two companies collectively ran an ad on national television in the United States once every 90 seconds. In addition to receiving direct investments from sports leagues, the two companies have reached sponsorship deals with several leagues and teams. In November 2014, DraftKings entered into a multi-year sponsorship deal with the NHL. In April 2015, after the NFL began to allow daily fantasy providers to sign multi-year team sponsorship deals, FanDuel reached deals with sixteen teams for placements on team-oriented digital properties, radio broadcasts, and within their stadiums. DraftKings has also received investments from Jerry Jones and Robert Kraft, who own the Dallas Cowboys and New England Patriots, respectively.\nThe legality of daily fantasy sports has been questioned, with critics arguing that they more closely resemble proposition wagering on athlete performance than a traditional fantasy sports game. However, following the 2018 United States Supreme Court decision in \"Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Association\", which allowed states to legalize sports betting, questions surrounding the legality of daily fantasy sports, as well as fantasy sports in general, within the United States have largely been settled.\nAs of May 2023, while 33 US states have operational legalized sports betting, 45 states have legalized daily fantasy sports. As of May 2023, DraftKings and FanDuel operate daily fantasy contests in 44 states each. Only one state, Montana, has officially banned online fantasy sports.\nIndustry overview.\nSize of the industry.\nIn May 2015, Australian market research firm IBISWorld reported that fantasy sports comprised a $2 billion industry in the United States, experiencing 10.7% annual growth and employing 4,386 people in 292 businesses.\nAccording to the Fantasy Sports Trade Association, in 2016, the size of the fantasy sports industry reached $7.22 billion, per research by Ipsos. The study estimated that there were 59.3 million fantasy sports players in the United States and Canada as of 2016.\nIndustry growth.\nThe Fantasy Sports &amp; Gaming Association estimates that the number of fantasy sports players in the US and Canada grew from 500,000 in 1988 to 15.2 million in 2003, declining slightly over the next few years before growing to 29.9 million in 2008 and 59.3 million in 2017. In 2015, \"Forbes\" estimated that the number of yearly non-betting fantasy sports users had grown 25% since 2011. This growth encouraged hundreds of millions of dollars in investments into emerging daily fantasy sports leagues, such as FanDuel and DraftKings.\nOutside of North America, the fantasy industry has also experienced a recent period of growth. The development of daily fantasy sports has encouraged growth in European markets. ESPN Super Selector launched in 2001 for fantasy cricket and had 500,000 users during the 2003 Cricket World Cup. By 2017, there were 40 million fantasy sports players in India. In 2019, the number had grown to 90 million, and in 2020, an estimated 100 million Indians participated in fantasy sports. The market leader in fantasy sports in India, Dream11, signed a four year sponsorship deal for the IPL in 2019.\nTrade associations.\nThe Fantasy Sports Trade Association was formed in 1998 to represent the growing industry in the United States and Canada. Now known as the Fantasy Sports &amp; Gaming Association, the organization aims to support fantasy sports, sports gambling in general, and its associated businesses and participants.\nThe Fantasy Sports Writers Association was formed in 2004 to represent the growing numbers of journalists covering fantasy \nsports exclusively. The Fantasy Sports Association was formed in 2006 as a rival trade group. However, the organization folded in 2010.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the Fantasy Sports &amp; Gaming Association (FSGA), of the 59.3 million people who played fantasy sports in the US and Canada in 2017, 43.2 million were American adults. In 2019, 45.9 million American adults participated. The FSGA estimated that 19% of American adults played fantasy sports in 2019, compared to 13% in 2014. A 2019 FSGA survey found that 81% of fantasy sports players were male, 50% were between the ages of 18 and 34 (with an average age of 37.7), 67% were employed full-time, and 47% made more than $75,000 per year. A 2015 analysis found that 89.8% were white and 51.5% were unmarried.\nAccording to the FSGA, the most popular fantasy sport in the US and Canada is gridiron football, which is played by approximately 78% of fantasy participants. The next most popular sports are baseball (39%), basketball (19%), ice hockey (18%), and association football (14%).\nResearch has shown that fantasy players are also generally stronger consumers alcoholic beverages, fast food, airline travel, video games, sports periodicals, athletic shoes, and cell phones relative to the general population. The FSGA reported in 2019 that fantasy players were also far more likely to use Instagram or Snapchat, visit a sports bar, and get food delivered than the general population.\nFantasy sports television programming.\nDue to the popularity of fantasy sports, major sports networks such as ESPN, NFL Network, and Fox Sports have created dedicated weekly fantasy programming to analyze player performance and predict outcomes in relation to particular scoring systems. ESPN's on-demand streaming platform ESPN+ offers a fantasy program called \"The Fantasy Show\" hosted by long time staff writer Matthew Berry. \"The Fantasy Show\" utilizes puppets and comedy to present statistical information about NFL players. ESPN also aires a show on Sunday mornings during the NFL season called Fantasy Football Now. \"Fantasy Football Now\" airs live on Sunday mornings during the NFL season, a time when fans are making last-minute roster moves and need the latest news from around the league. Providing the latest info are analysts Matthew Berry, Field Yates and licensed physical therapist Stephania Bell, who gives injury updates. \nNFL Network aires \"NFL Fantasy Live\" as an hour long program containing a consistent weekly segment list that viewers can count on to help them manage their team. \"NFL Fantasy Live\" is hosted by Cole Wright and features Michael Fabiano, Adam Rank, Marcas Grant, Akbar Gbaja-Biamila, Graham Barfield and statistics analytics expert Cynthia Frelund. Fox Sports Net aires Fantasy Football Hour on a weekly basis during the NFL season hosted by Katy Winge and features industry experts Brad Evans and Nate Lundy.\nLegal issues in the United States.\nFantasy sports are generally considered to be a form of gambling, though they are far less strictly regulated than other forms of sports betting. Unlike traditional sports betting, fantasy sports are generally viewed as \"games of skill,\" rather than \"games of chance,\" thus exempting them from gambling bans and regulations in many jurisdictions.\nFederal law related to fantasy gaming.\nThe Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006 (UIGEA), was enacted as part of the \"American Values Agenda\" of 2006 and was added as an amendment to the unrelated SAFE Port Act. The UIGEA generally prohibits funds transfers to businesses engaged in unlawful internet wagering. However the UIGEA does not itself define unlawful internet wagering, and expressly refrains from altering the legality of any underlying conduct other than funds transfers.\nWhile the act does not alter the legality of any particular activity permitted or prohibited under other laws, it does contain some express exemptions to its funds transfer prohibitions. One of these exemptions from the UIGEA prohibitions is for fantasy sports that meet certain criteria. Specifically, fantasy sports that are based on teams of real multiple athletes from multiple real world teams, that have prizes established before the event starts, that use the skill of participants to determine the outcome, are exempted from the definition of a bet or wager that is the basis for requiring banks to identify and block funds transfers. According to Congressman Jim Leach, an author of the UIGEA, exemptions, particularly one for fantasy sports, were included to relieve the burden of enforcement on banks and the UIGEA does not make fantasy sports legal.\nBecause the UIGEA exempted fantasy sports from its definition of a bet or wager, there is a misconception that fantasy sports were made legal by the UIGEA. However the UIGEA is not a criminal gambling statute, and it specifically does not alter any criminal gambling laws and thus does not make fantasy sports legal. Federal criminal gambling statutes are found in Title 18 of U.S. Code, such as the Federal Wire Act 18 U.S. Code \u00a7 1084 (which prohibits interstate sports wagering) and the Illegal Gambling Business Act 18 U.S. Code \u00a7 1955 (which prohibits the interstate conduct of wagering activity prohibited under state law). By contrast, the UIGEA is found in Title 31 with other anti-money laundering and financial crimes statutes.\nState laws related to fantasy gaming.\nWhether state laws can regulate fantasy sports conducted across state lines depends on whether fantasy sports are a form of sports wagering under federal law. This is because the Federal Wire Act prohibits the conduct of sports wagering in interstate or foreign commerce. With regard to intrastate sports wagering, in 2018 the United States Supreme Court in \"Murphy v. National Collegiate Athletic Association\" struck down the Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act, which had prohibited states from authorizing any wagering, lottery, betting, sweepstakes or other wagering scheme that is based directly or indirectly on games in which professional or amateur athletes participate or on the performance of any athletes in such games.\nWhere states have not expressly authorized fantasy sports contests, usually general gambling laws prohibit lotteries or wagering if three elements are present: an entry fee (known as \"consideration\"), a prize (a \"reward,\" in legal terms) and chance. Whether fantasy sports are legal under these laws hinges on the definition of \"chance\" that the state applies. For some states, if skill dominates the outcome of the event, then the contest is legal, and passes what is called the \"dominant factor test.\" Other states with a stricter definition of chance, called \"any chance test,\" have made fantasy football illegal.\nSeveral states have clarified that paid fantasy sports contests are games of skill and exempt from gambling laws, beginning with Maryland in 2012.\nOne exception is the state of Nevada, which has an exemption in PASPA to allow for sports betting. The Nevada attorney general issued an opinion that found Daily Fantasy Sports to be a form of sports wagering, similar to the current wagering offered by Nevada Sports Books. The opinions states that Daily Fantasy Sports are not illegal in Nevada; however, a sports pool license is required to conduct the activity in Nevada.\nSeveral Attorneys General have also issued opinions that Daily Fantasy Sports are a form of sports wagering. A Florida state attorney general's opinion in 1991 called into doubt the legality of fantasy football contests, but companies have operated in the state without any legal action. Since then nine other AGs have issued options, statements or formal opinions that equate DFS with gambling.\nHowever, several other Attorneys General have issued opinions that DFS are legal games of skill. In August 2015 in Kansas, due to uncertainty with the state's Racing and Gaming Commission position, the state's attorney general issued an opinion that daily fantasy sports was a skill game and thus permitted under state law. Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback signed legislation a month later authorizing fantasy gaming. The Attorneys General of West Virginia and Rhode Island have also issued opinions that clarified the legality of DFS and paid fantasy sports.\nAs of January 2022, online fantasy sports are legal in 49 of the 50 US states. The only state with a ban on online fantasy sports that is codified in statute is Montana. As of January 2022, daily fantasy sports are legal in 45 US states, with 23 of those states explicitly passing legislation legalizing the practice.\nLegal cases related to use of player statistics.\nThere have been other legal cases involving fantasy sports and the use of professional athletes' statistics for purposes of scoring.\nSTATS, Inc. vs. NBA.\nIn 1996, STATS, Inc., a major statistical provider to fantasy sports companies, won a court case, along with Motorola, on appeal against the NBA in which the NBA was trying to stop STATS from distributing in game score information via a special wireless device created by Motorola. The victory played a large part in defending other cases where sports leagues have tried to suppress live in-game information from their events being distributed by other outlets. The victory also accelerated the demand for real-time statistics amid the growth of the fantasy sports industry.\nCDM vs. MLBAM.\nThe development of fantasy sports produced tension between fantasy sports companies and professional leagues and players associations over the rights to player profiles and statistics. The players associations of the major sports leagues believed that fantasy games using player names were subject to licensing due to the right of publicity of the players involved. Since the player names were being used as a group, the players had assigned their publicity rights to the players association who then signed licensing deals. During the 1980s and 1990s many companies signed licensing deals with the player associations, but some companies did not. The issue came to a head with the lawsuit of Major League Baseball Advanced Media (MLBAM), MLB's Internet company, vs. St. Louis-based CBC Distribution and Marketing Inc., the parent company of CDM Sports. When CBC was denied a new licensing agreement with MLBAM (they had acquired the rights from the baseball players' association) for its fantasy baseball game, CBC filed suit.\nCBC argued that intellectual property laws and so-called \"right of publicity\" laws don't apply to the statistics used in fantasy sports. The FSTA filed an amicus curiae in support of CBC, also arguing that if MLBAM won the lawsuit it would have a dramatic impact on the industry, which was largely ignored by the major sports leagues for years while a number of smaller entrepreneurs grew it into a multibillion-dollar industry, and a ruling could allow the MLBAM to have a monopoly over the industry.\n\"This will be a defining moment in the fantasy sports industry,\" said Charlie Wiegert, executive vice president of CBC. \"The other leagues are all watching this case. If MLB prevailed, it just would have been a matter of time before they followed up. Their player unions are just waiting for the opportunity.\"\nCBC won the lawsuit as US District Court Judge Mary Ann Medler ruled that statistics are part of the public domain and can be used at no cost by fantasy companies. \"The names and playing records of major-league baseball players as used in CBC's fantasy games are not copyrightable,\" Medler wrote. \"Therefore, federal copyright law does not pre-empt the players' claimed right of publicity.\"\nThe 8th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the decision in October 2007. \"It would be strange law that a person would not have a First Amendment right to use information that is available to everyone,\" a three-judge panel said in its ruling. The Supreme Court upheld the circuit court's decision by declining to hear the case in June 2008. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10654", "revid": "31831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10654", "title": "Forward pass", "text": "Gridiron football play\nIn several forms of football, a forward pass is the throwing of the ball in the direction in which the offensive team is trying to move, towards the defensive team's goal line. The forward pass is one of the main distinctions between gridiron football (American football and Canadian football) in which the play is legal and widespread, and rugby football (union and league) from which the North American games evolved, in which the play is illegal.\nThe development of the forward pass in American football shows how the game has evolved from its rugby roots into the distinctive game it became. Illegal and experimental forward passes had been attempted as early as 1876, but the first legal forward pass in American football took place in 1906, after a change in rules. Another rule change on January 18, 1951, established that no center, tackle, or guard could receive a forward pass, unless such a player announces his intent to the referee beforehand that he will be an eligible receiver, called a tackle-eligible play. The only linemen who can receive a forward pass are the ends (tight ends and wide receivers). The rules regulate who may throw and who may receive a forward pass, and under what circumstances, as well as how the defensive team may try to prevent a pass from being completed. The primary passer is the quarterback, and statistical analysis is used to determine a quarterback's success rate at passing in various situations, as well as a team's overall success at the passing game.\nGridiron football.\nIn gridiron football, a forward pass is usually referred to simply as a pass, and consists of a player throwing the football towards the opponent's goal line. This is permitted only once during a scrimmage down by the offensive team before team possession has changed, provided the pass is thrown from behind the line of scrimmage; a pass is legal as long as some part of the passer's body is behind the line of scrimmage. The person passing the ball must be a member of the offensive team, and the recipient of the forward pass must be an eligible receiver and must touch the passed ball before any ineligible player. An illegal forward pass can incur a yardage penalty and the loss of a down, although it may be legally intercepted by the opponents and advanced.\nIf an eligible receiver on the passing team legally catches the ball, the pass is completed and the receiver may attempt to advance the ball. If an opposing player legally catches the ball \u2013 all defensive players are eligible receivers \u2013 it is an interception. That player's team immediately gains possession of the ball and he may attempt to advance the ball toward his opponent's goal. If no player is able to legally catch the ball it is an incomplete pass and the ball becomes dead the moment it touches the ground. It will then be returned to the original line of scrimmage for the next down. If any player interferes with an eligible receiver's ability to catch the ball it is pass interference which draws a penalty of varying degrees, depending upon the particular league's rules.\nThe moment that a forward pass begins is important to the game. The pass begins the moment the passer's arm begins to move forward. If the passer drops the ball before this moment it is a fumble and therefore a loose ball. In this case anybody can gain possession of the ball before or after it touches the ground. If the passer drops the ball while his arm is moving forward it is a forward pass, regardless of where the ball lands or is first touched. At some levels of play, a video replay may be required for the game's officials to conclusively determine if a play is a fumble or a forward pass.\nThe quarterback generally either starts a few paces behind the line of scrimmage or drops back a few steps after the ball is snapped. This places him in an area called the \"pocket\", which is a specific protective region formed by the offensive blockers up front and between the tackles on each side. A quarterback who runs out of this pocket is said to be scrambling. Under NFL and NCAA rules, once the quarterback moves out of the pocket the ball may be legally thrown away to prevent a sack. NFHS (high school) rules do not allow for a passer to intentionally throw an incomplete forward pass to save loss of yardage or conserve time, except for a spike to conserve time after a hand-to-hand snap. If he throws the ball away while still in the pocket then a foul called \"intentional grounding\" is assessed. In Canadian football the passer must simply throw the ball across the line of scrimmage \u2013 whether he is inside or outside of the \"pocket\"\u2014to avoid the foul of \"intentionally grounding\".\nIf a forward pass is caught near a sideline or endline it is a complete pass (or an interception) only if a receiver catches the ball \"in bounds\". For a pass to be ruled complete in-bounds, either one or two feet must touch the ground within the field boundaries after the ball is first grasped, depending on the league rules. In the NFL the receiver must touch the ground with both feet, but in most other codes \u2013 CFL, NCAA and high school \u2013 one foot in bounds is sufficient.\nCommon to all gridiron codes is the notion of control: a receiver must demonstrate control of the ball in order to be ruled in \"possession\" of it, while still in bounds. If the receiver handles the ball but the official determines that he was still \"bobbling\" it prior to the end of the play, then the pass will be ruled incomplete. Similarly, if the receiver fails to continue to control the ball after falling to the ground, the pass may be ruled incomplete.\nEarly illegal and experimental passes.\nThe forward pass had been attempted at least 30 years before the play was actually made legal. Passes \"had been carried out successfully but illegally several times, including the 1876 Yale\u2013Princeton game in which Yale's Walter Camp threw forward to teammate Oliver Thompson as he was being tackled. Princeton's protest, one account said, went for naught when the referee 'tossed a coin to make his decision and allowed the touchdown to stand'\u00a0\".\nThe University of North Carolina used the forward pass in an 1895 game against the University of Georgia. However, the play was still illegal at the time. Bob Quincy stakes Carolina's claim in his 1973 book \"They Made the Bell Tower Chime\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;John Heisman, namesake of the Heisman Trophy, wrote 30 years later that, indeed, the Tar Heels had given birth to the forward pass against the Bulldogs (UGA). It was conceived to break a scoreless deadlock and give UNC a 6\u20130 win. The Carolinians were in a punting situation and a Georgia rush seemed destined to block the ball. The punter, with an impromptu dash to his right, tossed the ball and it was caught by George Stephens, who ran 70 yards for a touchdown.\nIn a 1905 experimental game at Wichita, Kansas, Washburn University and Fairmount College (what would become Wichita State) used the pass before new rules allowing the play were approved in early 1906. Credit for the first pass goes to Fairmount's Bill Davis, who completed a pass to Art Solter.\n1905 had been a bloody year on the gridiron; the \"Chicago Tribune\" reported 19 players had been killed and 159 seriously injured that season. There were moves to outlaw the game, but United States President Theodore Roosevelt personally intervened and demanded that the rules of the game be reformed. In a meeting of more than 60 schools in late 1905, the commitment was made to make the game safer. This meeting was the first step toward the establishment of what would become the NCAA and was followed by several sessions to work out \"the new rules.\"\nThe final meeting of the Rules Committee tasked with reshaping the game was held on April 6, 1906, at which time the forward pass officially became a legal play. \"The New York Times\" reported in September 1906 on the rationale for the changes: \"The main efforts of the football reformers have been to 'open up the game'\u2014that is to provide for the natural elimination of the so-called mass plays and bring about a game in which speed and real skill shall supersede so far as possible mere brute strength and force of weight.\" However, the \"Times\" also reflected widespread skepticism as to whether the forward pass could be effectively integrated into the game: \"There has been no team that has proved that the forward pass is anything but a doubtful, dangerous play to be used only in the last extremity.\" John Heisman was instrumental in the rules' acceptance.\nIn Canadian football, the first exhibition game using a forward pass was held on November 5, 1921, at McGill University in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, between the McGill Redmen football team and visiting American college football team the Syracuse Orangemen from Syracuse University. The game was organized by Frank Shaughnessy, the head coach of McGill. McGill player Robert \"Boo\" Anderson is credited with the first forward pass attempt in Canadian football history.\nThe forward pass was not officially allowed in Canadian football until 1929.\nFirst legal pass.\nMost sources credit Saint Louis University's Bradbury Robinson from Bellevue, Ohio with throwing the first legal forward pass. On September 5, 1906, in a game against Carroll College, Robinson's first attempt at a forward pass fell incomplete and resulted in a turnover under the 1906 rules. In the same game, Robinson later completed a 20-yard touchdown pass to Jack Schneider. The 1906 Saint Louis University team, coached by Eddie Cochems, was undefeated at 11\u20130 and featured the most potent offense in the country, outscoring their opponents 407\u201311. Football authority and College Football Hall of Fame coach David M. Nelson wrote that \"E. B. Cochems is to forward passing what the Wright brothers are to aviation and Thomas Edison is to the electric light.\"\nWhile Saint Louis University completed the first legal forward pass in the first half of September, this accomplishment was in part because most schools did not begin their football schedule until early October.\nIn 1952, football coach Amos Alonzo Stagg discounted accounts crediting any particular coach with being the innovator of the forward pass. Stagg noted that he had Walter Eckersall working on pass plays and saw Pomeroy Sinnock of Illinois throw many passes in 1906. Stagg summed up his view as follows: \"I have seen statements giving credit to certain people originating the forward pass. The fact is that all coaches were working on it. The first season, 1906, I personally had sixty-four different forward pass patterns.\" In 1954, Stagg disputed Cochems' claim to have invented the forward pass:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Eddie Cochems, who coached at [Saint] Louis University in 1906, also claimed to have invented the pass as we know it today ... It isn't so, because after the forward pass was legalized in 1906, most of the schools commenced experimenting with it and nearly all used.\nStagg asserted that, as far back as 1894, before the rules committee even considered the forward pass, one of his players used to throw the ball \"like a baseball pitcher.\"\nOn the other hand, Hall of Fame coach Gus Dorais told the United Press that \"Eddie Cochems of the [Saint] Louis University team of 1906\u201307\u201308 deserves the full credit.\" Writing in \"Collier's\" more than 20 years earlier, Dorais' Notre Dame teammate Knute Rockne acknowledged Cochems as the early leader in the use of the pass, observing, \"One would have thought that so effective a play would have been instantly copied and become the vogue. The East, however, had not learned much or cared much about Midwest and Western football. Indeed, the East scarcely realized that football existed beyond the Alleghanies ...\"\nOnce the 1906 season got underway, many programs began experimenting with the forward pass. On September 26, 1906, Villanova's game against the Carlisle Indians was billed as \"the first real game of football under the new rules.\" In the first play from scrimmage after the opening kicks, Villanova completed a pass that \"succeeded in gaining ten yards.\" Following the Villanova-Carlisle game, \"The New York Times\" described the new passing game this way:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnother coach sometimes credited with popularizing the overhead spiral pass in 1906 is former Princeton All-American \"Bosey\" Reiter. Reiter claimed to have invented the overhead spiral pass while playing professional football as a player-coach for Connie Mack's Philadelphia Athletics of the original National Football League (1902). While playing for the Athletics, Reiter was a teammate of Hawley Pierce, a former star for the Carlisle Indian School. Pierce, a Native American, taught Reiter to throw an underhand spiral pass, but Reiter had short arms and was unable to throw for distance from an underhand delivery. Accordingly, Reiter began working on an overhand spiral pass. Reiter recalled trying to imitate the motion of a baseball catcher throwing to second base. After practice and experimentation, Reiter \"discovered he could get greater distance and accuracy throwing that way.\" In 1906, Reiter was the head coach at Wesleyan University. In the opening game of the 1906 season against Yale, Reiter's quarterback Sammy Moore completed a forward pass to Irvin van Tassell for a thirty-yard gain. \"The New York Times\" called it \"the prettiest play of the day\", as Wesleyan's quarterback \"deftly passed the ball past the whole Yale team to his mate Van Tassel.\" Van Tassel later described the historic play to the United Press:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was the right halfback, and on this formation played one yard back of our right tackle. The quarterback, Sam Moore, took the ball from center and faded eight or 10 yards back of our line. Our two ends angled down the field toward the sidelines as a decoy, and I slipped through the strong side of our line straight down the center and past the secondary defense. The pass worked perfectly. However, the quarterback coming up fast nailed me as I caught it. This brought the ball well into Yale territory, about the 20-yard line.\nThe football season opened for most schools during the first week of October, and the impact of the forward pass was immediate:\nSome publications credit Yale All-American Paul Veeder with the \"first forward pass in a major game.\" Veeder threw a 20- to 30-yard completion in leading Yale past Harvard 6\u20130 before 32,000 fans in New Haven on November 24, 1906. However, that Yale/Harvard game was played three weeks after St. Louis completed 45- and 48-yard passes against Kansas before a crowd of 7,000 at Sportsman's Park.\nNew style of play.\nThe forward pass was a central feature of Cochems' offensive scheme in 1906 as his St. Louis University team compiled an undefeated 11\u20130 season in which they outscored opponents by a combined score 407 to 11. The highlight of the campaign was St. Louis' 39\u20130 win over Iowa. Cochems' team reportedly completed eight passes in ten attempts for four touchdowns. \"The average flight distance of the passes was twenty yards.\" Nelson continues, \"the last play demonstrated the dramatic effect that the forward pass was having on football. St. Louis was on Iowa's thirty-five-yard line with a few seconds to play. Timekeeper Walter McCormack walked onto the field to end the game when the ball was thrown twenty-five yards and caught on the dead run for a touchdown.\"\nThe 1906 Iowa game was refereed by one of the top football officials in the country, West Point's Lt. Horatio B. \"Stuffy\" Hackett. He had officiated games involving the top Eastern powers that year. Hackett, who would become a member of the football rules committee in December 1907 and officiated games into the 1930s, was quoted the next day in Ed Wray's \"Globe-Democrat\" article: \"It was the most perfect exhibition ... of the new rules ... that I have seen all season and much better than that of Yale and Harvard. St. Louis' style of pass differs entirely from that in use in the east. ... The St. Louis university players shoot the ball hard and accurately to the man who is to receive it ... The fast throw by St. Louis enables the receiving player to dodge the opposing players, and it struck me as being all but perfect.\"\nHackett is the only known expert witness to the passing offenses of both Cochems' 1906 squads and that of Stagg, who dismissed any special role for the St. Louis coach in the development of the pass. Hackett was an official in games involving both teams. As Wray recalled almost 40 years later: \"Hackett told this writer that in no other game that he handled had he seen the forward pass as used by St. Louis U. nor such bewildering variations of it.\"\n\"Cochems said that the poor Iowa showing resulted from its use of the old style play and its failure to effectively use the forward pass\", Nelson writes. \"Iowa did attempt two basketball-style forward passes.\"\n\"During the 1906 season [Robinson] threw a sixty-seven yard pass ... and ... Schneider tossed a sixty-five yarder. Considering the size, shape and weight of the ball, these were extraordinary passes.\"\nIn 1907, after the first season of the forward pass, one football writer noted that, \"with the single exception of Cochems, football teachers were groping in the dark.\"\nBecause St. Louis was geographically isolated from both the dominant teams and the major sports media (newspapers) of the era, all centered in and focused on the East, Cochems' groundbreaking offensive strategy was not picked up by the major teams. Pass-oriented offenses would not be adopted by the Eastern football powers until the next decade.\nBut that does not mean that other teams in the Midwest did not pick it up. Arthur Schabinger, quarterback for the College of Emporia in Kansas, was reported to have regularly used the forward pass in 1910. Coach H. W. \"Bill\" Hargiss' \"Presbies\" are said to have featured the play in a 17\u20130 victory over Washburn University and in a 107\u20130 destruction of Pittsburg State University. Coach Pop Warner at Carlisle had quarterback Frank Mount Pleasant, one of the first regular spiral pass quarterbacks in football.\nKnute Rockne.\nKnute Rockne and Gus Dorais worked on the pass while lifeguarding on a Lake Erie beach at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio, during the summer of 1913. That year, Jesse Harper, Notre Dame head coach, also showed how the pass could be used by a smaller team to beat a bigger one, first utilizing it to defeat rival Army. After it was used against a major school on a national stage in this game, the forward pass rapidly gained popularity.\nThe 1919 and 1920 Notre Dame teams had George Gipp, an ideal handler of the forward pass, who threw for 1,789 yards.\nJohn Mohardt led the 1921 Notre Dame team to a 10\u20131 record with 781 rushing yards, 995 passing yards, 12 rushing touchdowns, and nine passing touchdowns. Grantland Rice wrote that \"Mohardt could throw the ball to within a foot or two of any given space\" and noted that the 1921 team was the first at Notre Dame \"to build its attack around a forward passing game, rather than use a forward passing game as a mere aid to the running game.\" Mohardt had both Eddie Anderson and Roger Kiley at end to receive his passes.\nIncrease in popularity.\nFrom 1915 to 1916, Pudge Wyman and end Bert Baston of Minnesota were \"one of the greatest forward-passing combinations in the history of the gridiron.\"\nIn the 1921 Rose Bowl, California's Brick Muller completed a touchdown against Washington &amp; Jefferson which went 53 yards in the air, a feat previously thought impossible.\nIn a 1925, 62\u201313 victory over Cornell, Dartmouth's Andy Oberlander had 477 yards in total offense, including six touchdown passes, a Dartmouth record which still stands.\nThe 1925 Michigan team was coach Fielding H. Yost's favorite and featured the passing tandem of Benny Friedman and Bennie Oosterbaan.\nYost disciple Dan McGugin coached Vanderbilt and was one of the first emphasize the forward pass. His 1907 team beat Sewanee on a double pass play Grantland Rice cited as his biggest thrill in his years of watching sports. McGugin's 1927 team was piloted by Bill Spears, who threw for over a thousand yards. According to one writer, Vanderbilt produced \"almost certainly the legit top Heisman candidate in Spears, if there had been a Heisman Trophy to award in 1927.\" McGugin disciple and former quarterback Ray Morrison brought the pass to the southwest when he coached Gerald Mann at Southern Methodist.\nFirst pass in a professional game.\nThe first forward pass in a professional football game may have been thrown in an Ohio League game played on October 25, 1906. The Ohio League, which traced its history to the 1890s, was a direct predecessor of the NFL. According to Robert W. Peterson in his book \"Pigskin The Early Years of Pro Football\", the \"passer was George W. (Peggy) Parratt, probably the best quarterback of the era\", who played for the Massillon, Ohio Tigers, one of pro football's first franchises. Citing the Professional Football Researchers Association as his source, Peterson writes that \"Parratt completed a short pass to end Dan Riley (real name, Dan Policowski)\" in a game played at Massillon against a team from West Virginia. Since the Tigers \"ran up a 61 to 0 score on the hapless Mountain Staters, the pass played no important part in the result.\"\nAccording to National Football League history, it legalized the forward pass from anywhere behind the line of scrimmage on February 25, 1933. Before that rule change, a forward pass had to be made from 5 or more yards behind the line of scrimmage.\nForward passes were first permitted in Canadian football in 1929, but the tactic remained a minor part of the game for several years. Jack Jacobs of the Winnipeg Blue Bombers is recognized, not for inventing the forward pass, but for popularizing it in the Western Interprovincial Football Union (one of the forerunner leagues to the modern Canadian Football League) in the early 1950s, thus changing the Canadian game from a more run-dominated game to a more passing-dominant game.\nChange in ball shape.\nSpecification of the size of the ball for the American game came in 1912, but it was still essentially a rugby ball. Increased use of the forward pass encouraged adoption of a narrower ball, starting with changes in the 1920s which enhanced rifled throwing and also spiral punting. This had the consequence of all but eliminating the drop kick from the American game.\nRugby football.\nIn the two codes of rugby (union and league), a forward pass is against the rules. Normally this results in a scrum to the opposing team, but on rare occasions a penalty may be awarded if the referee is of the belief that the ball was deliberately thrown forward.\nIn both codes of rugby the direction of the pass is relative to the player making the pass and not to the actual path relative to the ground. A forward pass occurs when the player passes the ball forward in relation to himself. (This applies only to the movement of the player, not to the direction in which the passer is facing, i.e. if the player is facing backwards and passes toward their team's goal area, it is not forward; and conversely, if the player passes toward the opponent's goal area, it is forward.) In rugby league, the video referee may not make judgements on whether a pass is forward.\nThe garryowen, as well as the cross-field kick, while not as reliable as the forward pass and more difficult to execute successfully, can provide some of the function that a forward pass does in American and Canadian football.\nOther football codes.\nIn some other football codes, such as association football (soccer), Australian rules football and Gaelic football, the kicked forward pass is used so ubiquitously that it is not thought of as a distinct kind of play at all. In association football and its variants, the concept of offside is used to regulate who can be in front of the play or be nearest to the goal. Historically some earlier incarnations of football allowed unlimited forward passing, and present-day Australian rules football and Gaelic football do not have an offside rule.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "10660", "revid": "41438237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10660", "title": "Telecommunications in Fiji", "text": "Telecommunications in Fiji include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nRadio is a key source of information, particularly on the outer islands. There are publicly and privately owned stations. State-owned Fiji Broadcasting Corporation operates Fijian-language Radio Fiji One, Hindi-language Radio Fiji Two, music-based Bula FM, Hindi station Mirchi FM, and music-based 2day FM.\nCommunications Fiji Limited, a public listed company on the South Pacific Stock Exchange was established in 1996 and is located in 231 Waimanu Road, Suva. It broadcasts English speaking stations FM96 and LegendFM on 96.2FM and 98.6FM respectively, Fijian language station, VitiFM, Navtarang and Radio Sargam - Hindi speaking stations. The BBC World Service broadcasts on 88.2 FM in the capital, Suva.\nMedia control.\nUnder the military government's Media Decree, the directors and 90 percent of the shareholders of locally based media must be citizens of, and permanently reside in Fiji. The Media Industry Development Authority of Fiji is responsible for enforcing these provisions. The authority has the power to investigate journalists and media outlets for alleged violations of the decree, including powers of search and seizure of equipment.\nA code of ethics contained in the Media Decree requires that all stories run by the media be balanced, with comment obtained from both sides where there is any disagreement on the facts. This requirement enables government departments and private businesses to prevent stories from being published by not responding to media questions, thus making it impossible for the media to fulfill the decree's requirement for comment from both sides. However, media sources report that if the story is positive toward the government, the balance requirement could be ignored without consequence.\nInternet.\nThe Internet is widely available and used in and around urban centers, but its availability and use are minimal or nonexistent outside these areas.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThe government in a parliament sitting on March 15, 2018 passed a bill known as the Online Safety Bill to the Standing Committee on Justice, Law and Human Rights that was tabled in the Parliament of Fiji to enforce tougher restrictions on those that may share explicit photos of individuals on social media or spread anti- government remarks as well.\nCurrently, there are no government restrictions on general public access to the Internet, but evidence suggests that the government monitors private e-mails of citizens as well as Internet traffic in an attempt to control antigovernment reports by anonymous bloggers.\nThe country has operated under a military-led government since 2006 and has had no constitution or functioning parliament since 2009. A series of decrees have been issued, including the Public Order Amendment Decree (POAD), the Media Decree, and the Crime Decree.\nBy decree all telephone and Internet service users must register their personal details with telephone and Internet providers, including their name, birth date, home address, left thumbprint, and photographic identification. The decree imposes fines of up to F$100,000 ($56,721) on providers who continue to provide services to unregistered users and up to F$10,000 ($5,672) on users who do not update their registration information as required. Vodafone, one of two mobile telephone providers, also requires users to register their nationality, postal address, employment details, and both thumbprints.\nThe POAD gives the government the power to detain persons on suspicion of \"endangering public safety or the preservation of the peace\"; defines terrorism as any act designed to advance a political, religious, or ideological cause that could \"reasonably be regarded\" as intended to compel a government to do or refrain from doing any act or to intimidate the public or a section thereof; and makes religious vilification and attempts to sabotage or undermine the economy offenses punishable by a maximum F$10,000 ($5,672) fine or five years\u2019 imprisonment. The Media Decree prohibits \"irresponsible reporting\" and provides for government censorship of the media. The Crimes Decree includes criticism of the government in its definition of the crime of sedition, including statements made in other countries by any person, who can be prosecuted on return to Fiji. The government uses the threat of prosecution under these provisions to intimidate government critics and limit public criticism of the government. Journalists and media organizations practice varying degrees of self-censorship, with many reportedly fearing retribution if they criticize the government.\nIn May 2007 it was reported that the military in Fiji had blocked access to blogs critical of the regime.\nIn 2012 police investigated former University of the South Pacific (USP) professor Wadan Narsey, a prominent Fijian economist and long-time critic of the military government, for alleged sedition in writings published on his personal blog.\nThe POAD permits military personnel to search persons and premises without a warrant from a court and to take photographs, fingerprints, and measurements of any person. Police and military officers may enter private premises to break up any meeting considered unlawful.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10661", "revid": "42135411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10661", "title": "Transport in Fiji", "text": "Modes of transport in Fiji include rail, road, water, and air. The rail network is mainly used for movement of sugar cane. Suva and Lautoka are the largest seaports. There are 122km of navigable inland waterways. There are two international airports, one other paved airport, and over 20 with unpaved runways. With 333 tropical islands that make up this country, one can expect to use various modes of transport to get to their destination.\nBuses.\nBuses are the main mode of transport in Fiji's main islands.\nRailways.\nTotal: 597\u00a0km; 597\u00a0km 0.610-m gauge (1995)\nNarrow gauge: Note: belongs to the government-owned Fiji Sugar Corporation The railway is not for passenger or public use.\nWaterways.\n203\u00a0km; 122\u00a0km navigable by motorized craft and 200-metric-ton barges\nPorts and harbors.\nLabasa, Lautoka, Levuka, Savusavu, Suva\nMerchant marine.\nTotal: 6 ships (1,000 GT or over) totaling 11,870 GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\nShips by type: chemical tanker 2, passenger 1, petroleum tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off 1, specialized tanker 1 (1999 est.)\nAirports.\nFiji has two airports that cater to international air traffic, the main one being Nadi International Airport and a secondary one, Nausori Airport, which receives a small number of international flights. There are 13 other smaller domestic airports spread throughout the country's outer islands and these mainly cater for small prop aircraft. Airports Fiji Limited (AFL), a state-owned enterprise owns and operates Nadi International Airport and manages the other 14 airports for the Government.\nMajor airports include:\nTotal 25 (1999 est.)\nAirports with paved runways.\nTotal: 3\nOver 3,047 m: 1\n1,524 to 2,437 m: 1\n914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1999 est.)\nAirports with unpaved runways.\nTotal: 22\n914 to 1,523 m: 5\nUnder 914 m: 17 (1999 est.)"}
{"id": "10662", "revid": "42632462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10662", "title": "Republic of Fiji Military Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Fiji\nThe Republic of Fiji Military Forces (RFMF, formerly the Royal Fiji Military Forces) is the military force of the Pacific island nation of Fiji. With a total manpower of about 4,000 active soldiers and approximately 6,000 reservists, it is one of the smallest militaries in the world. The Ground Force is organised into six infantry and one engineer battalions.\nThe first two regular battalions of the Fiji Infantry Regiment are traditionally stationed overseas on peacekeeping duties; the 1st Battalion has been posted to Lebanon, Iraq, Syria, and East Timor under the command of the UN, while the 2nd Battalion is stationed in Sinai with the MFO. Peacekeepers income represents an important source of income for Fiji. The 3rd Battalion is stationed in the capital, Suva, and the remaining three are spread throughout the islands.\nFiji Infantry Regiment.\nThe Fiji Infantry Regiment is the main combat element of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces. The regiment was formed with the foundation of the Fijian armed forces in 1920. The regiment, as it is today, goes back to 1978 following Fiji's independence.\nFijian Navy.\nThe Republic of Fiji Navy was formed in 1975, following the government's ratification of the United Nations Law of the Sea convention. The Navy is responsible for maritime needs in border control, such as watching over Fiji's exclusive economic zone and organising task and rescue missions. It currently operates 9 patrol boats. Military aid is received from Australia, the People's Republic of China, and the United Kingdom (although the latter has suspended aid as a result of the 2006 military coup against the civilian government).\nSpeaking at 30th anniversary celebrations on 26 July 2006, Commander Bradley Bower said that the greatest challenge facing the navy of a maritime country like Fiji was to maintain sovereignty and the maritime environment, to acquire, restore, and replace equipment, and to train officers to keep pace with changing situations.\nIn January 2019 five of Fiji's naval vessels were operational. In 2020 Australia will provide two new s to replace the three vessels it provided over thirty years ago. In December 2019 Fiji took delivery of , boosting the number of operational vessels to six. The Guardian class patrol vessel was officially handed over to Fijian officials, in Henderson, Australia, on 6 March 2020.\nNorthern Air operates search and rescue flights for the Navy. \nEquipment.\n3 x (Australia, displacement 162 t, length , width draught , power 2 x , maximal speed , crew 17-man, armament machine guns 1 x 12.7\u00a0mm). These boats replaced discharged s FNS \"Kula\", \"Kikau\" and \"Kiro\", gained 1975 \u2013 1976 from the United States Navy.\n2 patrol boat (US, displacement 97 t, crew 11-man, armament machine guns 1 x 12.7\u00a0mm)\n4 (Israel, displacement 39 t, crew 9-man, armament 2 x cannon 20\u00a0mm, 2 x machine guns 7.62\u00a0mm)\n2 Oceanic survey vessels\nRank insignia.\nRank designation based on the British tradition.\nCommissioned officers.\nThe rank insignia for commissioned officers for the army and navy respectively. They are based on the rank structure of Royal Navy and British Army.\nEnlisted.\nThe rank insignia for enlisted personnel for the army and navy respectively. They are based on the ranks of the Royal Navy and British Army. \nHistory.\nPolitical intervention.\nFiji's military has a history of political intervention. In 1987, soldiers were responsible for two military coups, and in 2000, the military organised a countercoup to quash George Speight's civilian coup. Since 2000, the military has had a sometimes tense relationship with the Qarase government, and has strongly opposed its plans to establish a Commission with the power to compensate victims and pardon perpetrators of the coup. Among other objections, the military claims that its integrity and discipline would be undermined if soldiers who mutinied in the 2000 upheaval were to be pardoned.\nOn 4 August 2005, Opposition Leader Mahendra Chaudhry called for more Indo-Fijians, who presently comprise less than one percent of the military personnel, to be recruited. (Specifically, as of October 2007, Fiji's military had 3527 full-time members, of whom only 15 were Indo-Fijians.) This would help guarantee political stability, he considered. He also spoke against government plans to downsize the military. Military spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Orisi Rabukawaqa responded the next day by saying that the military was not an ethnic Fijian body, that it stood to serve the entire nation, and that there was no colour bar in its recruitment or promotion. He said that many Indo-Fijians had been reluctant to commit themselves to a military career because of the slow progress of promotion, often preferring to be discharged and to use their record as a stepping stone to a successful career in some other field. Nevertheless, he appreciated the Indo-Fijian contribution to the military, and noted the success of Lieutenant Colonel Mohammed Aziz, the head of the military's legal unit who was a pivotal figure in the court martial of soldiers who mutinied in 2000. Ironically the rate of promotion of indigenous Fijian officers had been very rapid after the 1987 coup, and subsequent expansion of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces.\nOn 26 August 2005, the government announced plans to study ways to reduce the size of the military. Military engineers would be transferred to the Regional Development Ministry, said Home Affair Minister Josefa Vosanibola, and the reduction of the military forces would coincide with an increase in the numbers of the police force.\nOn 26 September 2005, Rabukawaqa revealed that the military had decided to curtail certain operations to stay within its budget. The cuts would affect maritime patrols, search and rescue operations, training and exercises, School Cadet training, and the deployment of military engineers to rural areas. These cuts would be made to ensure that activities accorded a higher priority, such as peacekeeping operations in the Sinai Peninsula and Iraq, officer cadet training with the New Zealand Defence Forces, and the prosecution of soldiers charged with mutiny, would not be affected, Rabukawaqa said.\nThe next day, Lesi Korovavala, chief executive officer of the Ministry of Home Affairs, told the Fiji Village news service that the military had undertaken the reductions on its own initiative, in consultation with the department, an explanation corroborated by Lieutenant Colonel Rabukawaqa.\nOn 5 December 2006, the Fijian army staged a third coup d'\u00e9tat. On 7 February 2008, the head of the RFMF and post-coup interim Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama stated: \"Qarase [...] does not understand the role of the Military and as such is misinforming the nation. [...] [I]f there are practices and policies which have potential to undermine the national security and territorial integrity of Fiji, the RFMF has every right under the Constitution to intervene.\" In August 2009, with Bainimarama still controlling the government as prime minister and the constitution abrogated, Epeli Nailatikau, a former military commander, was appointed acting president on the retirement of Iloilo.\nOperations.\nFiji committed troops to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. Australia agreed to transport those troops.\nFiji sent 54 individuals to Australia, to help fight wildfires there.\nFiji Air Wing.\nThe Air Wing of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces, founded in 1987, had a base at the airport in Nausori, but was abolished in 1997. Yehonatan Shim\u02bbon Fren\u1e33el writes that the \"Air Wing was formed after the 1987 coup, when the French provided two helicopters as part of its military aid package.\" Frenkel goes on to say that the air wing was disbanded after both helicopters crashed and after subsequent revelations of huge debts incurred as a result of the aircraft.\nAircraft.\nThe two helicopters were:\nHelicopter AS-365 N2 Dauphin crashed off the coast of the main island in July 1994; a smaller AS-355F-2 continued in service until mid-1997 and in 1999 was sold to France.\nThe Air Wing did not have its own roundel or ensign and its only marking was the national flag used as a fin flash.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10663", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10663", "title": "Foreign relations of Fiji", "text": "Fiji has experienced many coups recently, in 1987, 2000, and 2006. Fiji has been suspended various times from the Commonwealth of Nations, a grouping of mostly former British colonies. It was readmitted to the Commonwealth in December 2001, following the parliamentary election held to restore democracy in September that year, and has been suspended again because of the 2006 coup, but has been readmitted a second time after the 2014 election. Other Pacific Island governments have generally been sympathetic to Fiji's internal political problems and have declined to take public positions.\nFiji became the 127th member of the United Nations on 13 October 1970, and participates actively in the organization. Fiji's contributions to UN peacekeeping are unique for a nation of its size. A nation with a population of less than one million, it maintains nearly 1,000 soldiers overseas in UN peacekeeping missions, mainly in the Middle East.\nSince Fiji's independence, the country has been a leader in the South Pacific region, and has played a leading role in the formation of the South Pacific Forum. Fiji has championed causes of common interest to Pacific Island countries.\nSince 2005, Fiji has become embroiled in a number of disagreements with other countries, including Australia, China, New Zealand, South Korea, the United States, and Vanuatu.\nThe country's foreign relations and diplomatic missions are maintained by its Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation.\nDiplomatic relations list.\nList of countries which have established diplomatic relations with Fiji:\nFijian missions abroad.\nFiji maintains direct diplomatic or consular relations with countries with historical, cultural, or trading ties to Fiji; Ambassadors stationed in such countries are often accredited to neighbouring countries. Fiji maintains embassies in Belgium (taking care of Fiji's relations with the entire European Union), China, Japan, South Korea, and the United States; and High Commissions in Australia, India, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, the United Kingdom and New Zealand (in keeping with the Commonwealth practice of calling missions in fellow-commonwealth countries High Commissions rather than Embassies). Fiji also has a Permanent Mission to the United Nations.\nForeign reaction to Fijian legislation.\nAustralia and New Zealand have both expressed concern over legislation currently before the Fijian Parliament (as of June 2005), which proposes to establish a Reconciliation and Unity Commission, with the power (subject to presidential approval) to compensate victims and pardon persons convicted of crimes related to the coup d'\u00e9tat which deposed the elected government in 2000.\nOn 30 August 2005, the then Commonwealth Secretary-General Don McKinnon called on the Fijian government to ensure that the legislation reflected the views of its citizens. He emphasized, however, that the Commonwealth did not have a position on the bill.\nFiji and international organizations.\nFiji plays an active role in numerous international bodies. The South Pacific Forum was largely the brainchild of Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, Fiji's first Prime Minister. The country has been an outspoken participant many international forums.\nCommonwealth of Nations.\nFiji has been a member of the Commonwealth of Nations since it gained its independence in 1970. It was not a member of the Commonwealth between 1987 and 1997 as a result of a republican coup d'\u00e9tat, and was suspended just three years after rejoining between 2000 and 2001 after a military coup, and was suspended after the 2006 coup.\nFiji regained its status as a full member after the Fijian general election in 2014.\nOceania Customs Organisation.\nOn 1 September 2005, it was announced that the Oceania Customs Organization would relocate to Fiji in 2006. Though located in Fiji, it would be totally independent of the Fijian government and of the Fiji Islands Revenue and Customs Authority (FIRCA), Finance Minister Ratu Jone Kubuabola said, and for the first three years of its presence in Fiji, its secretariat would be financed by the New Zealand government.\nWorld Trade Organization.\nSpeaking at the 18th Fiji-Australia Business Forum in Sydney on 17 October 2005, Prime Minister Qarase strongly criticized the World Trade Organization, saying that its policies were unfair to small countries like Fiji. \"WTO is trying to impose equality of trade in an unequal world,\" he said, \"but for developing countries like Fiji there is no level playing field, just a slippery slope.\" It would be a long time before Fiji's economy could compete on equal terms with that of more developed nations, he considered.\nInternational Labour Organization.\nOn 10 January 2006, the Fijian government criticized the International Labour Organization for what it said was the organization's unfair treatment of the Fiji Islands Congress of Trade Unions (FICTU). Labour Minister Kenneth Zinck said the government had received a complaint from FICTU about the ILO's discrimination against it in favour of the rival Fiji Trades Union Congress.\nDiplomatic initiatives.\nSpeaking at the 6th Session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues in New York City on 23 May 2005, Isikia Savua, Fiji's Permanent Representative (Ambassador) to the United Nations, called for equal recognition of individual and collective rights in national and international policies. He said that Fiji had embodied both concepts in its Constitution, through such provisions as communal voting (giving each elector to vote for two members of the House of Representatives, one from his or her own ethnic group, and the other from any ethnic group).\nOn 1 September 2005, Prime Minister Qarase announced his intention to ask his Australian counterpart, John Howard, for more favourable market access for Pacific Islands products. He called on Australia and New Zealand to revise the rules of origin under the SPARTECA trade agreement, and reduce the figure from 50 percent to 35 percent, thereby allowing Fiji to export a higher percentage of garments made elsewhere to Australian and New Zealand markets.\nOn 28 October 2005, Prime Minister Qarase criticized Australia and New Zealand for refusing to grant temporary work permits to Pacific Islanders. He said the two countries were acting unfairly in assuming that such permits would encourage illegal immigration. The Prime Minister claimed that in the absence of such work permits, Pacific Islanders visiting Australia and New Zealand often undertook illegal employment anyway."}
{"id": "10664", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10664", "title": "Goal line (gridiron football)", "text": "The goal line is the chalked or painted line dividing the end zone from the field of play in gridiron football. In American football the goal lines run parallel to the end lines, while in Canadian football they run parallel to the dead lines. In both football codes the distance is measured from the inside edge of the end line to the far edge of the goal line so that the line itself is part of the end zone. It is the line that must be crossed in order to score a touchdown.\nIf any part of the ball reaches any part of the imaginary vertical plane transected by this line while in-bounds and in possession of a player whose team is striving toward that end of the field, this is considered a touchdown and scores six points for the team whose player has advanced the ball to, or recovered the ball in, this position. This is in contrast with other sports like Association football and ice hockey, which require the puck or ball to pass completely over the goal line to count as a score.\nIf any member of the offensive team is downed while in possession of the ball behind his own team's goal line, this is called a safety and scores two points for the defensive team.\nIf, during the course of play, a loose ball travels past the goal line and is recovered within the end zone, then it is a touchdown if recovered by the team that scores in that end zone, or a touchback if recovered and downed by the opposing team\nIn the event of a kick recovered in one's own end zone, the entirety of the ball must pass the goal line in order for the ball to be considered a touchback, and to not be in the field of play.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10666", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10666", "title": "Dead ball (American football)", "text": ""}
{"id": "10667", "revid": "149466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10667", "title": "Tackle (football move)", "text": "Defensive move in various forms of football\nMost forms of football have a move known as a tackle. The primary purposes of tackling are to dispossess an opponent of the ball, to stop the player from gaining ground towards goal or to stop them from carrying out what they intend.\nThe word is used in some contact variations of football to describe the act of physically holding or wrestling a player to the ground. In others, it simply describes one or more methods of contesting for possession of the ball. It can therefore be used as both a defensive or attacking move.\nName origin.\nIn Middle Dutch, the verb meant to grab or to handle. By the 14th century, this had come to be used for the equipment used for fishing, referring to the rod and reel, etc., and also for that used in sailing, referring to rigging, equipment, or gear used on ships. By the 18th century, a similar use was applied to harnesses or equipment used with horses. Modern use in football comes from the earlier sport of rugby, where the word was used in the 19th century.\nAssociation football.\nUnlike other codes, tackles in association football have to be predominantly directed against the ball rather than the player in possession of it. This is achieved by using either leg to wrest possession from the opponent, or sliding in on the grass to knock the ball away. A defender is permitted to use their body to obstruct the motion of a player with the ball, and this may be part of a successful tackle. Pulling a player to the ground in the style of tackle common to other codes is completely absent from the game (this would be considered \"serious foul play\" and result in a dismissal).\nAlthough some contact between players is allowed, the rules of association football significantly limit the physicality of tackles, explicitly forbidding contacts which are \"careless, reckless or [use] excessive force\". Almost all tackles where the tackler's legs make contact with the opponent before the ball are considered illegal, and heavy contact after initially touching the ball may also be penalised.\nIllegal tackles are fouls and are punished with a direct free kick (or penalty if committed within the penalty area) for the opponent's team. Such incidents are common, with dozens of occurrences in a typical match. In most cases these fouls are not considered misconducts, however yellow cards (cautions) may be delivered for more egregious fouls that constitute \"unsporting behaviour\". If a foul tackle endangers the tackled player's safety, it is likely to be considered as \"violent conduct\" by the referee and punished with a red card (dismissal).\nTackles that involve lunging at an opponent with both legs, regardless of whether the ball is won, are generally considered to constitute serious foul play and hence result in a sending-off. This explicitly includes \"scissoring\" (tackling with legs apart, so as to trap the opponent's leg or legs in between), which is likely to be punished with a sending-off (red card), as it poses a high risk of severe knee injury to the player being tackled. Tackling with \"studs up\" is considered dangerous. A \"studs up tackle\" is made when a player lunges into a tackle with a leg or both legs outstretched exposing the soles of their boots. Referees are encouraged to at the very least caution (yellow card) players who commit such challenges.\nAdditionally, an illegal tackle which is also a professional foul is considered misconduct.\nThe most spectacular form of tackle in association football is the slide tackle, wherein a tackler slides, leg extended, along the ground, aiming to hit the ball away. This form of tackle carries a high risk of committing a foul.\n\"Diving\" in association football involves tackled players exaggerating the physicality of tackles, so as to gain favourable decisions from the referee.\nAustralian rules football.\nIn Australian rules football, the move commonly described as a \"tackle\" is similar to in rugby and involves wrapping, holding or wrestling a player who has possession of the ball to the ground. Tackling players not in possession of the ball is not allowed, this is considered \u201cholding the man\u201d and penalised with a free kick to the opposition.\nAs there is no offside rule in Australian rules football, players can be tackled from any direction, and are often blindsided. For this reason, the sport allows players to shepherd and bump their opponents within 5 metres of the ball, to protect the ball carrier.\nA tackled player must immediately dispose of the ball legally, by kicking or handballing, but not by throwing or dropping the ball. If this is not done, a holding the ball free kick will be awarded to the tackler. If the ball is knocked free by the tackler, pinned to the player by the tackler, or the player unsuccessfully attempts a kick or handball, a free kick will only be awarded if the ball carrier is deemed to have had a prior opportunity to dispose of the ball prior to being tackled. If a player has not had prior opportunity to dispose of the ball and a tackler knocks the ball free during a tackle then no free kick is paid and the game continues.\nA tackle must only contact below the shoulders and above the knees, and a player is able to be thrown to the ground, so long as the tackle is deemed not to be reckless or likely to cause injury. There are also rules outlawing pushing in the back making tackling more difficult. Tripping, by both hand or foot, is not allowed and can be a reportable offence.\nPlayers wear little to no padding to cushion the impact of tackles, however players generally wear mouthguards to protect their teeth.\nTypes of tackles in Australian rules.\nThere are many types of tackles in Australian rules football:\nOther tackling methods.\nAlthough the term \"tackle\" is used in Australian rules to exclusively describe wrapping, holding or wrestling a player in possession, there are also several other ways of contesting possession in Australian rules that other sports would describe as a \"tackle\" and that also involve a degree of contact.\nOther defensive actions are generally categorised as \"one percenters\". The defensive tactic of punching away (commonly known as spoiling) from a player is allowed. \"Smothering\", which involves using the arms or body to get in the way of an opponent's kick as it leaves their boot, is similar to a \"charge down\" in rugby football.\nGaelic football.\nGaelic football defines tackling as wresting the ball from an opponent's hands. Bumping is allowed on the player with the ball, but a player cannot be grabbed.\nGridiron football.\nIn American football and Canadian football, to tackle is to physically interfere with the forward progress of a player in possession of the ball, such that his forward progress ceases and is not resumed, or such that he is caused to touch some part of his body to the ground other than his feet or hands, or such that he is forced to go out of bounds. In any such case, the ball becomes dead, the down is over, and play ceases until the beginning of the next play.\nA tackle is known as a quarterback sack when the quarterback is tackled at or behind the line of scrimmage while attempting to throw a pass. A tackle for loss is a tackle that causes a loss of yardage for the opposing running back or wide receiver. This happens when the quarterback is sacked, when either a rusher or a receiver is tackled behind the line of scrimmage, or when the ball is fumbled behind the line of scrimmage and was picked up by an offensive player who does not manage to move past the line before being tackled. When a player who does not have the ball is taken down, it is generally referred to as a block.\nTacklers are not required to wrap their arms around the ball carrier before bringing him to the ground; in fact, the ball carrier is often \"tackled\" by the defender taking a running start and hitting the ball carrier to knock them to the ground. Tackles can also be made by grabbing the ball carrier's jersey (or even hair, should it be long enough and allowed to dangle freely from beneath the helmet) and pulling him to the ground. As mentioned above, the referee can declare that a play is dead if the ball carrier's forward progress has been stopped, even if he has not actually been taken to the ground.\nTo protect players from potentially catastrophic injury, there are some restrictions on tackles and blocks. At no time may a defensive player tackle an offensive player by grabbing the facemask of their helmet; doing so incurs a 15-yard penalty and the victimized team is awarded a new set of downs. Although spear tackles are allowed in gridiron football, a player may not use his helmet to tackle an opponent as the technique can cause serious injury to both players (more often the tackler, due to the force of reaction on the tackler, which is apt to be beyond the limit that the neck can handle) and also warrants a 15-yard penalty as well as a fresh set of downs if committed by the defending team; this is known as \"spearing the player\". A similar penalty is assessed to any player attempting to make contact with his helmet against another opponent's helmet, which is known as a helmet-to-helmet collision. Grabbing a ball carrier by the pads behind his neck and pulling him down is known as a \"horse collar\", a method which has been made illegal at all levels of American football.\nIt is also illegal to tackle a player who has thrown a forward pass (generally a quarterback) after he has released the ball; doing so is called \"roughing the passer\" and incurs a 15-yard penalty and a fresh set of downs for the team with the ball. However, in the NFL a player can continue forward for one step, which means that often a player who is committed to attacking the quarterback will still make a tackle. Place kickers and punters are afforded an even greater protection from being tackled.\nOnce the play is ruled complete, no contact is permitted; a player who makes contact with an opponent after the play is charged with \"unnecessary roughness\" and his team is assessed a 15-yard penalty.\nBlocks that occur in the back of the legs and below the knees, initiated below the waist, or clotheslines are also generally prohibited and players who use them are subject to much more severe penalties than other illegal tackles. However, a player who plays on the line \"can\" block below the knees (cut block) as long the block is within five yards of the line and the player they block is in front of them and not engaged by another blocker (chop block).\nIn the National Football League (NFL), tackles are tracked as an unofficial statistic by a scorekeeper hired by the home team. Though the statistic is widely cited, the league does not verify that the counts are accurate.\nOn November 12, 2022, Carlton Martial of Troy recorded his 546th tackle to break the Division I FBS record for most tackles in a career.\nInternational rules football.\nInternational rules football is a hybrid game between Australian rules football and Gaelic football.\nTackling in International Rules is subject to similar rules as Australian rules football, but with some subtle differences. Tackling is only allowed as low as the waist, whereas it is allowed down to the knees in Aussie Rules. One handed tackling has been banned in International Rules since the 2008 International Rules Series.\nRugby football.\nRugby league.\nIn rugby league the ball-carrier can be tackled by any number of defenders from any direction. The initial contact in the tackle must be made below the ball carrier's neck or it will be deemed a high tackle and penalised. A tackle in rugby league is completed when any of the following occurs:\nOnce the tackle is completed, the ball-carrier must be allowed to get to his feet to 'play-the-ball' and the defensive team must retreat 10 metres (except 2 markers, facing the tackled player). Spear tackles are illegal in rugby league, with most tackles in which the defender is lifted 'above the horizontal' bringing about penalties in the modern game. A stiff arm tackle is an offence. A 2012 New Zealand study found that over 659 tackles are made per game in professional rugby league. Of all the rugby league positions, second-row averages the most tackles.\nRugby union.\nIn rugby union, a player must be brought to ground for a tackle to be completed. The tackled player must release the ball, but the ball is not dead and a \"ruck\" forms to contest possession of it. If the ball carrier is not brought to the ground a \"maul\" will usually form. High/reckless or stiff arm tackles laws once dictated any contact made above the shoulders was an offence. Now, even if contact starts below the shoulders, if the head is involved in any reckless tackle it results in the offending player being given a yellow card and therefore sin binned. World Rugby now defines a reckless tackle as being any contact where the tackler \"knew or should have known that there was a risk of making contact with the head of an opponent, but did so anyway\"\nNon-tackling variants.\nFor various codes of football, variant codes have been developed which substitute out the tackling element, making the game less physical. In these games, either a being touched by an opponent or, in some codes, having a tag on the player's person removed, has effects similar to a tackle in the parent code.\nOther uses.\nOther non-football games that feature tackling or similar concepts include hurling, hockey and shinty. With the increasing popularity of football in the late 19th century, tackling had been integrated into field-based chasing games such as British Bulldog (game), Pom-Pom-Pull-Away and British Bulldog. For younger boys, these children's games became essential for the acquisition of football skills.\nTackle types.\nSome illegal tackle moves result in a penalty play, however others may be \"reportable\" offences \u2014 that is, the option exists for an official to penalise a player's conduct individually rather than during the game refer it to a tribunal for deferred penalty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10668", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10668", "title": "Play from scrimmage", "text": "A sequence of play in gridiron football\nA play from scrimmage is the sequence in the game of gridiron football during which one team tries to advance the ball, get a first down, or score, and the other team tries to stop them or take the ball away. Once a play is over, and before the next play starts, the football is considered dead. A game of American football (or Canadian Football) consists of many (about 120\u2013150) such plays.\nSpecifications.\nThe term is also used to denote a specific plan of action, or its execution, under a particular set of circumstances faced by either team. For instance, the offensive team may be faced with one or two downs left in a possession and still ten or more yards to go to earn a new set of downs. In this instance, they may decide to employ a forward pass. Well in advance of the particular game, a number of different kinds of forward pass plays will have been planned out and practiced by the team. They will be designated by obscure words, letters and/or numbers so that the name of a play does not reveal its exact execution to outsiders. The team's coach, or perhaps the quarterback, will choose one of the planned forward passing strategies, and tell the team, during the huddle which one has been chosen. Because of planning and practice, each player is expected to know what his role in the play is to be, and how to execute it. This will be the offensive play.\nConversely, the defensive team will know that the offense has to cover a good deal of ground in a single play, will expect a forward pass, and will know from earlier study something of the propensities of the offense they face. The defensive captain is likely to call out a specific formation or defensive play, to anticipate and counteract the expected action by the offense.\nThe play.\nThe play will begin with the snap of the ball (typically but not exclusively to the quarterback), and it will end when the effort by the offensive squad to advance the ball has either succeeded in scoring, or has been frustrated by the ball being downed before the aim of the offensive play is accomplished, or by the defensive squad having managed to come into possession of the ball without first downing it. In the event of change of possession during a play, the team newly in possession of the ball may try to advance it toward their opponent's goal, which the team formerly in possession will naturally resist. Change of possession during a routine play may occur by interception or by fumble (often collectively referred to as \"turnovers\").\nChange of possession may also occur in other ways. A change of possession can occur \"on downs\", if the offensive team fails to achieve a first down or a touchdown in a specified number of consecutive attempts, known as \"downs\" (four in American football; three in Canadian football). Another way is through a change of possession play, when the offensive team (having perhaps surmised the unlikelihood of scoring or of achieving a first down within the allowed consecutive attempts to do so) kicks the ball away in what is known as a punt. A touchdown (and subsequent conversion attempt, whether successful or not) or successful field goal attempt will be followed by a kickoff. Kickoffs and field goal attempts are not considered true change of possession plays. An unsuccessful field goal attempt will usually also result in a change of possession (without a kickoff), but is usually not counted as a turnover.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10669", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10669", "title": "Football player", "text": "Sports person who plays football\nA football player or footballer is a sportsperson who plays one of the different types of football. The main types of football are association football, American football, Canadian football, Australian rules football, Gaelic football, rugby league, and rugby union.\nIt has been estimated that there are 250 million association football players in the world, and many play the other forms of football.\nCareer.\nJean-Pierre Papin has described football as a \"universal language\". Footballers across the world and at almost any level may regularly attract large crowds of spectators, and players are the focal points of widespread social phenomena such as association football culture.\nFootballers generally begin as amateurs and the best players progress to become professional players. Normally they start at a youth team (any local team) and from there, based on skill and talent, scouts offer contracts. Once signed, some learn to play better football and a few advance to the senior or professional teams.\nPay.\nPay in some top leagues is significantly higher than in other jobs. Players in the Premier League earn average about $1 million per year. In the wealthiest clubs in European football leagues, some players earn an average wage up to $6 to $8 million per year. The best players of those clubs can earn up to $70 million per year.\nHowever, only a fraction of men's professional football players is paid at this level. Wages may be much more moderate in other divisions and leagues, and a significant number of players are semi-professional. For example, the average annual salary for footballers in Major League Soccer for the 2013 season was $148,693, with significant variations depending on the player position (goalkeepers for example earned $85,296, whereas forwards earned $251,805.\nPopularity and average salaries in women's leagues are far lower. For example, players in the National Women's Soccer League (NWSL) (which started in 2012) earn $15,000 to $40,000 per year as of January 2017.\nPost-retirement.\nA minority of retired footballers continue working full-time in football, for instance as football managers. A 1979 study reported that former first-team ballplayers were over-represented as top-ranking executives in their companies and had greater income mobility than second-teamers and reserves. However, some experience chronic health issues, see below.\nSkills and specialties.\nAssociation football specialties (positions).\nIn association football, there are four traditional types of specialties (positions): goalkeepers (goalies), defenders (full-backs), midfielders (half-backs), and forwards (attackers). Special purpose positions include such performers as sweepers, stoppers, second forwards (under-attackers), wingers, insiders, etc.\nAmerican football.\nThe American football teams' positions are categorized by a form of play where each of it has own spectrum of positions. Those are offensive, defensive and special teams.\nPsychological aspects of performance.\nResearch shows that association football players who take less than 200ms after the referee blows their whistle to make a penalty kick are significantly less likely to score than those who take over a second.\nHealth issues.\nAn Irish 2002 study of association and Gaelic football players characterized players as \"lean and muscular with a reasonably high level of capacity in all areas of physical performance\". The opposite is the case for American football, where obesity could be the cause of grave health problems.\nA 2000 study documented injuries sustained by Czech [association] football players at all levels:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Trauma was the cause of 81.5% of the injuries, and overuse was the cause of 18.5%. Joint sprains predominated (30%), followed by fractures (16%), muscle strains (15%), ligament ruptures (12%), meniscal tears and contusions (8%), and other injuries. Injuries to the knee were most prevalent (29%), followed by injuries to the ankle (19%) and spine (9%). More injuries occurred during games (59%) than in practice. Patellar tendinitis (knee pain) is considered an injury that comes from overexertion, which also happens to other athletes of virtually every sport. It is a common problem that football players develop and can usually be treated by a quadriceps strengthening program. Jumping activities place particularly high strains on the tendon and with repetitive jumping, tearing and injury of the tendon can occur. The chronic injury and healing response results in inflammation and localized pain.\nAlthough levels of depression and pain in retired football players are on par with the societal average, some players suffer from post-retirement chronic injuries. Head injuries are a particular concern.\nLife expectancy.\nStudies have long shown former American football NFL players have a longer life expectancy than the general public or males with a similar age and race distribution, but a higher rate of cardiovascular issues. A study comparing the deaths of former Major League Baseball players found baseball players lived longer still, perhaps suggesting a \"healthy worker\" bias where NFL athletes lived less long than they would otherwise have, despite their longer than average life expectancy. A 2009 review of the evidence in the American Journal of Medicine concluded the existing evidence \"did not suggest an increased mortality\" but does \"suggest increased cardiovascular risk..., particularly the heavier linemen.\"\nIn association football, a 2011 German study found that German national team players lived 1.9 years less than the general male population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Football players participating in international matches for Germany have reduced longevity compared to the general population. This disadvantage was the larger, the earlier the international football player started his international career. This finding is in line with the current knowledge of life expectancy in major athletes, especially those from other team sports\nA 1983 study of rugby players found that the life expectancy of All Blacks was the same as for the general population.\nAustralian rules footballers have lower death rates than the general population.\nHead.\nAmerican football players are prone to head injuries such as concussions. In later life, this increases the risk of dementia and Alzheimer's. Professional American football players self-reporting concussions are at greater risk for having depressive episodes later in life compared with those retired players self-reporting no concussions.\nProbably due to the repeated trauma associated with heading balls, professional association football has been suggested to increase the incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In a 1987 study of former Norwegian association football national team players, one third of the players were found to have central cerebral atrophy, \"i.e.\" brain damage. A 1999 study connected soccer to chronic traumatic head injury (CTHI):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[P]articipation in amateur association football in general and concussion specifically is associated with impaired performance in memory and planning functions. Due to the worldwide popularity of soccer, these observations may have important public health implications\nKnee.\nAnterior cruciate ligaments are particularly vulnerable in most types of football due to injuries that can be sustained during tackles.\nHip.\nAn increased incidence of osteoarthritis in the hip joint has been found in retired football players.\nMuscles.\nA 2012 study of association football injuries found that 19% of all injuries were muscle injuries, of which 54% affected the thigh muscles.\nSleep and psychological functioning.\nIn a 2009 study, association football was found to be associated with favourable sleep patterns and psychological functioning in adolescent male football players.\nThe rate of suicide among NFL vets has been found to be 59% lower than in the general population.\nFIFA response.\nIn 2012, FIFA released a paper intended to identify key risk factors for association football players.\nLongevity and factors of mortality.\nIn 2015, a systematic review of a sample of fifty-four peer-reviewed publications and three articles on elite athletes\u2019 mortality and longevity, resulted in major longevity outcomes for the elite athletes (baseball, football, soccer, basketball, and cycling) \"compared to age-and sex-matched controls from the general population and other athletes.\" The span longevities were influenced by factors like the type of sport, the playing position, the race, and the energy system.\nInternational level.\nAn observational study held from professional footballers -active (during career) and recently retired (post career, aged more than 45 years)- of 70 countries between 2007 and 2013, elaborated on data of the World Footballers' Union (FIFPro), recorded 214 deaths of which 25% was caused by accidents, 11% by suicides and 33% by a suspected cardiac pathology (on an overall 55% of deaths caused by a some sort of disease).\nClinical evaluation, ECG and echocardiography are required for the athletes as pre-participation tools in order to prevent sudden cardiac deaths on people aged less than 35. To evaluate the risk of myocardial fibrosis, may use and recommended the additional use of alte gadolinium enhancement (LGE) with pre- and post-contrast and extracellular volume fraction (ECV) images. Even encouraged, it wasn't yet made mandatory.\nNorth America.\nIn 2015, 205 deaths among North American professional athletes who were registered as active at the time of their decease were analysed. Data were collected for the four major sports: National Basketball Association (NBA), National Football League (NFL), National Hockey League (NHL), and Major League Baseball (MLB). The NFL and NBA active players had \"a higher likelihood of dying in a car accident\" and a significantly higher likelihood of dying from a cardiac-related illness compared to the NHL and MLB active populations.\nIn 2013, a study on 3,439 retired athletes of the National Football Leagues with at least five credited playing seasons between 1959 and 1988 did not show a statistical correlation between suicide mortality and professional activity, and particularly football-related compared with the general control sample. No stratification was reported between speed and non-speed position players.\nItaly.\nUntil the 2000s a very limited number of formal studies has been published on mortality from all causes in soccer players, despite the high interest of the public to the matter.\nAn extended study held in Italy between 1975 and 2003 on a total of 5.389 players, age 14\u201335 years, highlighted that, while the mortality for cancer and cardiovascular diseases among the football players cohort was significantly lower than the general Italian population, the \"mortality rates for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and car accidents were significantly higher than expected, and for ALS the risk is 18 times than expected.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10670", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10670", "title": "Friedrich Nietzche", "text": ""}
{"id": "10671", "revid": "40764242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10671", "title": "Friedrich Nietzsche", "text": "German philosopher (1844\u20131900)\nFriedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche (; ] () ]; 15 October 1844 \u2013 25 August 1900) was a German philosopher, prose poet, cultural critic, philologist, and composer whose work has exerted a profound influence on contemporary philosophy.\nNietzsche's writing spans philosophical polemics, poetry, cultural criticism, and fiction while displaying a fondness for aphorism and irony. Prominent elements of his philosophy include his radical critique of truth in favour of perspectivism; a genealogical critique of religion and Christian morality and a related theory of master\u2013slave morality; the aesthetic affirmation of life in response to both the \"death of God\" and the profound crisis of nihilism; the notion of Apollonian and Dionysian forces; and a characterisation of the human subject as the expression of competing wills, collectively understood as the will to power. He also developed influential concepts such as the \"\" and his doctrine of eternal return. In his later work, he became increasingly preoccupied with the creative powers of the individual to overcome cultural and moral mores in pursuit of new values and aesthetic health. His body of work touched a wide range of topics, including art, philology, history, music, religion, tragedy, culture, and science, and drew inspiration from Greek tragedy as well as figures such as Zoroaster, Arthur Schopenhauer, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Richard Wagner and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.\nAfter his death, Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth became the curator and editor of his manuscripts. She edited his unpublished writings to fit her German ultranationalist ideology, often contradicting or obfuscating Nietzsche's stated opinions, which were explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism. Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated with fascism and Nazism. 20th-century scholars such as Walter Kaufmann, R. J. Hollingdale, and Georges Bataille defended Nietzsche against this interpretation, and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available. Nietzsche's thought enjoyed renewed popularity in the 1960s and his ideas have since had a profound impact on 20th- and early 21st-century thinkers across philosophy\u2014especially in schools of continental philosophy such as existentialism, postmodernism and post-structuralism\u2014as well as art, literature, poetry, politics, and popular culture.\nLife.\nYouth (1844\u20131868).\nBorn on 15 October 1844, Nietzsche grew up in the town of R\u00f6cken (now part of L\u00fctzen), near Leipzig, in the Prussian Province of Saxony. He was named after King Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia, who turned 49 on the day of Nietzsche's birth (Nietzsche later dropped his middle name Wilhelm). Nietzsche's parents, Carl Ludwig Nietzsche (1813\u20131849), a Lutheran pastor and former teacher; and Franziska Nietzsche (\"n\u00e9e\" Oehler) (1826\u20131897), married in 1843, the year before their son's birth. They had two other children: a daughter, Elisabeth F\u00f6rster-Nietzsche, born in 1846; and a second son, Ludwig Joseph, born in 1848. Nietzsche's father died from a brain ailment in 1849; Ludwig Joseph died six months later at age two. The family then moved to Naumburg, where they lived with Nietzsche's maternal grandmother and his father's two unmarried sisters. After the death of Nietzsche's grandmother in 1856, the family moved into their own house, now Nietzsche-Haus, a museum and Nietzsche study center.\nNietzsche attended a boys' school and then a private school, where he became friends with Gustav Krug and Wilhelm Pinder, all three of whom came from highly respected families. Academic records from one of the schools attended by Nietzsche noted that he excelled in Christian theology.\nIn 1854, he began to attend Domgymnasium in Naumburg. Because his father had worked for the state (as a pastor) the now-fatherless Nietzsche was offered a scholarship to study at the internationally recognised Schulpforta (the claim that Nietzsche was admitted on the strength of his academic competence has been debunked: his grades were not near the top of the class). He studied there from 1858 to 1864, becoming friends with Paul Deussen and Carl von Gersdorff. He also found time to work on poems and musical compositions. Nietzsche led \"Germania\", a music and literature club, during his summers in Naumburg. At Schulpforta, Nietzsche received an important grounding in languages\u2014Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and French\u2014so as to be able to read important primary sources; he also experienced for the first time being away from his family life in a small-town conservative environment. His end-of-semester exams in March 1864 showed a 1in Religion and German; a 2a in Greek and Latin; a 2b in French, History, and Physics; and a \"lackluster\" 3in Hebrew and Mathematics.\nNietzsche was an amateur composer. He composed several works for voice, piano, and violin beginning in 1858 at the Schulpforta in Naumburg when he started to work on musical compositions. Richard Wagner was dismissive of Nietzsche's music, allegedly mocking a birthday gift of a piano composition sent by Nietzsche in 1871 to his wife Cosima. German conductor and pianist Hans von B\u00fclow also described another of Nietzsche's pieces as \"the most undelightful and the most antimusical draft on musical paper that I have faced in a long time\".\nWhile at Schulpforta, Nietzsche pursued subjects that were considered unbecoming. He became acquainted with the work of the then almost-unknown poet Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin, calling him \"my favorite poet\" and writing an essay in which he said that the poet raised consciousness to \"the most sublime ideality\". The teacher who corrected the essay gave it a good mark but commented that Nietzsche should concern himself in the future with healthier, more lucid, and more \"German\" writers. Additionally, he became acquainted with Ernst Ortlepp, an eccentric, blasphemous, and often drunken poet who was found dead in a ditch weeks after meeting the young Nietzsche but who may have introduced Nietzsche to the music and writing of Richard Wagner. Perhaps under Ortlepp's influence, he and a student named Richter returned to school drunk and encountered a teacher, resulting in Nietzsche's demotion from first in his class and the end of his status as a prefect.\nAfter graduation in September 1864, Nietzsche began studying theology and classical philology at the University of Bonn in the hope of becoming a minister. For a short time, he and Deussen became members of the Burschenschaft \"Frankonia\". After one semester (and to the anger of his mother), he stopped his theological studies and lost his faith. As early as his 1862 essay \"Fate and History\", Nietzsche had argued that historical research had discredited the central teachings of Christianity, but David Strauss's \"Life of Jesus\" also seems to have had a profound effect on the young man. In addition, Ludwig Feuerbach's \"The Essence of Christianity\" influenced young Nietzsche with its argument that people created God, and not the other way around. In June 1865, at the age of 20, Nietzsche wrote to his sister Elisabeth, who was deeply religious, a letter regarding his loss of faith. This letter contains the following statement:\nHence the ways of men part: if you wish to strive for peace of soul and pleasure, then believe; if you wish to be a devotee of truth, then inquire...\nNietzsche subsequently concentrated on studying philology under Professor Friedrich Wilhelm Ritschl, whom he followed to the University of Leipzig in 1865. There he became close friends with his fellow student Erwin Rohde. Nietzsche's first philological publications appeared soon after.\nIn 1865, Nietzsche thoroughly studied the works of Arthur Schopenhauer. He owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading Schopenhauer's \"The World as Will and Representation\" and later admitted that Schopenhauer was one of the few thinkers whom he respected, dedicating the essay \"\" in the \"Untimely Meditations\" to him.\nIn 1866, he read Friedrich Albert Lange's \"History of Materialism\". Lange's descriptions of Kant's anti-materialistic philosophy, the rise of European Materialism, Europe's increased concern with science, Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, and the general rebellion against tradition and authority intrigued Nietzsche greatly. Nietzsche would ultimately argue the impossibility of an evolutionary explanation of the human aesthetic sense.\nIn 1867, Nietzsche signed up for one year of voluntary service with the Prussian artillery division in Naumburg. He was regarded as one of the finest riders among his fellow recruits, and his officers predicted that he would soon reach the rank of captain. However, in March 1868, while jumping into the saddle of his horse, Nietzsche struck his chest against the pommel and tore two muscles in his left side, leaving him exhausted and unable to walk for months. Consequently, he turned his attention to his studies again, completing them in 1868. Nietzsche also met Richard Wagner for the first time later that year.\nProfessor at Basel (1869\u20131879).\nIn 1869, with Ritschl's support, Nietzsche received an offer to become a professor of classical philology at the University of Basel in Switzerland. He was only 24 years old and had neither completed his doctorate nor received a teaching certificate (\"habilitation\"). He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Leipzig University in March 1869, again with Ritschl's support.\nDespite his offer coming at a time when he was considering giving up philology for science, he accepted. To this day, Nietzsche is still among the youngest of the tenured Classics professors on record.\nNietzsche's 1870 projected doctoral thesis, \"Contribution toward the Study and the Critique of the Sources of Diogenes Laertius\" (\"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Quellenkunde und Kritik des Laertius Diogenes\"), examined the origins of the ideas of Diogenes La\u00ebrtius. Though never submitted, it was later published as a ('congratulatory publication') in Basel.\nBefore moving to Basel, Nietzsche renounced his Prussian citizenship: for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless.\nNevertheless, Nietzsche served in the Prussian forces during the Franco-Prussian War (1870\u20131871) as a medical orderly. In his short time in the military, he experienced much and witnessed the traumatic effects of battle. He also contracted diphtheria and dysentery. Walter Kaufmann speculates that he also contracted syphilis at a brothel along with his other infections at this time. On returning to Basel in 1870, Nietzsche observed the establishment of the German Empire and Otto von Bismarck's subsequent policies as an outsider and with a degree of scepticism regarding their genuineness. His inaugural lecture at the university was \"\". Nietzsche also met Franz Overbeck, a professor of theology who remained his friend throughout his life. Afrikan Spir, a little-known Russian philosopher responsible for the 1873 \"Thought and Reality\" and Nietzsche's colleague, the famed historian Jacob Burckhardt, whose lectures Nietzsche frequently attended, began to exercise significant influence on him.\nNietzsche had already met Richard Wagner in Leipzig in 1868 and later Wagner's wife, Cosima. Nietzsche admired both greatly and during his time at Basel frequently visited Wagner's house in Tribschen in Lucerne. The Wagners brought Nietzsche into their most intimate circle\u2014including Franz Liszt, of whom Nietzsche colloquially described: \"Liszt or the art of running after women!\" Nietzsche enjoyed the attention he gave to the beginning of the Bayreuth Festival. In 1870, he gave Cosima Wagner the manuscript of \"The Genesis of the Tragic Idea\" as a birthday gift. In 1872, Nietzsche published his first book, \"The Birth of Tragedy\". However, his colleagues within his field, including Ritschl, expressed little enthusiasm for the work in which Nietzsche eschewed the classical philologic method in favour of a more speculative approach. In his polemic \"Philology of the Future\", Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff damped the book's reception and increased its notoriety. In response, Rohde (then a professor in Kiel) and Wagner came to Nietzsche's defence. Nietzsche remarked freely about the isolation he felt within the philological community and attempted unsuccessfully to transfer to a position in philosophy at Basel.\nIn 1873, Nietzsche began to accumulate notes that would be posthumously published as \"Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks\". Between 1873 and 1876, he published four separate long essays: \"David Strauss: the Confessor and the Writer\", \"On the Use and Abuse of History for Life\", \"Schopenhauer as Educator\", and \"Richard Wagner in Bayreuth\". These four later appeared in a collected edition under the title \"Untimely Meditations\". The essays shared the orientation of a cultural critique, challenging the developing German culture suggested by Schopenhauer and Wagner. During this time in the circle of the Wagners, he met Malwida von Meysenbug and Hans von B\u00fclow. He also began a friendship with Paul R\u00e9e who, in 1876, influenced him into dismissing the pessimism in his early writings. However, he was deeply disappointed by the Bayreuth Festival of 1876, where the banality of the shows and baseness of the public repelled him. He was also alienated by Wagner's championing of \"German culture\", which Nietzsche felt a contradiction in terms, as well as by Wagner's celebration of his fame among the German public. All this contributed to his subsequent decision to distance himself from Wagner.\nWith the publication in 1878 of \"Human, All Too Human\" (a book of aphorisms ranging from metaphysics to morality to religion), a new style of Nietzsche's work became clear, highly influenced by Afrikan Spir's \"Thought and Reality\" and reacting against the pessimistic philosophy of Wagner and Schopenhauer. Nietzsche's friendship with Deussen and Rohde cooled as well. In 1879, after a significant decline in health, Nietzsche had to resign his position at Basel and was pensioned. Since his childhood, various disruptive illnesses had plagued him, including moments of shortsightedness that left him nearly blind, migraine headaches, and violent indigestion. The 1868 riding accident and diseases in 1870 may have aggravated these persistent conditions, which continued to affect him through his years at Basel, forcing him to take longer and longer holidays until regular work became impractical.\nIndependent philosopher (1879\u20131888).\nLiving off his pension from Basel and aid from friends, Nietzsche travelled frequently to find climates more conducive to his health and lived until 1889 as an independent author in different cities. He spent many summers in Sils Maria near St. Moritz in Switzerland. He spent his winters in the Italian cities of Genoa, Rapallo, and Turin and the French city of Nice. In 1881, when France occupied Tunisia, he planned to travel to Tunis to view Europe from the outside but later abandoned that idea, probably for health reasons. Nietzsche occasionally returned to Naumburg to visit his family, and, especially during this time, he and his sister Elisabeth had repeated periods of conflict and reconciliation.\nWhile in Genoa, Nietzsche's failing eyesight prompted him to explore the use of typewriters as a means of continuing to write. He is known to have tried using the Hansen Writing Ball, a contemporary typewriter device. In the end, a past student of his, Peter Gast, became a private secretary to Nietzsche. In 1876, Gast transcribed the crabbed, nearly illegible handwriting of Nietzsche's first time with Richard Wagner in Bayreuth. He subsequently transcribed and proofread the galleys for almost all of Nietzsche's work. On at least one occasion, on 23 February 1880, the usually poor Gast received 200 marks from their mutual friend, Paul R\u00e9e. Gast was one of the very few friends Nietzsche allowed to criticise him. In responding most enthusiastically to \"Also Sprach Zarathustra\" (\"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\"), Gast did feel it necessary to point out that what were described as \"superfluous\" people were in fact quite necessary. He went on to list the number of people Epicurus, for example, had to rely on to supply his simple diet of goat cheese.\nTo the end of his life, Gast and Overbeck remained consistently faithful friends. Malwida von Meysenbug remained like a motherly patron even outside the Wagner circle. Soon Nietzsche made contact with the music-critic Carl Fuchs. Nietzsche stood at the beginning of his most productive period. Beginning with \"Human, All Too Human\" in 1878, Nietzsche published one book or major section of a book each year until 1888, his last year of writing; that year, he completed five.\nIn 1882, Nietzsche published the first part of \"The Gay Science\". That year he also met Lou Andreas-Salom\u00e9, through Malwida von Meysenbug and Paul R\u00e9e.\nSalom\u00e9's mother took her to Rome when Salom\u00e9 was 21. At a literary salon in the city, Salom\u00e9 became acquainted with Paul R\u00e9e. R\u00e9e proposed marriage to her, but she, instead, proposed that they should live and study together as \"brother and sister\", along with another man for company, where they would establish an academic commune. R\u00e9e accepted the idea and suggested that they be joined by his friend Nietzsche. The two met Nietzsche in Rome in April 1882, and Nietzsche is believed to have instantly fallen in love with Salom\u00e9, as R\u00e9e had done. Nietzsche asked R\u00e9e to propose marriage to Salom\u00e9, which she rejected. She had been interested in Nietzsche as a friend, but not as a husband. Nietzsche nonetheless was content to join with R\u00e9e and Salom\u00e9 touring through Switzerland and Italy together, planning their commune. The three travelled with Salom\u00e9's mother through Italy and considered where they would set up their \"Winterplan\" commune. They intended to set up their commune in an abandoned monastery, but no suitable location was found. On 13 May, in Lucerne, when Nietzsche was alone with Salom\u00e9, he earnestly proposed marriage to her again, which she rejected. He nonetheless was happy to continue with the plans for an academic commune. After discovering the relationship, Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth became determined to get Nietzsche away from the \"immoral woman\". Nietzsche and Salom\u00e9 spent the summer together in Tautenburg in Thuringia, often with Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth as a chaperone. Salom\u00e9 reports that he asked her to marry him on three separate occasions and that she refused, though the reliability of her reports of events is questionable. Arriving in Leipzig (Germany) in October, Salom\u00e9 and R\u00e9e separated from Nietzsche after a falling-out between Nietzsche and Salom\u00e9, in which Salom\u00e9 believed that Nietzsche was desperately in love with her.\nWhile the three spent a number of weeks together in Leipzig in October 1882, the following month R\u00e9e and Salom\u00e9 left Nietzsche, leaving for Stibbe (today Zdbowo in Poland) without any plans to meet again. Nietzsche soon fell into a period of mental anguish, although he continued to write to R\u00e9e, stating \"We shall see one another from time to time, won't we?\" In later recriminations, Nietzsche would blame on separate occasions the failure in his attempts to woo Salom\u00e9 on Salom\u00e9, R\u00e9e, and on the intrigues of his sister (who had written letters to the families of Salom\u00e9 and R\u00e9e to disrupt the plans for the commune). Nietzsche wrote of the affair in 1883, that he now felt \"genuine hatred for my sister\".\nAmidst renewed bouts of illness, living in near-isolation after a falling out with his mother and sister regarding Salom\u00e9, Nietzsche fled to Rapallo, where he wrote the first part of \"Also Sprach Zarathustra\" in only ten days.\nBy 1882, Nietzsche was taking huge doses of opium, but he was still having trouble sleeping. In 1883, while staying in Nice, he was writing out his own prescriptions for the sedative chloral hydrate, signing them \"Dr. Nietzsche\".\nHe turned away from the influence of Schopenhauer, and after he severed his social ties with Wagner, Nietzsche had few remaining friends. Now, with the new style of \"Zarathustra\", his work became even more alienating, and the market received it only to the degree required by politeness. Nietzsche recognised this and maintained his solitude, though he often complained. His books remained largely unsold. In 1885, he printed only 40 copies of the fourth part of \"Zarathustra\" and distributed a fraction of them among close friends, including Helene von Druskowitz.\nIn 1883, he tried and failed to obtain a lecturing post at the University of Leipzig. According to a letter he wrote to Peter Gast, this was due to his \"attitude towards Christianity and the concept of God\".\nIn 1886, Nietzsche broke with his publisher Ernst Schmeitzner, disgusted by his antisemitic opinions. Nietzsche saw his own writings as \"completely buried and in this anti-Semitic dump\" of Schmeitzner\u2014associating the publisher with a movement that should be \"utterly rejected with cold contempt by every sensible mind\". He then printed \"Beyond Good and Evil\" at his own expense. He also acquired the publication rights for his earlier works and over the next year issued second editions of \"The Birth of Tragedy\", \"Human, All Too Human\", \"Daybreak\", and of \"The Gay Science\" with new prefaces placing the body of his work in a more coherent perspective. Thereafter, he saw his work as completed for a time and hoped that soon a readership would develop. In fact, interest in Nietzsche's thought did increase at this time, if rather slowly and imperceptibly to him. During these years Nietzsche met Meta von Salis, Carl Spitteler, and Gottfried Keller.\nIn 1886, his sister Elisabeth married the antisemite Bernhard F\u00f6rster and travelled to Paraguay to found Nueva Germania, a \"Germanic\" colony. Through correspondence, Nietzsche's relationship with Elisabeth continued through cycles of conflict and reconciliation, but they met again only after his collapse. He continued to have frequent and painful attacks of illness, which made prolonged work impossible.\nIn 1887, Nietzsche wrote the polemic \"On the Genealogy of Morality\". During the same year, he encountered the work of Fyodor Dostoyevsky, to whom he felt an immediate kinship. He also exchanged letters with Hippolyte Taine and Georg Brandes. Brandes, who had started to teach the philosophy of S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard in the 1870s, wrote to Nietzsche asking him to read Kierkegaard, to which Nietzsche replied that he would come to Copenhagen and read Kierkegaard with him. However, before fulfilling this promise, Nietzsche slipped too far into illness. At the beginning of 1888, Brandes delivered in Copenhagen one of the first lectures on Nietzsche's philosophy.\nAlthough Nietzsche had previously announced at the end of \"On the Genealogy of Morality\" a new work with the title \"The Will to Power: Attempt at a Revaluation of All Values\", he seems to have abandoned this idea and, instead, used some of the draft passages to compose \"Twilight of the Idols\" and \"The Antichrist\" in 1888.\nHis health improved and he spent the summer in high spirits. In the autumn of 1888, his writings and letters began to reveal a higher estimation of his own status and \"fate\". He overestimated the increasing response to his writings, however, especially to the recent polemic, \"The Case of Wagner\". On his 44th birthday, after completing \"Twilight of the Idols\" and \"The Antichrist\", he decided to write the autobiography \"Ecce Homo\". In its preface\u2014which suggests Nietzsche was well aware of the interpretive difficulties his work would generate\u2014he declares, \"Hear me! For I am such and such a person. Above all, do not mistake me for someone else.\" In December, Nietzsche began a correspondence with August Strindberg and thought that, short of an international breakthrough, he would attempt to buy back his older writings from the publisher and have them translated into other European languages. Moreover, he planned the publication of the compilation \"Nietzsche contra Wagner\" and of the poems that made up his collection \"Dionysian-Dithyrambs\".\nInsanity and death (1889\u20131900).\nOn 3 January 1889, Nietzsche suffered a mental breakdown. Two policemen approached him after he caused a public disturbance in the streets of Turin. What happened remains unknown, but an often-repeated tale from shortly after his death states that Nietzsche witnessed the flogging of a horse at the other end of the Piazza Carlo Alberto, ran to the horse, threw his arms around its neck to protect it, then collapsed to the ground.\nIn the following few days, Nietzsche sent short writings\u2014known as the \"Wahnzettel\" or \"Wahnbriefe\" (literally \"Delusion notes\" or \"letters\")\u2014to a number of friends including Cosima Wagner and Jacob Burckhardt. Most of them were signed \"Dionysus\", though some were also signed \"der Gekreuzigte\" meaning \"the crucified one\". To his former colleague Burckhardt, Nietzsche wrote:I have had Caiaphas put in fetters. Also, last year I was crucified by the German doctors in a very drawn-out manner. Wilhelm, Bismarck, and all anti-Semites abolished.Additionally, he commanded the German emperor to go to Rome to be shot and summoned the European powers to take military action against Germany, writing also that the pope should be put in jail and that he, Nietzsche, created the world and was in the process of having all anti-Semites shot dead.\nOn 6 January 1889, Burckhardt showed the letter he had received from Nietzsche to Overbeck. The following day, Overbeck received a similar letter and decided that Nietzsche's friends had to bring him back to Basel. Overbeck travelled to Turin and brought Nietzsche to a psychiatric clinic in Basel. By that time Nietzsche appeared fully in the grip of a serious mental illness, and his mother Franziska decided to transfer him to a clinic in Jena under the direction of Otto Binswanger. In January 1889, they proceeded with the planned release of \"Twilight of the Idols\", by that time already printed and bound. From November 1889 to February 1890, the art historian Julius Langbehn attempted to cure Nietzsche, claiming that the methods of the medical doctors were ineffective in treating Nietzsche's condition. Langbehn assumed progressively greater control of Nietzsche until his secretiveness discredited him. In March 1890, Franziska removed Nietzsche from the clinic and, in May 1890, brought him to her home in Naumburg. During this process Overbeck and Gast contemplated what to do with Nietzsche's unpublished works. In February, they ordered a fifty-copy private edition of \"Nietzsche contra Wagner\", but the publisher C. G. Naumann secretly printed one hundred. Overbeck and Gast decided to withhold publishing \"The Antichrist\" and \"Ecce Homo\" because of their more radical content. Nietzsche's reception and recognition enjoyed their first surge.\nIn 1893, Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth returned from Nueva Germania in Paraguay following the suicide of her husband. She studied Nietzsche's works and, piece by piece, took control of their publication. Overbeck was dismissed and Gast finally co-operated. After the death of Franziska in 1897, Nietzsche lived in Weimar, where Elisabeth cared for him and allowed visitors, including Rudolf Steiner (who in 1895 had written \"Friedrich Nietzsche: a Fighter Against His Time\", one of the first books praising Nietzsche), to meet her uncommunicative brother. Elisabeth employed Steiner as a tutor to help her to understand her brother's philosophy. Steiner abandoned the attempt after only a few months, declaring that it was impossible to teach her anything about philosophy.\nNietzsche's insanity was originally diagnosed as tertiary syphilis, in accordance with a prevailing medical paradigm of the time. Although most commentators regard his breakdown as unrelated to his philosophy, Georges Bataille dropped dark hints (\"'Man incarnate' must also go mad\") and Ren\u00e9 Girard's postmortem psychoanalysis posits a worshipful rivalry with Richard Wagner. Nietzsche had previously written, \"All superior men who were irresistibly drawn to throw off the yoke of any kind of morality and to frame new laws had, if they were not actually mad, no alternative but to make themselves or pretend to be mad.\" (Daybreak, 14) The diagnosis of syphilis has since been challenged and a diagnosis of \"manic-depressive illness with periodic psychosis followed by vascular dementia\" was put forward by Cybulska prior to Schain's study. Leonard Sax suggested the slow growth of a right-sided retro-orbital meningioma as an explanation of Nietzsche's dementia; Orth and Trimble postulated frontotemporal dementia while other researchers have proposed a hereditary stroke disorder called CADASIL. Poisoning by mercury, a treatment for syphilis at the time of Nietzsche's death, has also been suggested.\nIn 1898 and 1899, Nietzsche suffered at least two strokes. They partially paralysed him, leaving him unable to speak or walk. He likely suffered from clinical hemiparesis/hemiplegia on the left side of his body by 1899. After contracting pneumonia in mid-August 1900, he had another stroke during the night of 24\u201325 August and died at about noon on 25 August. Elisabeth had him buried beside his father at the church in R\u00f6cken near L\u00fctzen. His friend and secretary Gast gave his funeral oration, proclaiming: \"Holy be your name to all future generations!\"\nElisabeth F\u00f6rster-Nietzsche compiled \"The Will to Power\" from Nietzsche's unpublished notebooks and published it posthumously in 1901. Because his sister arranged the book based on her own conflation of several of Nietzsche's early outlines and took liberties with the material, the scholarly consensus has been that it does not reflect Nietzsche's intent. (For example, Elisabeth removed aphorism 35 of \"The Antichrist\", where Nietzsche rewrote a passage of the Bible.) Indeed, Mazzino Montinari, the editor of Nietzsche's \"Nachlass\", called it a forgery. Yet, the endeavour to rescue Nietzsche's reputation by discrediting \"The Will to Power\" often leads to scepticism about the value of his late notes, even of his whole \"Nachlass\". However, his \"Nachlass\" and \"The Will to Power\" are distinct.\nCitizenship, nationality and ethnicity.\nGeneral commentators and Nietzsche scholars, whether emphasising his cultural background or his language, overwhelmingly label Nietzsche as a \"German philosopher\". Others do not assign him a national category. While Germany had not yet been unified into a nation-state, Nietzsche was born a citizen of Prussia, which was mostly part of the German Confederation. His birthplace, R\u00f6cken, is in the modern German state of Saxony-Anhalt. When he accepted his post at Basel, Nietzsche applied for annulment of his Prussian citizenship. The official revocation of his citizenship came in a document dated 17 April 1869, and for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless.\nAt least toward the end of his life, Nietzsche believed his ancestors were Polish. He wore a signet ring bearing the Radwan coat of arms, traceable back to Polish nobility of medieval times and the surname \"Nicki\" of the Polish noble (szlachta) family bearing that coat of arms. Gotard Nietzsche, a member of the Nicki family, left Poland for Prussia. His descendants later settled in the Electorate of Saxony circa the year 1700. Nietzsche wrote in 1888, \"My ancestors were Polish noblemen (Nietzky); the type seems to have been well preserved despite three generations of German mothers.\" At one point, Nietzsche becomes even more adamant about his Polish identity. \"I am a pure-blooded Polish nobleman, without a single drop of bad blood, certainly not German blood.\" On yet another occasion, Nietzsche stated, \"Germany is a great nation only because its people have so much Polish blood in their veins... I am proud of my Polish descent.\" Nietzsche believed his name might have been Germanized, in one letter claiming, \"I was taught to ascribe the origin of my blood and name to Polish noblemen who were called Ni\u00ebtzky and left their home and nobleness about a hundred years ago, finally yielding to unbearable suppression: they were Protestants.\"\nMost scholars dispute Nietzsche's account of his family's origins. Hans von M\u00fcller debunked the genealogy put forward by Nietzsche's sister in favour of Polish noble heritage. Max Oehler, Nietzsche's cousin and curator of the Nietzsche Archive at Weimar, argued that all of Nietzsche's ancestors bore German names, including the wives' families. Oehler claims that Nietzsche came from a long line of German Lutheran clergymen on both sides of his family, and modern scholars regard the claim of Nietzsche's Polish ancestry as \"pure invention\". Colli and Montinari, the editors of Nietzsche's assembled letters, gloss Nietzsche's claims as a \"mistaken belief\" and \"without foundation.\" The name \"Nietzsche\" itself is not a Polish name, but an exceptionally common one throughout central Germany, in this and cognate forms (such as \"Nitsche\" and \"Nitzke\"). The name derives from the forename \"Nikolaus,\" abbreviated to \"Nick\"; assimilated with the Slavic \"Nitz\"; it first became \"Nitsche\" and then \"Nietzsche\".\nIt is not known why Nietzsche wanted to be thought of as Polish nobility. According to biographer R. J. Hollingdale, Nietzsche's propagation of the Polish ancestry myth may have been part of his \"campaign against Germany\". Nicholas D. More states that Nietzsche's claims of having an illustrious lineage were a parody on autobiographical conventions, and suspects \"Ecce Homo\", with its self-laudatory titles, such as \"Why I Am So Wise\", as being a work of satire. He concludes that Nietzsche's supposed Polish genealogy was a joke\u2014not a delusion.\nRelationships and sexuality.\nNietzsche was never married. He proposed to Lou Salom\u00e9 three times and each time was rejected. One theory blames Salom\u00e9's view on sexuality as one of the reasons for her alienation from Nietzsche. As articulated in her 1898 novella \"Fenitschka\", Salom\u00e9 viewed the idea of sexual intercourse as prohibitive and marriage as a violation, with some suggesting that they indicated sexual repression and neurosis. Reflecting on unrequited love, Nietzsche considered that \"indispensable ... to the lover is his unrequited love, which he would at no price relinquish for a state of indifference\".\nDeussen cited the episode of Cologne's brothel in February 1865 as instrumental to understanding the philosopher's way of thinking, mostly about women. Nietzsche was surreptitiously accompanied to a \"call house\" from which he clumsily escaped upon seeing \"a half dozen apparitions dressed in sequins and veils.\" According to Deussen, Nietzsche \"never decided to remain unmarried all his life. For him, women had to sacrifice themselves to the care and benefit of men.\" Nietzsche scholar Joachim K\u00f6hler has attempted to explain Nietzsche's life history and philosophy by claiming that he was homosexual. K\u00f6hler argues that Nietzsche's supposed syphilis, which is \"...usually considered to be the product of his encounter with a prostitute in a brothel in Cologne or Leipzig, is equally likely. Some maintain that Nietzsche contracted it in a male brothel in Genoa.\" The acquisition of the infection from a homosexual brothel was the theory believed by Sigmund Freud, who cited Otto Binswanger as his source. K\u00f6hler also suggests that Nietzsche had a romantic relationship, as well as a friendship, with Paul R\u00e9e. There is the claim that Nietzsche's homosexuality was widely known in the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, with Nietzsche's friend Paul Deussen claiming that \"he was a man who had never touched a woman.\"\nK\u00f6hler's views have not found wide acceptance among Nietzsche scholars and commentators. Allan Megill argues that, while K\u00f6hler's claim that Nietzsche was conflicted about his homosexual desire cannot simply be dismissed, \"the evidence is very weak,\" and K\u00f6hler may be projecting twentieth-century understandings of sexuality on nineteenth-century notions of friendship. It is also rumoured that Nietzsche frequented heterosexual brothels. Nigel Rodgers and Mel Thompson have argued that continuous sickness and headaches hindered Nietzsche from engaging much with women. Yet they offer other examples in which Nietzsche expressed his affections to women, including Wagner's wife Cosima Wagner.\nOther scholars have argued that K\u00f6hler's sexuality-based interpretation is not helpful in understanding Nietzsche's philosophy. However, there are also those who stress that, if Nietzsche preferred men\u2014with this preference constituting his psycho-sexual make-up\u2014but could not admit his desires to himself, it meant he acted in conflict with his philosophy.\nPhilosophy.\nBecause of Nietzsche's evocative style and provocative ideas, his philosophy generates passionate reactions. His works remain controversial, due to varying interpretations and misinterpretations. In Western philosophy, Nietzsche's writings have been described as a case of free revolutionary thought, that is, revolutionary in its structure and problems, although not tied to any revolutionary project. His writings have also been described as a revolutionary project in which his philosophy serves as the foundation of a European cultural rebirth.\nApollonian and Dionysian.\nThe \"Apollonian and Dionysian\" is a two-fold philosophical concept based on two figures in ancient Greek mythology, Apollo and Dionysus. This relationship takes the form of a dialectic. Even though the concept is related to \"The Birth of Tragedy\", the poet H\u00f6lderlin had already spoken of it, and Winckelmann had talked of Bacchus.\nNietzsche found in classical Athenian tragedy an art form that transcended the pessimism found in the so-called wisdom of Silenus. The Greek spectators, by looking into the abyss of human suffering depicted by characters on stage, passionately and joyously affirmed life, finding it worth living. The main theme in \"The Birth of Tragedy\" is that the fusion of Dionysian and Apollonian \"Kunsttriebe\" (\"artistic impulses\") forms dramatic arts or tragedies. He argued that this fusion has not been achieved since the ancient Greek tragedians. Apollo represents harmony, progress, clarity, logic and the principle of individuation, whereas Dionysus represents disorder, intoxication, emotion, ecstasy and unity (hence the omission of the principle of individuation). Nietzsche used these two forces because, for him, the world of mind and order on one side, and passion and chaos on the other, formed principles that were fundamental to the Greek culture: the Apollonian a dreaming state, full of illusions; and Dionysian a state of intoxication, representing the liberations of instinct and dissolution of boundaries. In this mould, a man appears as the satyr. He is the horror of the annihilation of the principle of individuality and at the same time someone who delights in its destruction.\nApollonian and Dionysian juxtapositions appear in the interplay of tragedy: the tragic hero of the drama, the main protagonist, struggles to make (Apollonian) order of his unjust and chaotic (Dionysian) fate, though he dies unfulfilled. Elaborating on the conception of Hamlet as an intellectual who cannot make up his mind, and is a living antithesis to the man of action, Nietzsche argues that a Dionysian figure possesses the knowledge that his actions cannot change the eternal balance of things, and it disgusts him enough not to act at all. Hamlet falls under this category\u2014he glimpsed the supernatural reality through the Ghost; he has gained true knowledge and knows that no action of his has the power to change this. For the audience of such drama, this tragedy allows them to sense what Nietzsche called the \"Primordial Unity\", which revives Dionysian nature. He describes primordial unity as the increase of strength, the experience of fullness and plenitude bestowed by frenzy. Frenzy acts as intoxication and is crucial for the physiological condition that enables the creation of any art. Stimulated by this state, a person's artistic will is enhanced:\nIn this state one enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees, whatever wills is seen swelled, taut, strong, overloaded with strength. A man in this state transforms things until they mirror his power\u2014until they are reflections of his perfection. This having to transform into perfection is\u2014art.\nNietzsche is adamant that the works of Aeschylus and Sophocles represent the apex of artistic creation, the true realisation of tragedy; it is with Euripides, that tragedy begins its \"Untergang\" (literally 'going under' or 'downward-way;' meaning decline, deterioration, downfall, death, etc.). Nietzsche objects to Euripides' use of Socratic rationalism and morality in his tragedies, claiming that the infusion of ethics and reason robs tragedy of its foundation, namely the fragile balance of the Dionysian and Apollonian. Socrates emphasised reason to such a degree that he diffused the value of myth and suffering to human knowledge. Plato continued along this path in his dialogues, and the modern world eventually inherited reason at the expense of artistic impulses found in the Apollonian and Dionysian dichotomy. He notes that without the Apollonian, the Dionysian lacks the form and structure to make a coherent piece of art, and without the Dionysian, the Apollonian lacks the necessary vitality and passion. Only the fertile interplay of these two forces brought together as an art represented the best of Greek tragedy.\nAn example of the impact of this idea can be seen in the book \"Patterns of Culture\", where anthropologist Ruth Benedict acknowledges Nietzschean opposites of \"Apollonian\" and \"Dionysian\" as the stimulus for her thoughts about Native American cultures. Carl Jung has written extensively on the dichotomy in \"Psychological Types\". Michel Foucault commented that his own book \"Madness and Civilization\" should be read \"under the sun of the great Nietzschean inquiry\". Here Foucault referenced Nietzsche's description of the birth and death of tragedy and his explanation that the subsequent tragedy of the Western world was the refusal of the tragic and, with that, refusal of the sacred. Painter Mark Rothko was influenced by Nietzsche's view of tragedy presented in \"The Birth of Tragedy.\"\nPerspectivism.\nNietzsche claimed the death of God would eventually lead to the realization that there can never be a universal perspective on things and that the traditional idea of objective truth is incoherent. Nietzsche rejected the idea of objective reality, arguing that knowledge is contingent and conditional, relative to various fluid perspectives or interests. This leads to constant reassessment of rules (i.e., those of philosophy, the scientific method, etc.) according to the circumstances of individual perspectives. This view has acquired the name \"perspectivism\".\nIn \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", Nietzsche proclaimed that a table of values hangs above every great person. He pointed out that what is common among different peoples is the act of esteeming, of creating values, even if the values are different from one person to the next. Nietzsche asserted that what made people great was not the content of their beliefs, but the act of valuing. Thus the values a community strives to articulate are not as important as the collective will to see those values come to pass. The willingness is more essential than the merit of the goal itself, according to Nietzsche. \"A thousand goals have there been so far\", says Zarathustra, \"for there are a thousand peoples. Only the yoke for the thousand necks is still lacking: the one goal is lacking. Humanity still has no goal.\" Hence, the title of the aphorism, \"On The Thousand And One Goal\". The idea that one value-system is no more worthy than the next, although it may not be directly ascribed to Nietzsche, has become a common premise in modern social science. Max Weber and Martin Heidegger absorbed it and made it their own. It shaped their philosophical and cultural endeavours, as well as their political understanding. Weber, for example, relied on Nietzsche's perspectivism by maintaining that objectivity is still possible\u2014but only after a particular perspective, value, or end has been established.\nAmong his critique of traditional philosophy of Kant, Descartes, and Plato in \"Beyond Good and Evil\", Nietzsche attacked the \"thing in itself\" and \"cogito ergo sum\" (\"I think, therefore I am\") as unfalsifiable beliefs based on naive acceptance of previous notions and fallacies. Philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre put Nietzsche in a high place in the history of philosophy. While criticising nihilism and Nietzsche together as a sign of general decay, he still commended him for recognising psychological motives behind Kant and Hume's moral philosophy:\nFor it was Nietzsche's historic achievement to understand more clearly than any other philosopher ... not only that what purported to be appeals of objectivity were in fact expressions of subjective will, but also the nature of the problems that this posed for philosophy.\nSlave revolt in morals.\nIn \"Beyond Good and Evil\" and \"On the Genealogy of Morality\", Nietzsche's genealogical account of the development of modern moral systems occupies a central place. For Nietzsche, a fundamental shift took place during the human history from thinking in terms of \"good and bad\" toward \"good and evil\".\nThe initial form of morality was set by a warrior aristocracy and other ruling castes of ancient civilisations. Aristocratic values of good and bad coincided with and reflected their relationship to lower castes such as slaves. Nietzsche presented this \"master morality\" as the original system of morality\u2014perhaps best associated with Homeric Greece. To be \"good\" was to be happy and to have the things related to happiness: wealth, strength, health, power, etc. To be \"bad\" was to be like the slaves over whom the aristocracy ruled: poor, weak, sick, pathetic\u2014objects of pity or disgust rather than hatred.\n\"Slave morality\" developed as a reaction to master morality. Value emerges from the contrast between good and evil: good being associated with other-worldliness, charity, piety, restraint, meekness, and submission; while evil is worldly, cruel, selfish, wealthy, and aggressive. Nietzsche saw slave morality as pessimistic and fearful, its values emerging to improve the self-perception of slaves. He associated slave morality with the Jewish and Christian traditions, as it is born out of the \"ressentiment\" of slaves. Nietzsche argued that the idea of equality allowed slaves to overcome their own conditions without despising themselves. By denying the inherent inequality of people\u2014in success, strength, beauty, and intelligence\u2014slaves acquired a method of escape, namely by generating new values on the basis of rejecting master morality, which frustrated them. It was used to overcome the slave's sense of inferiority before their (better-off) masters. It does so by making out slave weakness, for example, to be a matter of choice, by relabelling it as \"meekness\". The \"good man\" of master morality is precisely the \"evil man\" of slave morality, while the \"bad man\" is recast as the \"good man\".\nNietzsche saw slave morality as a source of the nihilism that has overtaken Europe. Modern Europe and Christianity exist in a hypocritical state due to a tension between master and slave morality, both contradictory values determining, to varying degrees, the values of most Europeans (who are \"motley\"). Nietzsche called for exceptional people not to be ashamed in the face of a supposed morality-for-all, which he deems to be harmful to the flourishing of exceptional people. He cautioned, however, that morality, per se, is not bad; it is good for the masses and should be left to them. Exceptional people, in contrast, should follow their own \"inner law\". A favourite motto of Nietzsche, taken from Pindar, reads: \"Become what you are.\"\nA long-standing assumption about Nietzsche is that he preferred master over slave morality. However, eminent Nietzsche scholar Walter Kaufmann rejected this interpretation, writing that Nietzsche's analyses of these two types of morality were used only in a descriptive and historic sense; they were not meant for any kind of acceptance or glorification. On the other hand, Nietzsche called master morality \"a higher order of values, the noble ones, those that say Yes to life, those that guarantee the future\". Just as \"there is an order of rank between man and man\", there is also an order of rank \"between morality and morality\". Nietzsche waged a philosophic war against the slave morality of Christianity in his \"revaluation of all values\" to bring about the victory of a new master morality that he called the \"philosophy of the future\" (\"Beyond Good and Evil\" is subtitled \"Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future\").\nIn \"Daybreak\", Nietzsche began his \"Campaign against Morality\". He called himself an \"immoralist\" and harshly criticised the prominent moral philosophies of his day: Christianity, Kantianism, and utilitarianism. Nietzsche's concept \"God is dead\" applies to the doctrines of Christendom, though not to all other faiths: he claimed that Buddhism is a successful religion that he complimented for fostering critical thought. Still, Nietzsche saw his philosophy as a counter-movement to nihilism through appreciation of art:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Art as the single superior counterforce against all will to negation of life, art as the anti-Christian, anti-Buddhist, anti-Nihilist par excellence.\nNietzsche claimed that the Christian faith as practised was not a proper representation of Jesus' teachings, as it forced people merely to believe in the way of Jesus but not to act as Jesus did; in particular, his example of refusing to judge people, something that Christians constantly did. He condemned institutionalised Christianity for emphasising a morality of pity (\"Mitleid\"), which assumes an inherent illness in society:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Christianity is called the religion of \"pity\". Pity stands opposed to the tonic emotions which heighten our vitality: it has a depressing effect. We are deprived of strength when we feel pity. That loss of strength in which suffering as such inflicts on life is still further increased and multiplied by pity. Pity makes suffering contagious.\nIn \"Ecce Homo\" Nietzsche called the establishment of moral systems based on a dichotomy of good and evil a \"calamitous error\", and wished to initiate a re-evaluation of the values of the Christian world. He indicated his desire to bring about a new, more naturalistic source of value in the vital impulses of life itself.\nWhile Nietzsche attacked the principles of Judaism, he was not antisemitic: in his work \"On the Genealogy of Morality\", he explicitly condemned antisemitism and pointed out that his attack on Judaism was not an attack on contemporary Jewish people but specifically an attack upon the ancient Jewish priesthood who he claimed antisemitic Christians paradoxically based their views upon. An Israeli historian who performed a statistical analysis of everything Nietzsche wrote about Jews claims that cross-references and context make clear that 85% of the negative comments are attacks on Christian doctrine or, sarcastically, on Richard Wagner.\nNietzsche felt that modern antisemitism was \"despicable\" and contrary to European ideals. Its cause, in his opinion, was the growth in European nationalism and the endemic \"jealousy and hatred\" of Jewish success. He wrote that Jews should be thanked for helping uphold a respect for the philosophies of ancient Greece, and for giving rise to \"the noblest human being (Christ), the purest philosopher (Baruch Spinoza), the mightiest book, and the most effective moral code in the world\".\nDeath of God and nihilism.\nThe statement \"God is dead,\" occurring in several of Nietzsche's works (notably in \"The Gay Science\"), has become one of his best-known remarks. On the basis of it, many commentators regard Nietzsche as an atheist; others (such as Kaufmann) suggest that this statement might reflect a more subtle understanding of divinity. Scientific developments and the increasing secularisation of Europe had effectively 'killed' the Abrahamic God, who had served as the basis for meaning and value in the West for more than a thousand years. The death of God may lead beyond bare perspectivism to outright nihilism, the belief that nothing has any inherent importance and that life lacks purpose. While Nietzsche rejected the traditional Christian morality and theology, he also rejected the nihilism which many thought was the only alternative to it.\nNietzsche believed that Christian moral doctrine was originally constructed to counteract nihilism. It provides people with traditional beliefs about the moral values of good and evil, belief in God (whose existence one might appeal to in justifying the evil in the world), and a framework with which one might claim to have objective knowledge. In constructing a world where objective knowledge is supposed to be possible, Christianity is an antidote to a primal form of nihilism\u2014the despair of meaninglessness. As Heidegger put the problem, \"If God as the supra sensory ground and goal of all reality is dead if the supra sensory world of the ideas has suffered the loss of its obligatory and above it its vitalizing and upbuilding power, then nothing more remains to which man can cling and by which he can orient himself.\"\nOne such reaction to the loss of meaning is what Nietzsche called \"passive nihilism\", which he recognised in the pessimistic philosophy of Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer's doctrine\u2014which Nietzsche also referred to as Western Buddhism\u2014advocates separating oneself from will and desires to reduce suffering. Nietzsche characterised this ascetic attitude as a \"will to nothingness\". Life turns away from itself as there is nothing of value to be found in the world. This moving away of all value in the world is characteristic of the nihilist, although, in this, the nihilist appears to be inconsistent; this \"will to nothingness\" is still a (disavowed) form of willing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A nihilist is a man who judges that the real world ought \"not\" to be and that the world as it ought to do not exist. According to this view, our existence (action, suffering, willing, feeling) has no meaning: this 'in vain' is the nihilists' pathos\u2014an inconsistency on the part of the nihilists.\nNietzsche approached the problem of nihilism as a deeply personal one, stating that this problem of the modern world had \"become conscious\" in him. Furthermore, he emphasised the danger of nihilism and the possibilities it offers, as seen in his statement that \"I praise, I do not reproach, [nihilism's] arrival. I believe it is one of the greatest crises, a moment of the deepest self-reflection of humanity. Whether man recovers from it, whether he becomes a master of this crisis, is a question of his strength!\" According to Nietzsche, it is only when nihilism is \"overcome\" that a culture can have a true foundation on which to thrive. He wished to hasten its coming only so that he could also hasten its ultimate departure. Heidegger interpreted the death of God with what he explained as the death of metaphysics. He concluded that metaphysics has reached its potential and that the ultimate fate and downfall of metaphysics was proclaimed with the statement \"God is dead.\"\nScholars such as Nishitani and Parkes have aligned Nietzsche's religious thought with Buddhist thinkers, particularly those of the Mahayana tradition. Occasionally, Nietzsche has also been considered in relation to Catholic mystics such as Meister Eckhart. Milne has argued against such interpretations on the grounds that such thinkers from Western and Eastern religious traditions strongly emphasise the divestment of will and the loss of ego, while Nietzsche offers a robust defence of egoism. Milne argues that Nietzsche's religious thought is better understood in relation to his self-professed ancestors: \u201cHeraclitus, Empedocles, Spinoza, Goethe\". Milne plays particularly close attention to Nietzsche\u2019s relationship to Goethe, who has typically been neglected in research by academic philosophers. Milne shows that Goethe\u2019s views on the one and the many allow a reciprocal determinism between part and whole, meaning that a claimed identity between part and whole does not give the part value solely in terms of belonging to the whole. In essence, this allows for a unitive sense of the individual\u2019s relationship to the universe, while also fostering a sense of \u201cself-esteem\u201d which Nietzsche found lacking in mystics such as Eckhart.\nWith regard to Nietzsche's development of thought, it has been noted in research that although he dealt with \"nihilistic\" themes (\"pessimism, with nirvana and with nothingness and non-being\") from 1869 onwards, a conceptual use of nihilism first took place in handwritten notes in mid-1880. This period saw the publication of a then popular work that reconstructed so-called \"Russian nihilism\" on the basis of Russian newspaper reports (N. Karlowitsch: The Development of Nihilism. Berlin 1880), which is significant for Nietzsche's terminology .\nWill to power.\nA basic element in Nietzsche's philosophical outlook is the \"will to power\" (), which he maintained provides a basis for understanding human behaviour\u2014more so than competing explanations, such as the ones based on pressure for adaptation or survival. As such, according to Nietzsche, the drive for conservation appears as the major motivator of human or animal behaviour only in exceptions, as the general condition of life is not one of a 'struggle for existence.' More often than not, self-conservation is a consequence of a creature's will to exert its strength on the outside world.\nIn presenting his theory of human behaviour, Nietzsche also addressed and attacked concepts from philosophies then popularly embraced, such as Schopenhauer's notion of an aimless will or that of utilitarianism. Utilitarians claim that what moves people is the desire to be happy and accumulate pleasure in their lives. But such a conception of happiness Nietzsche rejected as something limited to, and characteristic of, the bourgeois lifestyle of the English society, and instead put forth the idea that happiness is not an aim \"per se\". It is a consequence of overcoming hurdles to one's actions and the fulfilment of the will.\nRelated to his theory of the will to power is his speculation, which he did not deem final, regarding the reality of the physical world, including inorganic matter\u2014that, like man's affections and impulses, the material world is also set by the dynamics of a form of the will to power. At the core of his theory is a rejection of atomism\u2014the idea that matter is composed of stable, indivisible units (atoms). Instead, he seemed to have accepted the conclusions of Ru\u0111er Bo\u0161kovi\u0107, who explained the qualities of matter as a result of an interplay of forces. One study of Nietzsche defines his fully developed concept of the will to power as \"the element from which derive both the quantitative difference of related forces and the quality that devolves into each force in this relation\" revealing the will to power as \"the principle of the synthesis of forces\". Of such forces Nietzsche said they could perhaps be viewed as a primitive form of the will. Likewise, he rejected the view that the movement of bodies is ruled by inexorable laws of nature, positing instead that movement was governed by the power relations between bodies and forces.\nOther scholars disagree that Nietzsche considered the material world to be a form of the will to power: Nietzsche thoroughly criticised metaphysics, and by including the will to power in the material world, he would simply be setting up a new metaphysics. Other than Aphorism 36 in \"Beyond Good and Evil\", where he raised a question regarding will to power as being in the material world, they argue, it was only in his notes (unpublished by himself), where he wrote about a metaphysical will to power. And they also claim that Nietzsche directed his landlord to burn those notes in 1888 when he left Sils Maria. According to these scholars, the \"burning\" story supports their thesis that Nietzsche rejected his project on the will to power at the end of his lucid life. However, a recent study (Huang 2019) shows that although it is true that in 1888 Nietzsche wanted some of his notes burned, this indicates little about his project on the will to power, not only because only 11 \"aphorisms\" saved from the flames were ultimately incorporated into \"The Will to Power\" (this book contains 1067 \"aphorisms\"), but also because these abandoned notes mainly focus on topics such as the critique of morality while touching upon the \"feeling of power\" only once.\nEternal return.\n\"Eternal return\" (also known as \"eternal recurrence\") is a hypothetical concept that posits that the universe has been recurring, and will continue to recur, for an infinite number of times across infinite time or space. It is a purely physical concept, involving no supernatural reincarnation, but the return of beings in the same bodies. Nietzsche first proposed the idea of eternal return in a parable in Section 341 of \"The Gay Science\", and also in the chapter \"Of the Vision and the Riddle\" in \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", among other places. Nietzsche considered it as potentially \"horrifying and paralyzing\", and said that its burden is the \"heaviest weight\" imaginable (\" das schwerste Gewicht\"). The wish for the eternal return of all events would mark the ultimate affirmation of life, a reaction to Schopenhauer's praise of denying the will-to-live. To comprehend eternal recurrence, and to not only come to peace with it but to embrace it, requires \"amor fati\", \"love of fate\". As Heidegger pointed out in his lectures on Nietzsche, Nietzsche's first mention of eternal recurrence presents this concept as a hypothetical \"question\" rather than stating it as fact. According to Heidegger, it is the burden imposed by the \"question\" of eternal recurrence \u2013 the mere possibility of it, and the reality of speculating on that possibility \u2013 which is so significant in modern thought: \"The way Nietzsche here patterns the first communication of the thought of the 'greatest burden' [of eternal recurrence] makes it clear that this 'thought of thoughts' is at the same time 'the most burdensome thought.'\"\nAlexander Nehamas writes in \"Nietzsche: Life as Literature\" of three ways of seeing the eternal recurrence:\nNehamas concluded that, if individuals constitute themselves through their actions, they can only maintain themselves in their current state by living in a recurrence of past actions (Nehamas, 153). Nietzsche's thought is the negation of the idea of a history of salvation.\n\u00dcbermensch.\nAnother concept important to understanding Nietzsche is the \"\u00dcbermensch\" (Superman). Writing about nihilism in \"Also Sprach Zarathustra\", Nietzsche introduced an \"\u00dcbermensch\". According to Laurence Lampert, \"the death of God must be followed by a long twilight of piety and nihilism (II. 19; III. 8). Zarathustra's gift of the overman is given to mankind not aware of the problem to which the overman is the solution.\" Zarathustra presents the \"\u00dcbermensch\" as the creator of new values, and he appears as a solution to the problem of the death of God and nihilism. The \"\u00dcbermensch\" does not follow the morality of common people since that favours mediocrity but rises above the notion of good and evil and above the \"herd\". In this way Zarathustra proclaims his ultimate goal as the journey towards the state of the \"\u00dcbermensch\". He wants a kind of spiritual evolution of self-awareness and overcoming of traditional views on morality and justice that stem from the superstitious beliefs still deeply rooted or related to the notion of God and Christianity.\nFrom \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\" (Zarathustra's Prologue; pp.\u00a09\u201311):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I teach you the \u00dcbermensch\". Man is something that shall be overcome. What have you done to overcome him? All beings so far have created something beyond themselves: and you want to be the ebb of that great tide, and would rather go back to the beast than overcome man? What is the ape to man? A laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment. And just the same shall man be to the \u00dcbermensch: a laughing-stock or a painful embarrassment. You have made your way from worm to man, and much within you is still worm. Once you were apes, and even yet man is more of an ape than any ape. Even the wisest among you is only a conflict and hybrid of plant and ghost. But do I bid you become ghosts or plants? Behold, I teach you the \u00dcbermensch! The \u00dcbermensch is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say: The \u00dcbermensch \"shall be\" the meaning of the earth... Man is a rope stretched between the animal and the \u00dcbermensch\u2014a rope over an abyss... What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal: what is lovable in man is that he is an \"over-going\" and a \"going under\".\nZarathustra contrasts the \"\u00dcbermensch\" with the last man of egalitarian modernity (the most obvious example being democracy), an alternative goal humanity might set for itself. The last man is possible only by mankind's having bred an apathetic creature who has no great passion or commitment, who is unable to dream, who merely earns his living and keeps warm. This concept appears only in \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", and is presented as a condition that would render the creation of the \"\u00dcbermensch\" impossible.\nSome have suggested that the eternal return is related to the , since willing the eternal return of the same is a necessary step if the is to create new values untainted by the spirit of gravity or asceticism. Values involve a rank-ordering of things, and so are inseparable from approval and disapproval, yet it was dissatisfaction that prompted men to seek refuge in other-worldliness and embrace other-worldly values. It could seem that the , in being devoted to any values at all, would necessarily fail to create values that did not share some bit of asceticism. Willing the eternal recurrence is presented as accepting the existence of the low while still recognising it as the low, and thus as overcoming the spirit of gravity or asceticism. One must have the strength of the to will the eternal recurrence. Only the will have the strength to fully accept all of his past life, including his failures and misdeeds, and to truly will their eternal return. This action nearly kills Zarathustra, for example, and most human beings cannot avoid other-worldliness because they really are sick, not because of any choice they made.\nThe Nazis attempted to incorporate the concept into their ideology by means of taking Nietzsche's figurative form of speech and creating a literal superiority over other ethnicities. After his death, Elisabeth F\u00f6rster-Nietzsche became the curator and editor of her brother's manuscripts. She reworked Nietzsche's unpublished writings to fit her own German nationalist ideology while often contradicting or obfuscating Nietzsche's stated opinions, which were explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism. Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated with fascism and Nazism; 20th-century scholars contested this interpretation of his work and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available.\nAlthough Nietzsche has been misrepresented as a predecessor to Nazism, he criticised antisemitism, pan-Germanism and, to a lesser extent, nationalism. Thus, he broke with his editor in 1886 because of his opposition to his editor's antisemitic stances, and his rupture with Richard Wagner, expressed in \"The Case of Wagner\" and \"Nietzsche contra Wagner\", both of which he wrote in 1888, had much to do with Wagner's endorsement of pan-Germanism and antisemitism\u2014and also of his rallying to Christianity. In a 29 March 1887 letter to Theodor Fritsch, Nietzsche mocked antisemites, Fritsch, Eugen D\u00fchring, Wagner, Ebrard, Wahrmund, and the leading advocate of pan-Germanism, Paul de Lagarde, who would become, along with Wagner and Houston Chamberlain, the main official influences of Nazism. This 1887 letter to Fritsch ended by: \"And finally, how do you think I feel when the name Zarathustra is mouthed by anti-Semites?\" In contrast to these examples, Nietzsche's close friend Franz Overbeck recalled in his memoirs, \"When he\nspeaks frankly, the opinions he expresses about Jews go, in their severity, beyond any anti-Semitism. The foundation of his anti-Christianity is essentially anti-Semitic.\"\nCritique of mass culture.\nFriedrich Nietzsche held a pessimistic view of modern society and culture. He believed the press and mass culture led to conformity, brought about mediocrity, and the lack of intellectual progress was leading to the decline of the human species. In his opinion, some people would be able to become superior individuals through the use of willpower. By rising above mass culture, those persons would produce higher, brighter, and healthier human beings.\nReading and influence.\nA trained philologist, Nietzsche had a thorough knowledge of Greek philosophy. He read Kant, Plato, Mill, Schopenhauer and Spir, who became the main opponents in his philosophy, and later engaged, via the work of Kuno Fischer in particular, with the thought of Baruch Spinoza, whom he saw as his \"precursor\" in many respects but as a personification of the \"ascetic ideal\" in others. However, Nietzsche referred to Kant as a \"moral fanatic\", Plato as \"boring\", Mill as a \"blockhead\", and of Spinoza, he asked: \"How much of personal timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray?\" He likewise expressed contempt for British author George Eliot.\nNietzsche's philosophy, while innovative and revolutionary, was indebted to many predecessors. While at Basel, Nietzsche lectured on pre-Platonic philosophers for several years, and the text of this lecture series has been characterised as a \"lost link\" in the development of his thought. \"In it, concepts such as the will to power, the eternal return of the same, the overman, gay science, self-overcoming and so on receive rough, unnamed formulations and are linked to specific pre-Platonic, especially Heraclitus, who emerges as a pre-Platonic Nietzsche.\" The pre-Socratic thinker Heraclitus was known for rejecting the concept of being as a constant and eternal principle of the universe and embracing \"flux\" and incessant change. His symbolism of the world as \"child play\" marked by amoral spontaneity and lack of definite rules was appreciated by Nietzsche. Due to his Heraclitean sympathies, Nietzsche was also a vociferous critic of Parmenides, who, in contrast to Heraclitus, viewed the world as a single, unchanging Being.\nIn his \"Egotism in German Philosophy\", George Santayana claimed that Nietzsche's whole philosophy was a reaction to Schopenhauer. Santayana wrote that Nietzsche's work was \"an emendation of that of Schopenhauer. The will to live would become the will to dominate; pessimism founded on reflection would become optimism founded on courage; the suspense of the will in contemplation would yield to a more biological account of intelligence and taste; finally in the place of pity and asceticism (Schopenhauer's two principles of morals) Nietzsche would set up the duty of asserting the will at all costs and being cruelly but beautifully strong. These points of difference from Schopenhauer cover the whole philosophy of Nietzsche.\"\nThe superficial similarity of Nietzsche's \"\u00dcbermensch\" to Thomas Carlyle's Hero as well as both authors' rhetorical prose style has led to speculation concerning the degree to which Nietzsche might have been influenced by his reading of Carlyle. G. K. Chesterton believed that \"Out of [Carlyle] flows most of the philosophy of Nietzsche\", qualifying his statement by adding that they were \"profoundly different\" in character. Ruth apRoberts has shown that Carlyle anticipated Nietzsche in asserting the importance of metaphor (with Nietzsche's metaphor-fiction theory \"appear[ing] to owe something to Carlyle\"), announcing the death of God, and recognising both Goethe's \"Entsagen\" (renunciation) and Novalis's \"Selbstt\u00f6dtung\" (self-annihilation) as prerequisites for engaging in philosophy. apRoberts writes that \"Nietzsche and Carlyle had the same German sources, but Nietzsche may owe more to Carlyle than he cares to admit\", noting that \"[Nietzsche] takes the trouble to repudiate Carlyle with malicious emphasis.\" Ralph Jessop, senior lecturer at the University of Glasgow, has recently argued that a reassessment of Carlyle's influence on Nietzsche is \"long-overdue\".\nNietzsche expressed admiration for 17th-century French moralists such as La Rochefoucauld, La Bruy\u00e8re and Vauvenargues, as well as for Stendhal. The organicism of Paul Bourget influenced Nietzsche, as did that of Rudolf Virchow and Alfred Espinas. In 1867 Nietzsche wrote in a letter that he was trying to improve his German style of writing with the help of Lessing, Lichtenberg and Schopenhauer. It was probably Lichtenberg (along with Paul R\u00e9e) whose aphoristic style of writing contributed to Nietzsche's own use of aphorism. Nietzsche early learned of Darwinism through Friedrich Albert Lange. The essays of Ralph Waldo Emerson had a profound influence on Nietzsche, who \"loved Emerson from first to last\", wrote \"Never have I felt so much at home in a book\", and called him \"[the] author who has been richest in ideas in this century so far\". Hippolyte Taine influenced Nietzsche's view on Rousseau and Napoleon. Notably, he also read some of the posthumous works of Charles Baudelaire, Tolstoy's \"My Religion\", Ernest Renan's \"Life of Jesus\", and Fyodor Dostoyevsky's \"Demons\". Nietzsche called Dostoyevsky \"the only psychologist from whom I have anything to learn\". While Nietzsche never mentions Max Stirner, the similarities in their ideas have prompted a minority of interpreters to suggest a relationship between the two.\nIn 1861, Nietzsche wrote an enthusiastic essay on his \"favorite poet,\" Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin, mostly forgotten at that time. He also expressed deep appreciation for Stifter's \"Indian Summer\", Byron's \"Manfred\" and Twain's \"Tom Sawyer\".\nReception and legacy.\nNietzsche's works did not reach a wide readership during his active writing career. However, in 1888 the influential Danish critic Georg Brandes aroused considerable excitement about Nietzsche through a series of lectures he gave at the University of Copenhagen. In the years after Nietzsche's death in 1900, his works became better known, and readers have responded to them in complex and sometimes controversial ways. Many Germans eventually discovered his appeals for greater individualism and personality development in \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", but responded to them divergently. He had some following among left-wing Germans in the 1890s; in 1894\u20131895 German conservatives wanted to ban his work as subversive. During the late 19th century Nietzsche's ideas were commonly associated with anarchist movements and appear to have had influence within them, particularly in France and the United States. H.L. Mencken produced the first book on Nietzsche in English in 1907, \"The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche\", and in 1910 a book of translated paragraphs from Nietzsche, increasing knowledge of his philosophy in the United States. Nietzsche is known today as a precursor to existentialism, post-structuralism and postmodernism.\nW. B. Yeats and Arthur Symons described Nietzsche as the intellectual heir to William Blake. Symons went on to compare the ideas of the two thinkers in \"The Symbolist Movement in Literature\", while Yeats tried to raise awareness of Nietzsche in Ireland. A similar notion was espoused by W. H. Auden who wrote of Nietzsche in his \"New Year Letter\" (released in 1941 in \"The Double Man\"): \"O masterly debunker of our liberal fallacies ... all your life you stormed, like your English forerunner Blake.\" Nietzsche made an impact on composers during the 1890s. Writer Donald Mitchell noted that Gustav Mahler was \"attracted to the poetic fire of Zarathustra, but repelled by the intellectual core of its writings\". He also quoted Mahler himself, and adds that he was influenced by Nietzsche's conception and affirmative approach to nature, which Mahler presented in his Third Symphony using Zarathustra's roundelay. Frederick Delius produced a piece of choral music, \"A Mass of Life\", based on a text of \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", while Richard Strauss (who also based his \"Also sprach Zarathustra\" on the same book), was only interested in finishing \"another chapter of symphonic autobiography\". Writers and poets influenced by Nietzsche include Andr\u00e9 Gide, August Strindberg, Robinson Jeffers, P\u00edo Baroja, D.H. Lawrence, Edith S\u00f6dergran and Yukio Mishima.\nNietzsche was an early influence on the poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke. Knut Hamsun counted Nietzsche, along with Strindberg and Dostoyevsky, as his primary influences. Author Jack London wrote that he was more stimulated by Nietzsche than by any other writer. Critics have suggested that the character of David Grief in \"A Son of the Sun\" was based on Nietzsche. Nietzsche's influence on Muhammad Iqbal is most evidenced in \"Asrar-i-Khudi\" (\"The Secrets of the Self\"). Wallace Stevens was another reader of Nietzsche, and elements of Nietzsche's philosophy were found throughout Stevens's poetry collection \"Harmonium\". Olaf Stapledon was influenced by the idea of the and it is a central theme in his books \"Odd John\" and \"Sirius\". In Russia, Nietzsche influenced Russian symbolism and figures such as Dmitry Merezhkovsky, Andrei Bely, Vyacheslav Ivanov and Alexander Scriabin incorporated or discussed parts of Nietzsche philosophy in their works. Thomas Mann's novel \"Death in Venice\" shows a use of Apollonian and Dionysian, and in \"Doctor Faustus\" Nietzsche was a central source for the character of Adrian Leverk\u00fchn. Hermann Hesse, similarly, in his \"Narcissus and Goldmund\" presents two main characters as opposite yet intertwined Apollonian and Dionysian spirits. Painter Giovanni Segantini was fascinated by \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", and he drew an illustration for the first Italian translation of the book. The Russian painter Lena Hades created the oil painting cycle \"Also Sprach Zarathustra\" dedicated to the book \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\".\nBy World War I, Nietzsche had acquired a reputation as an inspiration for right-wing German militarism and leftist politics. German soldiers received copies of \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\" as gifts during World War I. The Dreyfus affair provided a contrasting example of his reception: the French antisemitic Right labelled the Jewish and leftist intellectuals who defended Alfred Dreyfus as \"Nietzscheans\". Nietzsche had a distinct appeal for many Zionist thinkers around the start of the 20th century, most notable being Ahad Ha'am, Hillel Zeitlin, Micha Josef Berdyczewski, A.D. Gordon and Martin Buber, who went so far as to extoll Nietzsche as a \"creator\" and \"emissary of life\". Chaim Weizmann was a great admirer of Nietzsche; the first president of Israel sent Nietzsche's books to his wife, adding a comment in a letter that \"This was the best and finest thing I can send to you.\" Israel Eldad, the ideological chief of the Stern Gang that fought the British in Palestine in the 1940s, wrote about Nietzsche in his underground newspaper and later translated most of Nietzsche's books into Hebrew. Eugene O'Neill remarked that \"Zarathustra\" influenced him more than any other book he ever read. He also shared Nietzsche's view of tragedy. The plays \"The Great God Brown\" and \"Lazarus Laughed\" are examples of Nietzsche's influence on him. The First International claimed Nietzsche as ideologically one of their own. From 1888 through the 1890s there were more publications of Nietzsche works in Russia than in any other country. Nietzsche was influential among the Bolsheviks. Among the Nietzschean Bolsheviks were Vladimir Bazarov, Anatoly Lunacharsky and Aleksandr Bogdanov. Nietzsche's influence on the works of Frankfurt School philosophers Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno can be seen in the \"Dialectic of Enlightenment\". Adorno summed up Nietzsche's philosophy as expressing the \"humane in a world in which humanity has become a sham\".\nNietzsche's growing prominence suffered a severe setback when his works became closely associated with Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany. Many political leaders of the twentieth century were at least superficially familiar with Nietzsche's ideas, although it is not always possible to determine whether they actually read his work. It is debated among scholars whether Hitler read Nietzsche, although if he did, it may not have been extensively. He was a frequent visitor to the Nietzsche museum in Weimar and used expressions of Nietzsche's, such as \"lords of the earth\" in \"Mein Kampf\". The Nazis made selective use of Nietzsche's philosophy. Alfred Baeumler was perhaps the most notable exponent of Nietzschean thought in Nazi Germany. Baeumler had published his book \"Nietzsche, Philosopher and Politician\" in 1931, before the Nazis' rise to power, and subsequently published several editions of Nietzsche's work during the Third Reich. Mussolini, Charles de Gaulle and Huey P. Newton read Nietzsche. Richard Nixon read Nietzsche with \"curious interest\", and his book \"Beyond Peace\" might have taken its title from Nietzsche's book \"Beyond Good and Evil\" which Nixon read beforehand. Bertrand Russell wrote that Nietzsche had exerted great influence on philosophers and on people of literary and artistic culture, but warned that the attempt to put Nietzsche's philosophy of aristocracy into practice could only be done by an organisation similar to the Fascist or the Nazi party.\nA decade after World War II, there was a revival of Nietzsche's philosophical writings thanks to translations and analyses by Walter Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale. Georges Bataille was also influential in this revival, defending Nietzsche against appropriation by the Nazis with his notable 1937 essay \"Nietzsche and Fascists\". Others, well known philosophers in their own right, wrote commentaries on Nietzsche's philosophy, including Martin Heidegger, who produced a four-volume study, and Lev Shestov, who wrote a book called \"Dostoyevski, Tolstoy and Nietzsche\" where he portrays Nietzsche and Dostoyevski as the \"thinkers of tragedy\". Georg Simmel compares Nietzsche's importance to ethics to that of Copernicus for cosmology. Sociologist Ferdinand T\u00f6nnies read Nietzsche avidly from his early life, and later frequently discussed many of his concepts in his own works. Nietzsche has influenced philosophers such as Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, Oswald Spengler, George Grant, Emil Cioran, Albert Camus, Ayn Rand, Jacques Derrida, Sarah Kofman, Leo Strauss, Max Scheler, Michel Foucault, Bernard Williams, and Nick Land.\nCamus described Nietzsche as \"the only artist to have derived the extreme consequences of an aesthetics of the absurd\". Paul Ric\u0153ur called Nietzsche one of the masters of the \"school of suspicion\", alongside Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud. Carl Jung was also influenced by Nietzsche. In \"Memories, Dreams, Reflections\", a biography transcribed by his secretary, he cites Nietzsche as a large influence. Aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy, especially his ideas of the self and his relation to society, run through much of late-twentieth and early twenty-first century thought. Nietzsche's writings have also been influential to some advancers of Accelerationist thought through his influence on Deleuze and Guattari. His deepening of the romantic-heroic tradition of the nineteenth century, for example, as expressed in the ideal of the \"grand striver\" appears in the work of thinkers from Cornelius Castoriadis to Roberto Mangabeira Unger. For Nietzsche, this grand striver overcomes obstacles, engages in epic struggles, pursues new goals, embraces recurrent novelty, and transcends existing structures and contexts.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10672", "revid": "19339494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10672", "title": "Frank Zappa", "text": "American musician (1940\u20131993)\nFrank Vincent Zappa (December 21, 1940\u00a0\u2013 December 4, 1993) was an American musician, composer, and bandleader. His work is characterized by nonconformity, free-form improvisation, sound experimentation, musical virtuosity and satire of American culture. In a career spanning more than 30\u00a0years, Zappa composed rock, pop, jazz, jazz fusion, orchestral and \"musique concr\u00e8te\" works; he also produced almost all of the 60-plus albums that he released with his band the Mothers of Invention and as a solo artist. Zappa also directed feature-length films and music videos, and designed album covers. He is considered one of the most innovative and stylistically diverse musicians of his generation.\nAs a self-taught composer and performer, Zappa had diverse musical influences that led him to create music that was sometimes difficult to categorize. While in his teens, he acquired a taste for 20th-century classical modernism, African-American rhythm and blues, and doo-wop music. He began writing classical music in high school, while at the same time playing drums in rhythm and blues bands, later switching to electric guitar. His debut studio album with the Mothers of Invention, \"Freak Out!\" (1966), combined songs in conventional rock and roll format with collective improvisations and studio-generated sound collages. He continued this eclectic and experimental approach whether the fundamental format was rock, jazz, or classical.\nZappa's output is unified by a conceptual continuity he termed \"Project/Object\", with numerous musical phrases, ideas, and characters reappearing across his albums. His lyrics reflected his iconoclastic views of established social and political processes, structures and movements, often humorously so, and he has been described as the \"godfather\" of comedy rock. He was a strident critic of mainstream education and organized religion, and a forthright and passionate advocate for freedom of speech, self-education, political participation and the abolition of censorship. Unlike many other rock musicians of his generation, he disapproved of recreational drug use, but supported decriminalization and regulation.\nZappa was a highly productive and prolific artist with a controversial critical standing; supporters of his music admired its compositional complexity, while detractors found it lacking emotional depth. He had greater commercial success outside the US, particularly in Europe. Though he worked as an independent artist, Zappa mostly relied on distribution agreements he had negotiated with the major record labels. He remains a major influence on musicians and composers. His many honors include his posthumous 1995 induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the 1997 Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.\n1940s\u20131960s: early life and career.\nChildhood.\nZappa was born on December 21, 1940, in Baltimore, Maryland. His mother, Rose Marie (n\u00e9e Colimore), was of Italian (Neapolitan and Sicilian) and French ancestry; his father, whose name was anglicized to Francis Vincent Zappa, was an immigrant from Partinico, near Palermo in the Italian island of Sicily.\nFrank, the eldest of four children, was raised in an Italian-American household where Italian was often spoken by his grandparents. The family moved often because his father, a chemist and mathematician, worked in the defense industry. After a time in Florida in the 1940s, the family returned to Maryland, where Zappa's father worked at the Edgewood Arsenal chemical warfare facility of the Aberdeen Proving Ground run by the U.S. Army. Due to their home's proximity to the arsenal, which stored mustard gas, gas masks were kept in the home in case of an accident. This living arrangement had a profound effect on Zappa, and references to germs, germ warfare, ailments and the defense industry occur frequently throughout his work.\nZappa's father often brought mercury-filled lab equipment home from his workplace and gave it to Zappa to play with. Zappa said that as a child he \"used to play with it all the time\", often by putting liquid mercury on the floor and using a hammer to spray out mercury droplets in a circular pattern, eventually covering the entire floor of his bedroom with them. Childhood exposure to toxic elemental mercury on military bases is known to increase the risk of developing prostate cancer as an adult. Zappa was diagnosed with terminal prostate cancer in 1990, and died from it in 1993 at the age of 52.\nZappa was often sick as a child, suffering from asthma, earaches and sinus problems. A doctor treated his sinusitis by inserting a pellet of radium into each of Zappa's nostrils. At the time, little was known about the potential dangers of even small amounts of therapeutic radiation, and although it has since been claimed that nasal radium treatment has causal connections to cancer, no studies have provided enough evidence to confirm this.\nNasal imagery and references appear in his music and lyrics, as well as in the collage album covers created by his long-time collaborator Cal Schenkel. Zappa believed his childhood diseases might have been due to exposure to mustard gas, released by the nearby chemical warfare facility, and his health worsened when he lived in Baltimore. In 1952, his family relocated for reasons of health to Monterey, California, where his father taught metallurgy at the Naval Postgraduate School. They soon moved to the San Diego neighborhood of Clairemont, and then to the nearby city of El Cajon, before finally returning to San Diego.\nFirst musical interests.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSince I didn't have any kind of formal training, it didn't make any difference to me if I was listening to Lightnin' Slim, or a vocal group called the Jewels\u00a0..., or Webern, or Var\u00e8se, or Stravinsky. To me it was all good music.\n\u2014 Frank Zappa, 1989\nZappa joined his first band at Mission Bay High School in San Diego as the drummer. At about the same time, his parents bought a phonograph, which allowed him to develop his interest in music, and to begin building his record collection. According to \"The Rough Guide to Rock\" (2003), \"as a teenager Zappa was simultaneously enthralled by black R&amp;B (Johnny 'Guitar' Watson, Guitar Slim), doo-wop (The Channels, The Velvets), the modernism of Igor Stravinsky and Anton Webern, and the dissonant sound experiments of Edgard Varese.\"\nR&amp;B singles were early purchases for Zappa, starting a large collection he kept for the rest of his life. He was interested in sounds for their own sake, particularly the sounds of drums and other percussion instruments. By age twelve, he had obtained a snare drum and began learning the basics of orchestral percussion. Zappa's deep interest in modern classical music began when he read a \"LOOK\" magazine article about the Sam Goody record store chain that lauded its ability to sell an LP as obscure as \"The Complete Works of Edgard Var\u00e8se, Volume One\". The article described Var\u00e8se's percussion composition \"Ionisation\", produced by EMS Recordings, as \"a weird jumble of drums and other unpleasant sounds\". Zappa decided to seek out Var\u00e8se's music. After searching for over a year, Zappa found a copy (he noticed the LP because of the \"mad scientist\" looking photo of Var\u00e8se on the cover). Not having enough money with him, he persuaded the salesman to sell him the record at a discount. Thus began his lifelong passion for Var\u00e8se's music and that of other modern classical composers. He also liked the Italian classical music listened to by his grandparents, especially Puccini's opera arias.\nBy 1956, the Zappa family had moved to Lancaster, a small aerospace and farming town in the Antelope Valley of the Mojave Desert close to Edwards Air Force Base; he would later refer to Sun Village (a town close to Lancaster) in the 1973 track \"Village of the Sun\". Zappa's mother encouraged him in his musical interests. Although she disliked Var\u00e8se's music, she was indulgent enough to give her son a long-distance call to the New York composer as a fifteenth birthday present. Unfortunately, Var\u00e8se was in Europe at the time, so Zappa spoke to the composer's wife and she suggested he call back later. In a letter, Var\u00e8se thanked him for his interest, and told him about a composition he was working on called \"D\u00e9serts\". Living in the desert town of Lancaster, Zappa found this very exciting. Var\u00e8se invited him to visit if he ever came to New York. The meeting never took place (Var\u00e8se died in 1965), but Zappa framed the letter and kept it on display for the rest of his life.\nAt Antelope Valley High School, Zappa met Don Glen Vliet (who later changed his name to Don Van Vliet and adopted the stage name Captain Beefheart). Zappa and Vliet became close friends, sharing an interest in R&amp;B records and influencing each other musically throughout their careers. Around the same time, Zappa started playing drums in a local band, the Blackouts. The band was racially diverse and included Euclid James \"Motorhead\" Sherwood who later became a member of the Mothers of Invention. Zappa's interest in the guitar grew, and in 1957 he was given his first instrument. Among his early influences were Johnny \"Guitar\" Watson, Howlin' Wolf and Clarence \"Gatemouth\" Brown. In the 1970s/1980s, he invited Watson to perform on several albums. Zappa considered soloing the equivalent of forming \"air sculptures\", and developed an eclectic, innovative and highly personal style. He was also influenced by Egyptian composer Halim El-Dabh.\nZappa's interest in composing and arranging flourished in his last high-school years. By his final year, he was writing, arranging and conducting avant-garde performance pieces for the school orchestra. He graduated from Antelope Valley High School in 1958, and later acknowledged two of his music teachers on the sleeve of the 1966 album \"Freak Out!\" Due to his family's frequent moves, Zappa attended at least six different high schools, and as a student he was often bored and given to distracting the rest of the class with juvenile antics. In 1959, he attended Chaffey College but left after one semester, and maintained thereafter a disdain for formal education, taking his children out of school at age 15 and refusing to pay for their college.\nZappa left home in 1959, and moved into a small apartment in Echo Park, Los Angeles. After he met Kathryn J. \"Kay\" Sherman during his short period of private composition study with Prof. Karl Kohn of Pomona College, they moved in together in Ontario, and were married December 28, 1960. Zappa worked for a short period in advertising as a copywriter. His sojourn in the commercial world was brief, but gave him valuable insights into its workings. Throughout his career, he took a keen interest in the visual presentation of his work, designing some of his album covers and directing his own films and videos.\nStudio Z.\nZappa attempted to earn a living as a musician and composer, and played different nightclub gigs, some with a new version of the Blackouts. Zappa's earliest professional recordings, two soundtracks for the low-budget films \"The World's Greatest Sinner\" (1962) and \"Run Home Slow\" (1965) were more financially rewarding. The former score was commissioned by actor-producer Timothy Carey and recorded in 1961. It contains many themes that appeared on later Zappa records. The latter soundtrack was recorded in 1963 after the film was completed, but it was commissioned by one of Zappa's former high school teachers in 1959 and Zappa may have worked on it before the film was shot. Excerpts from the soundtrack can be heard on the posthumous album \"The Lost Episodes\" (1996).\nDuring the early 1960s, Zappa wrote and produced songs for other local artists, often working with singer-songwriter Ray Collins and producer Paul Buff. Their \"Memories of El Monte\" was recorded by the Penguins, although only Cleve Duncan of the original group was featured. Buff owned the small Pal Recording Studio in Cucamonga, which included a unique five-track tape recorder he had built. At that time, only a handful of the most sophisticated commercial studios had multi-track facilities; the industry standard for smaller studios was still mono or two-track. Although none of the recordings from the period achieved major commercial success, Zappa earned enough money to allow him in 1963 to stage a concert of his orchestral music and to broadcast and record it. In March of that same year Zappa appeared on Steve Allen's syndicated late night show playing a bicycle as a musical \u200ausing drum sticks and a bow borrowed from the band's bass player he proceeded to pluck, bang, and bow the spokes of the bike, producing strange, comical sounds from his newfound instrument. With Captain Beefheart, Zappa recorded some songs under the name of the Soots. They were rejected by Dot Records. Later, the Mothers were also rejected by Columbia Records for having \"no commercial potential\", a verdict Zappa subsequently quoted on the sleeve of \"Freak Out!\"\nIn 1964, after his marriage started to break up, he moved into the Pal studio and began routinely working 12\u00a0hours or more per day recording and experimenting with overdubbing and audio tape manipulation. This established a work pattern that endured for most of his life. Aided by his income from film composing, Zappa took over the studio from Paul Buff, who was now working with Art Laboe at Original Sound. It was renamed Studio Z. Studio Z was rarely booked for recordings by other musicians. Instead, friends moved in, notably James \"Motorhead\" Sherwood. Zappa started performing in local bars as a guitarist with a power trio, the Muthers, to support himself.\nAn article in the local press describing Zappa as \"the Movie King of Cucamonga\" prompted the local police to suspect that he was making pornographic films. In March 1965, Zappa was approached by a vice squad undercover officer, and accepted an offer of $100 () to produce a suggestive audio tape for an alleged stag party. Zappa and a female friend recorded a faked erotic episode. When Zappa was about to hand over the tape, he was arrested, and the police stripped the studio of all recorded material. The press was tipped off beforehand, and next day's \"The Daily Report\" wrote that \"Vice Squad investigators stilled the tape recorders of a free-swinging, a-go-go film and recording studio here Friday and arrested a self-styled movie producer\". Zappa was charged with \"conspiracy to commit pornography\". This felony charge was reduced and he was sentenced to six months in jail on a misdemeanor, with all but ten days suspended. His brief imprisonment left a permanent mark, and was central to the formation of his anti-authoritarian stance. Zappa lost several recordings made at Studio Z in the process, as the police returned only 30 of 80 hours of tape seized. Eventually, he could no longer afford to pay the rent on the studio and was evicted. Zappa managed to recover some of his possessions before the studio was torn down in 1966.\nLate 1960s: the Mothers of Invention.\nFormation.\nIn 1964, Ray Collins asked Zappa to take over as guitarist in local R&amp;B band the Soul Giants, following a fight between Collins and the group's original guitarist. Zappa accepted, and soon assumed leadership and the role as co-lead singer (even though he never considered himself a singer, then or later). He convinced the other members that they should play his music to increase the chances of getting a record contract. The band debuted at the Broadside Club in Pomona, California and was renamed the Mothers since this gig took place on May 10, 1964 - Mother's Day. They increased their bookings after beginning an association with manager Herb Cohen, and gradually gained attention on the burgeoning Los Angeles underground music scene. In early 1966, they were spotted by leading record producer Tom Wilson when playing \"Trouble Every Day\", a song about the Watts riots. Wilson had earned acclaim as the producer for Bob Dylan and Simon &amp; Garfunkel, and was one of the few African-Americans working as a major label pop music producer at this time. Wilson signed the Mothers to the Verve division of MGM, which had built up a strong reputation for its releases of modern jazz recordings in the 1940s and 1950s, but was attempting to diversify into pop and rock audiences. Verve insisted that the band officially rename themselves the Mothers of Invention as \"Mother\" was short for \"motherfucker\"\u2014a term that, apart from its profane meanings, can denote a skilled musician.\nDebut album: \"Freak Out!\".\nWith Wilson credited as producer, the Mothers of Invention, augmented by a studio orchestra, recorded the groundbreaking \"Freak Out!\" (1966), which, after Bob Dylan's \"Blonde on Blonde\", was the second rock double album ever released. It mixed R&amp;B, doo-wop, musique concr\u00e8te, and experimental sound collages that captured the \"freak\" subculture of Los Angeles at that time. Although he was dissatisfied with the final product, \"Freak Out\" immediately established Zappa as a radical new voice in rock music, providing an antidote to the \"relentless consumer culture of America\". The sound was raw, but the arrangements were sophisticated. While recording in the studio, some of the additional session musicians were shocked that they were expected to read the notes on sheet music from charts with Zappa conducting them, since it was not standard when recording rock music. The lyrics praised non-conformity, disparaged authorities, and had dadaist elements. Yet, there was a place for seemingly conventional love songs. Most compositions are Zappa's, which set a precedent for the rest of his recording career. He had full control over the arrangements and musical decisions and did most overdubs. Wilson provided the industry clout and connections and was able to provide the group with the financial resources needed. Although Wilson was able to provide Zappa and the Mothers with an extraordinary degree of artistic freedom for the time, the recording did not go entirely as planned. In a 1967 radio interview, Zappa explained that the album's outlandish 11-minute closing track, \"Return of the Son of Monster Magnet\" was not finished. The track as it appears on the album was only a backing track for a much more complex piece, but MGM refused to allow the additional recording time needed for completion. Much to Zappa's chagrin, it was issued in its unfinished state.\nDuring the recording of \"Freak Out!\", Zappa moved into a house in Laurel Canyon with friend Pamela Zarubica, who appeared on the album. The house became a meeting (and living) place for many LA musicians and groupies of the time, despite Zappa's disapproval of their illicit drug use. After a short promotional tour following the release of \"Freak Out!\", Zappa met Adelaide Gail Sloatman. He fell in love within \"a couple of minutes\", and she moved into the house over the summer. They married in 1967, had four children and remained together until Zappa's death.\nWilson nominally produced the Mothers' second album \"Absolutely Free\" (1967), which was recorded in November 1966, and later mixed in New York, although by this time Zappa was in \"de facto\" control of most facets of the production. It featured extended playing by the Mothers of Invention and focused on songs that defined Zappa's compositional style of introducing abrupt, rhythmical changes into songs that were built from diverse elements. Examples are \"Plastic People\" and \"Brown Shoes Don't Make It\", which contained lyrics critical of the hypocrisy and conformity of American society, but also of the counterculture of the 1960s. As Zappa put it, \"[W]e're satirists, and we are out to satirize everything.\" At the same time, Zappa had recorded material for an album of orchestral works to be released under his own name, \"Lumpy Gravy\", released by Capitol Records in 1967. Due to contractual problems, the album was pulled. Zappa took the opportunity to radically restructure the contents, adding newly recorded, improvised dialogue. After the contractual problems were resolved, the album was reissued by Verve in 1968. It is an \"incredible ambitious musical project\", a \"monument to John Cage\", which intertwines orchestral themes, spoken words and electronic noises through radical audio editing techniques.\nNew York period (1966\u20131968).\nThe Mothers of Invention played in New York in late 1966 and were offered a contract at the Garrick Theater (at 152 Bleecker Street, above the Cafe au Go Go) during Easter 1967. This proved successful and Herb Cohen extended the booking, which eventually lasted half a year. As a result, Zappa and his wife Gail, along with the Mothers of Invention, moved to New York. Their shows became a combination of improvised acts showcasing individual talents of the band as well as tight performances of Zappa's music. Everything was directed by Zappa using hand signals. Guest performers and audience participation became a regular part of the Garrick Theater shows. One evening, Zappa managed to entice some U.S. Marines from the audience onto the stage, where they proceeded to dismember a big baby doll, having been told by Zappa to pretend that it was a \"gook baby\".\nIn 1967 filmmaker Ed Seeman paid Zappa $2,000 to produce music for a Luden's cough drops television commercial. Zappa's music was matched with Seeman's animation and the advertisement won a Clio Award for \"Best Use of Sound\". An alternate version of the soundtrack, called \"The Big Squeeze\", later appeared on Zappa's posthumous 1996 album \"The Lost Episodes\". This version lacks Seeman's narration.\nWhile living in New York City, and interrupted by the band's first European tour, the Mothers of Invention recorded the album widely regarded as the peak of the group's late 1960s work, \"We're Only in It for the Money\" (released 1968). It was produced by Zappa, with Wilson credited as executive producer. From then on, Zappa produced all albums released by the Mothers of Invention and as a solo artist. \"We're Only in It for the Money\" featured some of the most creative audio editing and production yet heard in pop music, and the songs ruthlessly satirized the hippie and flower power phenomena. He sampled surf music from his Studio Z days in the audio collage \"Nasal Retentive Caliope Music\". The cover photo parodied that of the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\". The cover art was provided by Cal Schenkel whom Zappa met in New York. This initiated a lifelong collaboration in which Schenkel designed covers for numerous Zappa and Mothers albums.\nReflecting Zappa's eclectic approach to music, the next album, \"Cruising with Ruben &amp; the Jets\" (1968), was very different. It represented a collection of doo-wop songs; listeners and critics were not sure whether the album was a satire or a tribute. Zappa later remarked that the album was conceived like Stravinsky's compositions in his neo-classical period: \"If he could take the forms and clich\u00e9s of the classical era and pervert them, why not do the same\u00a0... to doo-wop in the fifties?\" The opening theme from Stravinsky's \"The Rite of Spring\" is sung in \"Fountain of Love\".\nIn 1967 and 1968, Zappa made two appearances with the Monkees. The first appearance was on an episode of their TV series, \"The Monkees Blow Their Minds\", where Zappa, dressed up as Mike Nesmith, interviews Nesmith who is dressed up as Zappa. After the interview, Zappa destroys a car with a sledgehammer as the song \"Mother People\" plays. He later provided a cameo in the Monkees' movie \"Head\" where, leading a cow, he tells Davy Jones \"the youth of America depends on you to show them the way.\" Zappa respected the Monkees and recruited Micky Dolenz to the Mothers but RCA/Columbia/Colgems would not release Dolenz from his contract.\nDuring the late 1960s, Zappa continued to develop the business side of his career. He and Herb Cohen formed the Bizarre Records and Straight Records labels to increase creative control and produce recordings by other artists. These labels were distributed in the US by Warner Bros. Records. Zappa/Mothers recordings appeared on Bizarre along with Wild Man Fischer and Lenny Bruce. Straight released the double album \"Trout Mask Replica\" for Captain Beefheart, and releases by Alice Cooper, The Persuasions, and the GTOs.\nIn the Mothers' second European tour in September/October 1968 they performed for the Internationale Essener Songtage at the Grugahalle in Essen, Germany; at the Tivoli in Copenhagen, Denmark; for TV programs in Germany (\"Beat-Club\"), France, and England; at the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam; at the Royal Festival Hall in London; and at the Olympia in Paris.\nDisbandment.\nZappa and the Mothers of Invention returned to Los Angeles in mid-1968, and the Zappas moved into a house on Laurel Canyon Boulevard, only to move again to Woodrow Wilson Drive. This was Zappa's home for the rest of his life. Despite being successful in Europe, the Mothers of Invention were not doing well financially. Their first records were vocally oriented, but as Zappa wrote more instrumental jazz and classical style music for the band's concerts, audiences were confused. Zappa felt that audiences failed to appreciate his \"electrical chamber music\".\nIn 1969 there were nine band members and Zappa was supporting the group from his publishing royalties whether they played or not. In late 1969, Zappa broke up the band. He often cited the financial strain as the main reason, but also commented on the band members' lack of diligence. Many band members were bitter about Zappa's decision, and some took it as a sign of Zappa's perfectionism at the expense of human feeling. Others were irritated by 'his autocratic ways', exemplified by Zappa's never staying at the same hotel as the band members. Several members played for Zappa in years to come. Remaining recordings of the band from this period were collected on \"Weasels Ripped My Flesh\" and \"Burnt Weeny Sandwich\" (both released in 1970).\nAfter he disbanded the Mothers of Invention, Zappa released the acclaimed solo album \"Hot Rats\" (1969). It features, for the first time on record, Zappa playing extended guitar solos and contains one of his most enduring compositions, \"Peaches en Regalia\", which reappeared several times on future recordings. He was backed by jazz, blues and R&amp;B session players including violinist Don \"Sugarcane\" Harris, drummers John Guerin and Paul Humphrey, multi-instrumentalist and former Mothers of Invention member Ian Underwood, and multi-instrumentalist Shuggie Otis on bass, along with a guest appearance by Captain Beefheart on the only vocal track, \"Willie the Pimp\". It became a popular album in England, and had a major influence on the development of jazz-rock fusion.\n1970s.\nRebirth of the Mothers and filmmaking.\nIn 1970 Zappa met conductor Zubin Mehta. They arranged a May 1970 concert where Mehta conducted the Los Angeles Philharmonic augmented by a rock band. According to Zappa, the music was mostly written in motel rooms while on tour with the Mothers of Invention. Some of it was later featured in the movie \"200 Motels\". Although the concert was a success, Zappa's experience working with a symphony orchestra was not a happy one. His dissatisfaction became a recurring theme throughout his career; he often felt that the quality of performance of his material delivered by orchestras was not commensurate with the money he spent on orchestral concerts and recordings.\nLater in 1970, Zappa formed a new version of the Mothers (from then on, he mostly dropped the \"of Invention\"). It included British drummer Aynsley Dunbar, jazz keyboardist George Duke, Ian Underwood, Jeff Simmons (bass, rhythm guitar), and three members of the Turtles: bass player Jim Pons, and singers Mark Volman and Howard Kaylan, who, due to persistent legal and contractual problems, adopted the stage name \"The Phlorescent Leech and Eddie\", or \"Flo &amp; Eddie\".\nThis version of the Mothers debuted on Zappa's next solo album \"Chunga's Revenge\" (1970), which was followed by the double-album soundtrack to the movie \"200 Motels\" (1971), featuring the Mothers, the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, Ringo Starr, Theodore Bikel, and Keith Moon. Co-directed by Zappa and Tony Palmer, it was filmed in a week at Pinewood Studios outside London. Tensions between Zappa and several cast and crew members arose before and during shooting. The film deals loosely with life on the road as a rock musician. It was the first feature film photographed on videotape and transferred to 35\u00a0mm film, a process that allowed for novel visual effects. It was released to mixed reviews. The score relied extensively on orchestral music, and Zappa's dissatisfaction with the classical music world intensified when a concert, scheduled at the Royal Albert Hall after filming, was canceled because a representative of the venue found some of the lyrics obscene. In 1975, he lost a lawsuit against the Royal Albert Hall for breach of contract.\nAfter \"200 Motels\", the band went on tour, which resulted in two live albums, \"Fillmore East \u2013 June 1971\" and \"Just Another Band from L.A.\"; the latter included the 20-minute track \"Billy the Mountain\", Zappa's satire on rock opera set in Southern California. This track was representative of the band's theatrical performances\u2014which used songs to build sketches based on \"200 Motels\" scenes, as well as new situations that often portrayed the band members' sexual encounters on the road.\nAccident, attack, and aftermath.\nOn December 4, 1971, Zappa suffered his first of two serious setbacks. While performing at Casino de Montreux in Switzerland, the Mothers' equipment was destroyed when a flare set off by an audience member started a fire that burned down the casino. Immortalized in Deep Purple's song \"Smoke on the Water\", the event and immediate aftermath can be heard on the bootleg album \"Swiss Cheese/Fire\", released legally as part of Zappa's \"Beat the Boots II\" compilation. After losing $50,000 () worth of equipment and a week's break, the Mothers played at the Rainbow Theatre, London, with rented gear. During the encore, an audience member, jealous because of his girlfriend's infatuation with Zappa, pushed him off the stage and into the concrete-floored orchestra pit. The band thought Zappa had been killed\u2014he had suffered serious fractures, head trauma and injuries to his back, leg, and neck, as well as a crushed larynx, which ultimately caused his voice to drop a third after healing.\nAfter the attack Zappa needed to use a wheelchair for an extended period, making touring impossible for over half a year. Upon return to the stage in September 1972, Zappa was still wearing a leg brace, had a noticeable limp and could not stand for very long while on stage. Zappa noted that one leg healed \"shorter than the other\" (a reference later found in the lyrics of songs \"Zomby Woof\" and \"Dancin' Fool\"), resulting in chronic back pain. Meanwhile, the Mothers were left in limbo and eventually formed the core of Flo and Eddie's band as they set out on their own.\nIn December 1972, David Walley published the first biography of Zappa, titled \"No Commercial Potential\". Zappa was severely critical, calling it \"a quickie, paperback, sensational book\". He said that it contained \"gross inaccuracies\", described the writing as \"not quality workmanship\" and claimed that Walley had \"just slung together a bunch of quotes\". Despite Zappa's complaints, the book was later published in an updated edition in 1980 and again in 1996 after Zappa's death.\nSolo albums: Waka/Jawaka and The Grand Wazoo.\nDuring 1971\u20131972 Zappa released two strongly jazz-oriented solo LPs, \"Waka/Jawaka\" and \"The Grand Wazoo\", which were recorded during the forced layoff from concert touring, using floating line-ups of session players and Mothers alumni. Musically, the albums were akin to \"Hot Rats,\" in that they featured extended instrumental tracks with extended soloing. Zappa began touring again in late 1972. His first effort was a series of concerts in September 1972 with a 20-piece big band referred to as the Grand Wazoo. This was followed by a scaled-down version known as the Petit Wazoo that toured the U.S. for five weeks from October to December 1972.\nTop 10 album: \"Apostrophe (')\".\nZappa then formed and toured with smaller groups that variously included Ian Underwood (reeds, keyboards), Ruth Underwood (vibes, marimba), Sal Marquez (trumpet, vocals), Napoleon Murphy Brock (sax, flute and vocals), Bruce Fowler (trombone), Tom Fowler (bass), Chester Thompson (drums), Ralph Humphrey (drums), George Duke (keyboards, vocals), and Jean-Luc Ponty (violin).\nBy 1973 the Bizarre and Straight labels were discontinued. Zappa and Cohen then created DiscReet Records, also distributed by Warner. Zappa continued a high rate of production through the first half of the 1970s, including the solo album \"Apostrophe (')\" (1974), which reached a career-high No.\u00a010 on the \"Billboard\" pop album charts helped by the No.\u00a086 chart hit \"Don't Eat The Yellow Snow\". Other albums from the period are \"Over-Nite Sensation\" (1973), which contained several future concert favorites, such as \"Dinah-Moe Humm\" and \"Montana\", and the albums \"Roxy &amp; Elsewhere\" (1974) and \"One Size Fits All\" (1975) which feature ever-changing versions of a band still called the Mothers, and are notable for the tight renditions of highly difficult jazz fusion songs in such pieces as \"Inca Roads\", \"Echidna's Arf (Of You)\" and \"Be-Bop Tango (Of the Old Jazzmen's Church)\". A live recording from 1974, \"You Can't Do That on Stage Anymore, Vol. 2\" (1988), captures \"the full spirit and excellence of the 1973\u20131975 band\". Zappa released \"Bongo Fury\" (1975), which featured a live recording at the Armadillo World Headquarters in Austin from a tour the same year that reunited him with Captain Beefheart for a brief period. They later became estranged for a period of years, but were in contact at the end of Zappa's life.\nBusiness breakups and touring.\nIn 1976 Zappa produced the album \"Good Singin', Good Playin\"' for Grand Funk Railroad. Zappa's relationship with long-time manager Herb Cohen ended in May 1976. After Cohen cashed one of Zappa's royalty checks from Warner and kept the money for himself, Zappa sued Cohen. Zappa was also upset with Cohen for signing acts he did not approve. Cohen filed a lawsuit against Zappa in return, which froze the money Zappa and Cohen were expecting to receive from an out-of-court settlement with MGM/Verve over the rights to Zappa's early Mothers of Invention recordings. The MGM settlement was finalized in mid 1977 after two years of negotiations. Litigation with Cohen also prevented Zappa having access to any of his previously recorded material during the trials. Zappa therefore took his personal master copies of the album \"Zoot Allures\" (1976) directly to Warner, while bypassing DiscReet. Following the split with Cohen, Zappa hired Bennett Glotzer as new manager.\nBy late 1976 Zappa was upset with Warner over inadequate promotion of his recordings and he was eager to move on as soon as possible. In March 1977 Zappa delivered four albums (five full-length LPs) to Warner to complete his contract. These albums contained recordings mostly made between 1972 and 1976. Warner failed to meet contractual obligations to Zappa, and in response he filed a multi-million dollar breach of contract lawsuit. During a lengthy legal debate Warner eventually released the four disputed albums during 1978 and 1979, one of them in censored form. Also, in 1977 Zappa prepared a four-LP box set called \"L\u00e4ther\" (pronounced \"leather\") and negotiated distribution with Phonogram Inc. for release on the Zappa Records label. The \"L\u00e4ther\" box set was scheduled for release on Halloween 1977, but legal action from Warner forced Zappa to shelve this project.\nIn December 1977 Zappa appeared on the Pasadena, California radio station KROQ-FM and played the entire \"L\u00e4ther\" album, while encouraging listeners to make tape recordings of the broadcast. Both sets of recordings (five-LP and four-LP) have much of the same material, but each also has unique content. The albums integrate many aspects of Zappa's 1970s work: heavy rock, orchestral works, and complex jazz instrumentals, along with Zappa's distinctive guitar solos. \"L\u00e4ther\" was officially released posthumously in 1996. It is still debated as to whether Zappa had conceived the material as a four-LP set from the beginning, or only later when working with Phonogram.\nAlthough Zappa eventually gained the rights to all his material created under the MGM and Warner contracts, the various lawsuits meant that for a period Zappa's only income came from touring, which he therefore did extensively in 1975\u20131977 with relatively small, mainly rock-oriented, bands. Drummer Terry Bozzio became a regular band member, Napoleon Murphy Brock stayed on for a while, and original Mothers of Invention bassist Roy Estrada joined. Among other musicians were bassist Patrick O'Hearn, singer-guitarist Ray White and keyboardist/violinist Eddie Jobson. In December 1976, Zappa appeared as a featured musical guest on the NBC television show \"Saturday Night Live\". Zappa's song \"I'm the Slime\" was performed with a voice-over by \"SNL\" booth announcer Don Pardo, who also introduced \"Peaches En Regalia\" on the same airing. In 1978, Zappa served both as host and musical act on the show, and as an actor in various sketches. The performances included an impromptu musical collaboration with cast member John Belushi during the instrumental piece \"The Purple Lagoon\". Belushi appeared as his Samurai Futaba character playing the tenor sax with Zappa conducting. However, he earned a ban from the show after the latter episode because he had done what producers called \"a disastrous job of hosting\" (Zappa reportedly did not get along with cast and crew in the lead-up to recording, then told the audience he was simply reading from cue cards).\nZappa's band had a series of Christmas shows in New York City in 1976, recordings of which appear on \"Zappa in New York\" (1978) and also on the four-LP \"L\u00e4ther\" project. The band included Ruth Underwood and a horn section (featuring Michael and Randy Brecker). It mixes complex instrumentals such as \"The Black Page\" and humorous songs like \"Titties and Beer\". The former composition, written originally for drum kit but later developed for larger bands, is notorious for its complexity in rhythmic structure and short, densely arranged passages.\n\"Zappa in New York\" also featured a song about sex criminal Michael H. Kenyon, \"The Illinois Enema Bandit\", in which Don Pardo provides the opening narrative. Like many songs on the album, it contained numerous sexual references, leading to many critics objecting and being offended by the content. Zappa dismissed the criticism by noting that he was a journalist reporting on life as he saw it. Predating his later fight against censorship, he remarked: \"What do you make of a society that is so primitive that it clings to the belief that certain words in its language are so powerful that they could corrupt you the moment you hear them?\" The remaining albums released by Warner without Zappa's approval were \"Studio Tan\" in 1978 and \"Sleep Dirt\" and \"Orchestral Favorites\" in 1979. These releases were not promoted and were largely overlooked in midst of the press about Zappa's legal problems.\nZappa Records label.\nZappa released two of his most important projects in 1979. These were the best-selling album of his career, \"Sheik Yerbouti\", and what author Kelley Lowe called the \"bona fide masterpiece\", \"Joe's Garage\".\nThe double album \"Sheik Yerbouti\" appeared in March 1979 and was the first release to appear on Zappa Records. It contained the Grammy-nominated single \"Dancin' Fool\", which reached No.\u00a045 on the \"Billboard\" charts. It also contained \"Jewish Princess\", which received attention when a Jewish group, the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), attempted to prevent the song from receiving radio airplay due to its alleged anti-Semitic lyrics. Zappa vehemently denied any anti-Semitic sentiments, and dismissed the ADL as a \"noisemaking organization that tries to apply pressure on people in order to manufacture a stereotype image of Jews that suits their idea of a good time.\" The album's commercial success was attributable in part to \"Bobby Brown\". Due to its explicit lyrics about a young man's encounter with a \"dyke by the name of Freddie\", the song did not get airplay in the U.S., but it topped the charts in several European countries where English is not the primary language.\n\"Joe's Garage\" initially had to be released in two parts due to economic conditions. The first was a single LP \"Joe's Garage Act I\" in September 1979, followed by a double LP \"Joe's Garage Acts II and III\" in November 1979. The albums feature singer Ike Willis as lead character \"Joe\" in a rock opera about the danger of political systems, the suppression of freedom of speech and music\u2014inspired in part by the 1979 Islamic Iranian revolution that had made music illegal\u2014and about the \"strange relationship Americans have with sex and sexual frankness\". The first act contains the song \"Catholic Girls\" (a riposte to the controversies of \"Jewish Princess\"), and the title track, which was also released as a single. The second and third acts have extended guitar improvisations, which were recorded live, then combined with studio backing tracks. Zappa described this process as xenochrony. In this period the band included drummer Vinnie Colaiuta (with whom Zappa had a particularly strong musical rapport) \"Joe's Garage\" contains one of Zappa's most famous guitar \"signature pieces\", \"Watermelon in Easter Hay\". This work later appeared as a three-LP, or two-CD set.\nZappa had been known for his long hair since the mid 1960s, but he had Gail cut it short around August 1979. That fall he cancelled tour plans and stayed home to celebrate two of his children's birthdays in September. At this time Zappa also completed the Utility Muffin Research Kitchen (UMRK) studios, which were located at his house, thereby giving him complete freedom in his work.\nOn December 21, 1979, Zappa's movie \"Baby Snakes\" premiered in New York. The movie's tagline was \"A movie about people who do stuff that is not normal\". The 2\u00a0hour and 40\u00a0minutes movie was based on footage from concerts in New York around Halloween 1977, with a band featuring keyboardist Tommy Mars and percussionist Ed Mann (who would both return on later tours) as well as guitarist Adrian Belew. It also contained several extraordinary sequences of clay animation by Bruce Bickford who had earlier provided animation sequences to Zappa for a 1974 TV special (which became available on the 1982 video \"The Dub Room Special\"). The movie did not do well in theatrical distribution, but won the Premier Grand Prix at the First International Music Festival in Paris in 1981.\n1980s\u20131990s.\nZappa cut ties with Phonogram after the distributor refused to release his song \"I Don't Wanna Get Drafted\", which was recorded in February 1980. The single was released independently by Zappa in the United States and was picked up by CBS Records internationally.\nAfter spending much of 1980 on the road, Zappa released \"Tinsel Town Rebellion\" in 1981. It was the first release on his own Barking Pumpkin Records, and it contains songs taken from a 1979 tour, one studio track and material from the 1980 tours. The album is a mixture of complicated instrumentals and Zappa's use of \"sprechstimme\" (speaking song or voice)\u2014a compositional technique utilized by such composers as Arnold Schoenberg and Alban Berg\u2014showcasing some of the most accomplished bands Zappa ever had (mostly featuring drummer Vinnie Colaiuta). While some lyrics still raised controversy among critics, some of whom found them sexist, the political and sociological satire in songs like the title track and \"The Blue Light\" have been described as a \"hilarious critique of the willingness of the American people to believe anything\". The album is also notable for the presence of guitarist Steve Vai, who joined Zappa's touring band in late 1980.\nThe same year the double album \"You Are What You Is\" was released. The album included one complex instrumental, \"Theme from the 3rd Movement of Sinister Footwear\", but mainly consisted of rock songs with Zappa's sardonic social commentary\u2014satirical lyrics directed at teenagers, the media, and religious and political hypocrisy. \"Dumb All Over\" is a tirade on religion, as is \"Heavenly Bank Account\", wherein Zappa rails against TV evangelists such as Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson for their purported influence on the U.S. administration as well as their use of religion as a means of raising money. Songs like \"Society Pages\" and \"I'm a Beautiful Guy\" show Zappa's dismay with the Reagan era and its \"obscene pursuit of wealth and happiness\". Zappa made his only music video for a song from this album \u2013 \"You Are What You Is\" \u2013 directed by Jerry Watson, produced by Paul Flattery. The video was banned from MTV, though was later featured by Mike Judge in the Beavis &amp; Butthead episode \"Canoe\".\nIn 1981, Zappa also released three instrumental albums, \"Shut Up 'n Play Yer Guitar\", \"Shut Up 'N Play Yer Guitar Some More\", and \"The Return of the Son of Shut Up 'N Play Yer Guitar\", which were initially sold via mail order, but later released through CBS Records (now Sony Music Entertainment) due to popular demand.\nThe albums focus exclusively on Frank Zappa as a guitar soloist, and the tracks are predominantly live recordings from 1979 to 1980; they highlight Zappa's improvisational skills with \"beautiful performances from the backing group as well\". Another guitar-only album, \"Guitar\", was released in 1988, and a third, \"Trance-Fusion\", which Zappa completed shortly before his death, was released in 2006.\nZappa later expanded on his television appearances in a non-musical role. He was an actor or voice artist in episodes of \"Shelley Duvall's Faerie Tale Theatre\", \"Miami Vice\" and \"The Ren &amp; Stimpy Show\". A voice part in \"The Simpsons\" never materialized, to creator Matt Groening's disappointment (Groening was a neighbor of Zappa and a lifelong fan).\n\"Valley Girl\" and classical performances.\nIn May 1982, Zappa released \"Ship Arriving Too Late to Save a Drowning Witch\", which featured his biggest selling single ever, the Grammy Award-nominated song \"Valley Girl\" (topping out at No.\u00a032 on the \"Billboard\" charts). In her improvised lyrics to the song, Zappa's daughter Moon satirized the patois of teenage girls from the San Fernando Valley, which popularized many \"Valspeak\" expressions such as \"gag me with a spoon\", \"fer sure, fer sure\", \"grody to the max\", and \"barf out\".\nIn 1983, two different projects were released, beginning with \"The Man from Utopia,\" a rock-oriented work. The album is eclectic, featuring the vocal-led \"Dangerous Kitchen\" and \"The Jazz Discharge Party Hats\", both continuations of the sprechstimme excursions on \"Tinseltown Rebellion.\" The second album, \"London Symphony Orchestra, Vol. I\", contained orchestral Zappa compositions conducted by Kent Nagano and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra (LSO). A second record of these sessions, \"London Symphony Orchestra, Vol. II\" was released in 1987. The material was recorded under a tight schedule with Zappa providing all funding, helped by the commercial success of \"Valley Girl\". Zappa was not satisfied with the LSO recordings. One reason is \"Strictly Genteel\", which was recorded after the trumpet section had been out for drinks on a break: the track took 40 edits to hide out-of-tune notes.\nConductor Nagano, who was pleased with the experience, noted that \"in fairness to the orchestra, the music is humanly very, very difficult\". Some reviews noted that the recordings were the best representation of Zappa's orchestral work so far. In 1984 Zappa teamed again with Nagano and the Berkeley Symphony Orchestra for a live performance of \"A Zappa Affair\" with augmented orchestra, life-size puppets, and moving stage sets. Although critically acclaimed the work was a financial failure, and only performed twice. Zappa was invited by conference organizer Thomas Wells to be the keynote speaker at the American Society of University Composers at the Ohio State University. It was there Zappa delivered his famous \"Bingo! There Goes Your Tenure\" address, and had two of his orchestra pieces, \"Dupree's Paradise\" and \"Naval Aviation in Art?\" performed by the Columbus Symphony and ProMusica Chamber Orchestra of Columbus. Zappa's management relationship with Bennett Glotzer ended in 1984. From then on Gail acted as co-manager with Frank for all his business interests.\nSynclavier works.\nFor the remainder of his career, much of Zappa's work was influenced by his use of the Synclavier, an early digital synthesizer, as a compositional and performance tool. According to Zappa, \"With the Synclavier, any group of imaginary instruments can be invited to play the most difficult passages\u00a0... with \"one-millisecond\" accuracy\u2014every time\". Even though it essentially did away with the need for musicians, Zappa viewed the Synclavier and real-life musicians as separate.\nIn 1984, he released four albums. \"\" contains orchestral works commissioned and conducted by celebrated conductor, composer and pianist Pierre Boulez (who was listed as an influence on \"Freak Out!\"), and performed by his Ensemble InterContemporain. These were juxtaposed with premiere Synclavier pieces. Again, Zappa was not satisfied with the performances of his orchestral works, regarding them as under-rehearsed, but in the album liner notes he respectfully thanks Boulez's demands for precision. The Synclavier pieces stood in contrast to the orchestral works, as the sounds were electronically generated and not, as became possible shortly thereafter, sampled.\nThe album \"Thing-Fish\" was an ambitious three-record set in the style of a Broadway play dealing with a dystopian \"what-if\" scenario involving feminism, homosexuality, manufacturing and distribution of the AIDS virus, and a eugenics program conducted by the United States government. New vocals were combined with previously released tracks and new Synclavier music; \"the work is an extraordinary example of bricolage\".\n\"Francesco Zappa\", a Synclavier rendition of works by 18th-century composer Francesco Zappa, was also released in 1984.\nMerchandising.\nZappa's mail-order merchandise business, Barfko-Swill, established during the 1980s by Zappa's wife Gail, offers t-shirts, videos, posters, sheet music, and collector's recordings, most of them unavailable thru other media. Gail has explained why Barfko-Swill was founded: \"Just piles and piles of fan mail sitting around unanswered or with no response. The first thing that we did was put a list together from the fan mail and made a Barking Pumpkin t-shirt available which we still have \u2013 same old shirt, same old logo, same old price \u2013 just to see what would happen. Everybody would write to us and ask us if there was something they could get besides records. ...\" \"That was really the primary reason for getting into the business \u2013 for setting up Barfko-Swill \u2013 in those days was to be independent. To not have to rely on a major record company's interest and ability to promote your product. And that was what the challenge was for me. I prefer the autonomy.\"\nFrom 1983 to 1993, Barfko-Swill was run by Gerry Fialka, who also worked for Zappa as archivist, production assistant, tour assistant, and factotum, and answered the phone for Zappa's Barking Pumpkin Records hotline. Fialka appears giving a tour of Barfko-Swill in the 1987 VHS release (but not the original 1979 film release) of Zappa's film \"Baby Snakes\". He is credited on-screen as \"GERALD FIALKA Cool Guy Who Wraps Stuff So It Doesn't Break\". A short clip of this tour is also included in the 2020 documentary film \"Zappa\".\nDigital medium and last tour.\nAround 1986, Zappa undertook a comprehensive re-release program of his earlier vinyl recordings. He personally oversaw the remastering of all his 1960s, 1970s and early 1980s albums for the new digital compact disc medium. Certain aspects of these re-issues were criticized by some fans as being unfaithful to the original recordings. Nearly twenty years before the advent of online music stores, Zappa had proposed to replace \"phonographic record merchandising\" of music by \"direct digital-to-digital transfer\" through phone or cable TV (with royalty payments and consumer billing automatically built into the accompanying software). In 1989, Zappa considered his idea a \"miserable flop\".\nThe album \"Jazz from Hell,\" released in 1986, earned Zappa his first Grammy Award in 1988 for Best Rock Instrumental Performance. Except for one live guitar solo (\"St. Etienne\"), the album exclusively featured compositions brought to life by the Synclavier.\nZappa's last tour in a rock and jazz band format took place in 1988 with a 12-piece group which had a repertoire of over 100 (mostly Zappa) compositions, but which split under acrimonious circumstances before the tour was completed. The tour was documented on the albums \"Broadway the Hard Way\" (new material featuring songs with strong political emphasis); \"The Best Band You Never Heard in Your Life\" (Zappa \"standards\" and an eclectic collection of cover tunes, ranging from Maurice Ravel's \"Bol\u00e9ro\" to Led Zeppelin's \"Stairway to Heaven\"; and also, \"Make a Jazz Noise Here\". Parts are also found on \"You Can't Do That on Stage Anymore\", volumes 4 and 6. Recordings from this tour also appear on the 2006 album \"Trance-Fusion\".\nHealth deterioration.\nIn 1990, Zappa was diagnosed with terminal prostate cancer. The disease had been developing unnoticed for years and was considered inoperable. After the diagnosis, Zappa devoted most of his energy to modern orchestral and Synclavier works. Shortly before his death in 1993 he completed \"Civilization Phaze III\", a major Synclavier work which he had begun in the 1980s.\nIn 1991, Zappa was chosen to be one of four featured composers at the Frankfurt Festival in 1992 (the others were John Cage, Karlheinz Stockhausen, and Alexander Knaifel). Zappa was approached by the German chamber ensemble Ensemble Modern which was interested in playing his music for the event. Although ill, he invited them to Los Angeles for rehearsals of new compositions and new arrangements of older material. Zappa also got along with the musicians, and the concerts in Germany and Austria were set up for later in the year. Zappa also performed in 1991 in Prague, claiming that \"was the first time that he had a reason to play his guitar in 3 years\", and that that moment was just \"the beginning of a new country\", and asked the public to \"try to keep your country unique, do not change it into something else\".\nIn September 1992, the concerts went ahead as scheduled but Zappa could only appear at two in Frankfurt due to illness. At the first concert, he conducted the opening \"Overture\", and the final \"G-Spot Tornado\" as well as the theatrical \"Food Gathering in Post-Industrial America, 1992\" and \"Welcome to the United States\" (the remainder of the program was conducted by the ensemble's regular conductor Peter Rundel). Zappa received a 20-minute ovation. G-Spot Tornado was performed with Canadian dancer Louise Lecavalier. It was Zappa's last professional public appearance as the cancer was spreading to such an extent that he was in too much pain to enjoy an event that he otherwise found \"exhilarating\". Recordings from the concerts appeared on \"The Yellow Shark\" (1993), Zappa's last release during his lifetime, and some material from studio rehearsals appeared on the posthumous \"Everything Is Healing Nicely\" (1999).\nDeath.\nZappa died from prostate cancer on December 4, 1993, 17 days shy of his 53rd birthday, at his home with his wife and children by his side. At a private ceremony the following day, his body was buried in a grave at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery, in Los Angeles. The grave is unmarked. On December 6, his family publicly announced that \"Composer Frank Zappa left for his final tour just before 6:00\u00a0pm on Saturday\".\nMusical style and development.\nGenres.\nThe general phases of Zappa's music have been variously categorized under experimental rock, jazz, classical, avant-pop, experimental pop, comedy rock, doo-wop, jazz fusion, progressive rock, proto-prog, avant-jazz, and psychedelic rock.\nInfluences.\nZappa grew up influenced by avant-garde composers such as Edgard Var\u00e8se, Igor Stravinsky, and Anton Webern; 1950s blues artists Clarence \"Gatemouth\" Brown, Guitar Slim, Howlin' Wolf, Johnny \"Guitar\" Watson, and B.B. King; Egyptian composer Halim El-Dabh; R&amp;B and doo-wop groups (particularly local pachuco groups); and modern jazz. His own heterogeneous ethnic background, and the diverse social and cultural mix in and around greater Los Angeles, were crucial in the formation of Zappa as a practitioner of underground music and of his later distrustful and openly critical attitude towards \"mainstream\" social, political and musical movements. He frequently lampooned musical fads like psychedelia, rock opera and disco. Television also exerted a strong influence, as demonstrated by quotations from show themes and advertising jingles found in his later works.\nIn his book \"The Real Frank Zappa Book\", Frank credited composer Spike Jones for Zappa's frequent use of funny sound effects, mouth noises, and humorous percussion interjections. After explaining his ideas on this, he said \"I owe this part of my musical existence to Spike Jones.\"\nProject/Object.\nZappa's albums make extensive use of segued tracks, breaklessly joining the elements of his albums. His total output is unified by a conceptual continuity he termed \"Project/Object\", with numerous musical phrases, ideas, and characters reappearing across his albums. He also called it a \"conceptual continuity\", meaning that any project or album was part of a larger project. Everything was connected, and musical themes and lyrics reappeared in different form on later albums. Conceptual continuity clues are found throughout Zappa's entire \u0153uvre.\nTechniques.\nGuitar playing.\nZappa is widely recognized as one of the most significant electric guitar soloists. In a 1983 issue of \"Guitar World\", John Swenson declared: \"the fact of the matter is that [Zappa] is one of the greatest guitarists we have and is sorely unappreciated as such.\" His idiosyncratic style developed gradually and was mature by the early 1980s, by which time his live performances featured lengthy improvised solos during many songs. A November 2016 feature by the editors of \"Guitar Player\" magazine wrote: \"Brimming with sophisticated motifs and convoluted rhythms, Zappa's extended excursions are more akin to symphonies than they are to guitar solos.\" The symphonic comparison stems from his habit of introducing melodic themes that, like a symphony's main melodies, were repeated with variations throughout his solos. He was further described as using a wide variety of scales and modes, enlivened by \"unusual rhythmic combinations\". His left hand was capable of smooth legato technique, while Zappa's right was \"one of the fastest pick hands in the business.\" In 2016, Dweezil Zappa explained a distinctive element of his father's guitar improvisation technique was relying heavily on upstrokes much more than many other guitarists, who are more likely to use downstrokes with their picking.\nHis song \"Outside Now\" from \"Joe's Garage\" poked fun at the negative reception of Zappa's guitar technique by those more commercially minded, as the song's narrator lives in a world where music is outlawed and he imagines \"imaginary guitar notes that would irritate/An executive kind of guy\", lyrics that are followed by one of Zappa's characteristically quirky solos in 11/8 time. Zappa transcriptionist Kasper Sloots wrote, \"Zappa's guitar solos aren't meant to show off technically (Zappa hasn't claimed to be a big virtuoso on the instrument), but for the pleasure it gives trying to build a composition right in front of an audience without knowing what the outcome will be.\"\nZappa's guitar style was not without its critics. English guitarist and bandleader John McLaughlin, whose band Mahavishnu Orchestra toured with the Mothers of Invention in 1973, opined that Zappa was \"very interesting as a human being and a very interesting composer\" and that he \"was a very good musician but he was a dictator in his band,\" and that he \"was taking very long guitar solos [when performing live]\u201410\u201315 minute guitar solos and really he should have taken two or three minute guitar solos, because they were a little bit boring.\"\nIn 2000, he was ranked number 36 on VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock\". In 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked him at number 71 on its list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\", and in 2011 at number 22 on its list of the \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\".\nTape manipulation.\nIn New York, Zappa increasingly used tape editing as a compositional tool. A prime example is found on the double album \"Uncle Meat\" (1969), where the track \"King Kong\" is edited from various studio and live performances. Zappa had begun regularly recording concerts, and because of his insistence on precise tuning and timing, he was able to augment his studio productions with excerpts from live shows, and vice versa. Later, he combined recordings of different compositions into new pieces, irrespective of the tempo or meter of the sources. He dubbed this process \"xenochrony\" (strange synchronizations)\u2014reflecting the Greek \"xeno\" (alien or strange) and \"chronos\" (time).\nPersonal life.\nZappa was married to Kathryn J. \"Kay\" Sherman from 1960 to 1963. In 1967, he married Adelaide Gail Sloatman. He and his second wife had four children: Moon Unit, Dweezil, Ahmet, and Diva.\nFollowing Zappa's death, his widow Gail created the Zappa Family Trust, which owns the rights to Zappa's music and some other creative output: more than 60 albums were released during Zappa's lifetime and 40 posthumously. Upon Gail's death in October 2015, the Zappa children received shares of the trust; Ahmet and Diva received 30% each, Moon Unit and Dweezil received 20% each.\nBeliefs and politics.\nDrugs.\nZappa stated, \"Drugs do not become a problem until the person who uses the drugs does something to you, or does something that would affect your life that you don't want to have happen to you, like an airline pilot who crashes because he was full of drugs.\" Zappa was a heavy tobacco smoker for most of his life, and critical of anti-tobacco campaigns.\nWhile he disapproved of drug use, he criticized the War on Drugs, comparing it to alcohol prohibition, and stated that the United States Treasury would benefit from the decriminalization and regulation of drugs. Describing his philosophical views, Zappa stated, \"I believe that people have a right to decide their own destinies; people own themselves. I also believe that, in a democracy, government exists because (and only so long as) individual citizens give it a 'temporary license to exist'\u2014in exchange for a promise that it will behave itself. In a democracy, you own the government\u2014it doesn't own you.\"\nGovernment and religion.\nIn a 1991 interview, Zappa reported that he was a registered Democrat but added \"that might not last long\u2014I'm going to shred that.\" Describing his political views, Zappa categorized himself as a \"practical conservative.\" He favored limited government and low taxes; he also stated that he approved of national defense, social security, and other federal programs, but only if recipients of such programs are willing and able to pay for them. He opposed military drafts, saying that military service should be voluntary. He favored capitalism, entrepreneurship, and independent business, stating that musicians could make more from owning their own businesses than from collecting royalties. He opposed communism, stating, \"A system that doesn't allow ownership... has\u2014to put it mildly\u2014a fatal design flaw.\" He always encouraged his fans to register to vote on album covers, and throughout 1988, he had registration booths at his concerts. He even considered running for president of the United States as an independent.\nZappa was an atheist. He recalled his parents being \"pretty religious\" and trying to make him go to Catholic school despite his resentment. He felt disgust towards organized religion (Christianity in particular) because he believed that it promoted ignorance and anti-intellectualism. He held the view that the Garden of Eden story shows that the essence of Christianity is to oppose gaining knowledge. Some of his songs, concert performances, interviews and public debates in the 1980s criticized and derided Republicans and their policies\u2014President Ronald Reagan, the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), televangelism, and the Christian Right\u2014and warned that the United States government was in danger of becoming a \"fascist theocracy.\"\nIn early 1990, Zappa visited Czechoslovakia at the request of President V\u00e1clav Havel. A longtime admirer of Zappa's commitment to individual freedom, Havel designated him as Czechoslovakia's \"Special Ambassador to the West on Trade, Culture and Tourism.\" Havel was a lifelong fan of Zappa, who had great influence in the avant-garde and underground scene in Central Europe in the 1970s and 1980s (a Czech rock group that was imprisoned in 1976 took its name from Zappa's 1968 song \"Plastic People\"). Under pressure from Secretary of State, James Baker, Zappa's posting (as Czech 'Special Ambassador') was withdrawn. Havel made Zappa an unofficial cultural attach\u00e9 instead. Zappa planned to develop an international consulting enterprise to facilitate trade between the former Eastern Bloc and Western businesses.\nAnti-censorship.\nZappa expressed opinions on censorship when he appeared on CNN's \"Crossfire\" TV series and debated issues with \"Washington Times\" commentator John Lofton in 1986. On September 19, 1985, Zappa testified before the United States Senate Commerce, Technology, and Transportation committee, attacking the Parents Music Resource Center or PMRC, a music organization co-founded by Tipper Gore, wife of then-senator Al Gore. The PMRC consisted of many wives of politicians, including the wives of five members of the committee, and was founded to address the issue of song lyrics with sexual or satanic content. During Zappa's testimony, he stated that there was a clear conflict of interest between the PMRC due to the relations of its founders to the politicians who were then trying to pass what he referred to as the \"Blank Tape Tax.\" Kandy Stroud, a spokeswoman for the PMRC, announced that Senator Gore (who co-founded the committee) was a co-sponsor of that legislation. Zappa suggested that record labels were trying to get the bill passed quickly through committees, one of which was chaired by Senator Strom Thurmond, who was also affiliated with the PMRC. Zappa further pointed out that this committee was being used as a distraction from that bill being passed, which would lead only to the benefit of a select few in the music industry.\nZappa saw their activities as on a path towards censorship and called their proposal for voluntary labelling of records with explicit content \"extortion\" of the music industry.\nIn his prepared statement, he said:\nThe PMRC proposal is an ill-conceived piece of nonsense which fails to deliver any real benefits to children, infringes the civil liberties of people who are not children, and promises to keep the courts busy for years dealing with the interpretational and enforcemental problems inherent in the proposal's design. It is my understanding that, in law, First Amendment issues are decided with a preference for the least restrictive alternative. In this context, the PMRC's demands are the equivalent of treating dandruff by decapitation.\u00a0... The establishment of a rating system, voluntary or otherwise, opens the door to an endless parade of moral quality control programs based on things certain Christians do not like. What if the next bunch of Washington wives demands a large yellow \"J\" on all material written or performed by Jews, in order to save helpless children from exposure to concealed Zionist doctrine?\nZappa set excerpts from the PMRC hearings to Synclavier music in his composition \"Porn Wars\" on the 1985 album \"Frank Zappa Meets the Mothers of Prevention\", and the full recording was released in 2010 as \"Congress Shall Make No Law...\" Zappa is heard interacting with Senators Fritz Hollings, Slade Gorton and Al Gore.\nLegacy.\nZappa had a controversial critical standing during his lifetime. As Geoffrey Himes noted in 1993 after the artist's death, Zappa was hailed as a genius by conductor Kent Nagano and nominated by Czechoslovakian President V\u00e1clav Havel to the country's cultural ambassadorship, but he was in his lifetime rejected twice for admission into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and been found by critics to lack emotional depth. In \"\" (1981), Robert Christgau dismissed Zappa's music as \"sexist adolescent drivel ... with meters and voicings and key changes that are as hard to play as they are easy to forget.\" According to Himes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Admirers and detractors agree that Zappa's music\u2014with its odd time signatures, unorthodox harmonies and fiendishly difficult lines\u2014boasts a rare cerebral complexity. But that's where the agreement ends. Some fans find his sophomoric jokes (\"Don't Eat the Yellow Snow\") and pop music parodies (\"Sheik Yerbouti\") a crucial counterbalance to the rarefied density of the music; other devotees find the jokes an irrelevant sideshow to music best appreciated in a chamber or orchestral setting. The critics find the humor's smug iconoclasm a symptom of the essential emptiness of Zappa's intellectual exercises.\nAcclaim and honors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrank Zappa was one of the first to try tearing down the barriers between rock, jazz, and classical music. In the late Sixties his Mothers of Invention would slip from Stravinsky's \"Petroushka\" into The Dovells' \"Bristol Stomp\" before breaking down into saxophone squeals inspired by Albert Ayler\n\u2014 \"The Rolling Stone Illustrated History of Rock &amp; Roll\", p. 497\n\"The Rolling Stone Album Guide\" (2004) writes: \"Frank Zappa dabbled in virtually all kinds of music\u2014and, whether guised as a satirical rocker, jazz-rock fusionist, guitar virtuoso, electronics wizard, or orchestral innovator, his eccentric genius was undeniable.\" Even though his work drew inspiration from many different genres, Zappa was seen as establishing a coherent and personal expression.\nIn 1980, biographer David Walley noted that \"The whole structure of his music is unified, not neatly divided by dates or time sequences and it is all building into a composite\". \nOn commenting on Zappa's music, politics and philosophy, Barry Miles noted in 2004 that they cannot be separated: \"It was all one; all part of his 'conceptual continuity'.\"\n\"Guitar Player\" devoted a special issue to Zappa in 1992, and asked on the cover \"Is FZ America's Best Kept Musical Secret?\" Editor Don Menn remarked that the issue was about \"The most important composer to come out of modern popular music\".\nAmong those contributing to the issue was composer and musicologist Nicolas Slonimsky, who conducted premiere performances of works of Ives and Var\u00e8se in the 1930s. He became friends with Zappa in the 1980s, and said, \"I admire everything Frank does, because he practically created the new musical millennium. He does beautiful, beautiful work\u00a0... It has been my luck to have lived to see the emergence of this totally new type of music.\"\nConductor Kent Nagano remarked in the same issue that \"Frank is a genius. That's a word I don't use often\u00a0... In Frank's case it is not too strong\u00a0... He is extremely literate musically. I'm not sure if the general public knows that.\" Pierre Boulez told \"Musician\" magazine's posthumous Zappa tribute article that Zappa \"was an exceptional figure because he was part of the worlds of rock and classical music and that both types of his work would survive.\"\nIn 1994, jazz magazine \"DownBeat\"'s critics poll placed Zappa in its Hall of Fame. Zappa was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995. There, it was written that \"Frank Zappa was rock and roll's sharpest musical mind and most astute social critic. He was the most prolific composer of his age, and he bridged genres\u2014rock, jazz, classical, avant-garde and even novelty music\u2014with masterful ease\". He was ranked number 36 on VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock\" in 2000.\nIn 2005, the U.S. National Recording Preservation Board included \"We're Only in It for the Money\" in the National Recording Registry as \"Frank Zappa's inventive and iconoclastic album presents a unique political stance, both anti-conservative and anti-counterculture, and features a scathing satire on hippiedom and America's reactions to it\". The same year, \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked him at No.\u00a071 on its list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time.\nIn 2011, he was ranked at No.\u00a022 on the list of the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time by the same magazine. In 2016, \"Guitar World\" magazine placed Zappa atop its list of \"15 of the best progressive rock guitarists through the years.\"\nThe street of Partinico where his father lived at number 13, Via Zammat\u00e0, has been renamed to Via Frank Zappa.\nSince his death, several musicians have been considered by critics as filling the artistic niche left behind by Zappa, in view of their prolific output, eclecticism and other qualities, including Devin Townsend, Mike Patton and Omar Rodr\u00edguez-L\u00f3pez.\nGrammy Awards.\nIn the course of his career, Zappa was nominated for nine competitive Grammy Awards, which resulted in two wins (one posthumous). In 1998, he received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArtists influenced by Zappa.\nMany musicians, bands and orchestras from diverse genres have been influenced by Zappa's music. Rock artists such as The Plastic People of the Universe, Alice Cooper, Larry LaLonde of Primus, Fee Waybill of the Tubes all cite Zappa's influence, as do progressive, alternative, electronic and avant-garde/experimental rock artists like Can, Pere Ubu, Yes, Soft Machine, Henry Cow, Faust, Devo, Kraftwerk, Trey Anastasio and Jon Fishman of Phish, Jeff Buckley, John Frusciante, Steven Wilson, and The Aristocrats. \nPaul McCartney regarded \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" as the Beatles' \"Freak Out!.\" Jimi Hendrix and heavy rock and metal acts like Black Sabbath, Living Colour, Simon Phillips, Mike Portnoy, Warren DeMartini, Alex Skolnick, Steve Vai, Strapping Young Lad, System of a Down, and Clawfinger have acknowledged Zappa as inspiration. On the classical music scene, Tomas Ulrich, Meridian Arts Ensemble, Ensemble Ambrosius and the Fireworks Ensemble regularly perform Zappa's compositions and quote his influence. Contemporary jazz musicians and composers Bobby Sanabria, Bill Frisell and John Zorn are inspired by Zappa, as is funk legend George Clinton.\nOther artists affected by Zappa include ambient composer Brian Eno, new age pianist George Winston, electronic composer Bob Gluck, parodist artist and disk jockey Dr. Demento, parodist and novelty composer \"Weird Al\" Yankovic, industrial music pioneer Genesis P-Orridge, singer Cree Summer, noise music artist Masami Akita of Merzbow, the Italian band Elio e le Storie Tese and Chilean composer Cristi\u00e1n Crisosto from Fulano and Mediabanda.\nReferences in arts and sciences.\nScientists from various fields have honored Zappa by naming new discoveries after him. In 1967, paleontologist Leo P. Plas, Jr., identified an extinct mollusc in Nevada and named it \"Amaurotoma zappa\" with the motivation that, \"The specific name, \"zappa\", honors Frank Zappa\".\nIn the 1980s, biologist Ed Murdy named a genus of gobiid fishes of New Guinea \"Zappa\", with a species named \"Zappa confluentus\". Biologist Ferdinando Boero named a Californian jellyfish \"Phialella zappai\" (1987), noting that he had \"pleasure in naming this species after the modern music composer\".\nBelgian biologists Bosmans and Bosselaers discovered in the early 1980s a Cameroonese spider, which they in 1994 named \"Pachygnatha zappa\" because \"the ventral side of the abdomen of the female of this species strikingly resembles the artist's legendary moustache\".\nA gene of the bacterium \"Proteus mirabilis\" that causes urinary tract infections was in 1995 named \"zapA\" by three biologists from Maryland. In their scientific article, they \"especially thank the late Frank Zappa for inspiration and assistance with genetic nomenclature\". Repeating regions of the genome of the human tumor virus KSHV were named \"frnk\", \"vnct\" and \"zppa\" in 1996 by Yuan Chang and Patrick S. Moore who discovered the virus. Also, a 143 base pair repeat sequence occurring at two positions was named \"waka/jwka\".\nIn the late 1990s, American paleontologists Marc Salak and Halard L. Lescinsky discovered a metazoan fossil, and named it \"Spygori zappania\" to honor \"the late Frank Zappa\u00a0... whose mission paralleled that of the earliest paleontologists: to challenge conventional and traditional beliefs when such beliefs lacked roots in logic and reason\".\nIn 1994, lobbying efforts initiated by psychiatrist John Scialli led the International Astronomical Union's Minor Planet Center to name an asteroid in Zappa's honor: 3834 Zappafrank. The asteroid was discovered in 1980 by Czechoslovakian astronomer Ladislav Bro\u017eek, and the citation for its naming says that \"Zappa was an eclectic, self-trained artist and composer\u00a0... Before 1989 he was regarded as a symbol of democracy and freedom by many people in Czechoslovakia\".\nIn 1995, a bust of Zappa by sculptor Konstantinas Bogdanas was installed in Vilnius, the Lithuanian capital . The choice of Zappa was explained as \"a symbol that would mark the end of communism, but at the same time express that it wasn't always doom and gloom.\" A replica was offered to the city of Baltimore in 2008, and on September 19, 2010\u2014the twenty-fifth anniversary of Zappa's testimony to the U.S. Senate\u2014a ceremony dedicating the replica was held, and the bust was unveiled at a library in the city.\nIn 2002, a bronze bust was installed in German city Bad Doberan, location of the \"Zappanale\" since 1990, an annual music festival celebrating Zappa. At the initiative of musicians community ORWOhaus, the city of Berlin named a street in the Marzahn district \"Frank-Zappa-Stra\u00dfe\" in 2007. The same year, Baltimore mayor Sheila Dixon proclaimed August 9 as the city's official \"Frank Zappa Day\" citing Zappa's musical accomplishments as well as his defense of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.\n\"Zappa\" documentary.\nThe biographical documentary \"Zappa\", directed by Alex Winter and released on November 27, 2020, includes previously unreleased footage from Zappa's personal vault, to which he was granted access by the Zappa Family Trust.\nDiscography.\nDuring his lifetime, Zappa released 62 albums. Since 1994, the Zappa Family Trust has released 63 posthumous albums, making a total of 125 albums. The distributor of Zappa's recorded output is Universal Music Enterprises. In June 2022 the Zappa Trust announced that it had sold Zappa's entire catalog to Universal Music, including master tapes, song copyrights and trademarks.\nTour.\nTour and the relative video:\nTimeline of videos with tour:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10673", "revid": "20010540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10673", "title": "Fagales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nThe Fagales are an order of flowering plants, including some of the best-known trees. The order name is derived from genus \"Fagus\", beeches. They belong among the rosid group of dicotyledons. The families and genera currently included are as follows:\nThe older Cronquist system only included four families (Betulaceae, Corylaceae, Fagaceae, Ticodendraceae; Corylaceae now being included within Betulaceae); this arrangement is followed by, for example, the World Checklist of selected plant families. The other families were split into three different orders, placed among the Hamamelidae. The Casuarinales comprised the single family Casuarinaceae, the Juglandales comprised the Juglandaceae and Rhoipteleaceae, and the Myricales comprised the remaining forms (plus \"Balanops\"). The change is due to studies suggesting the Myricales, so defined, are paraphyletic to the other two groups.\nCharacteristics.\nMost Fagales are wind pollinated and are monoecious with unisexual flowers.\nEvolutionary history.\nThe oldest member of the order is the flower \"Soepadmoa cupulata\" preserved in the late Turonian-Coniacian New Jersey amber, which is a mosaic with characteristics characteristic of both \"Nothofagus\" and other Fagales, suggesting that the ancestor of all Fagales was \"Nothofagus\"-like.\nSystematics.\nModern molecular phylogenetics suggest the following relationships:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10674", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10674", "title": "Fabales", "text": "Order of flowering plants in the dicots\nThe Fabales are an order of flowering plants included in the rosid group of the eudicots in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group II classification system. In the APG II circumscription, this order includes the families Fabaceae or legumes (including the subfamilies Caesalpinioideae, Mimosoideae, and Faboideae), Quillajaceae, Polygalaceae or milkworts (including the families Diclidantheraceae, Moutabeaceae, and Xanthophyllaceae), and Surianaceae. Under the Cronquist system and some other plant classification systems, the order Fabales contains only the family Fabaceae. In the classification system of Dahlgren the Fabales were in the superorder Fabiflorae (also called Fabanae) with three families corresponding to the subfamilies of Fabaceae in APG II. The other families treated in the Fabales by the APG II classification were placed in separate orders by Cronquist, the Polygalaceae within its own order, the Polygalales, and the Quillajaceae and Surianaceae within the Rosales. \nThe Fabaceae, as the third-largest plant family in the world, contain most of the diversity of the Fabales, the other families making up a comparatively small portion of the order's diversity. Research in the order is largely focused on the Fabaceae, due in part to its great biological diversity, and to its importance as food plants. The Polygalaceae are fairly well researched among plant families, in part due to the large diversity of the genus \"Polygala\", and other members of the family being food plants for various Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species. While taxonomists using molecular phylogenetic techniques find strong support for the order, questions remain about the morphological relationships of the Quillajaceae and Surianaceae to the rest of the order, due in part to limited research on these families.\nDistribution.\nThe Fabales are a cosmopolitan order of plants, except only the subfamily Papilionoideae (Faboideae) of the Fabaceae are well dispersed throughout the northern part of the North Temperate Zone.\nPhylogeny.\nThe phylogeny of the Fabales is shown below.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10676", "revid": "45944768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10676", "title": "French", "text": "French may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10678", "revid": "1153079546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10678", "title": "List of French people", "text": "French people of note include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nActors.\nA\u2013C.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nD\u2013L.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nM\u2013Z.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArchitects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArtists.\nPhotographers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSculptors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAthletes.\nA\u2013J.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nK\u2013Z.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAuthors.\nA\u2013E.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nF\u2013O.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nP\u2013Z.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAviators.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBusiness.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChefs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nColonial administrators.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCraftspeople and inventors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCriminals.\nFor collaboration with Nazi Germany see also the \"politicians\" section.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDancers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFashion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilmmakers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHumorists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMusicians.\nA\u2013J.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nK\u2013Z.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhilosophers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPoliticians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nResistance workers.\nResistance workers during the German occupation of France in World War II\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSocial activists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSoldiers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTheologians.\nO.P. (\"Ordo Praedicatorum\") is the abbreviation used to indicate that someone is/was a member of the Dominican order, a Catholic religious order.\nS.J. (\"Societas Iesu\") is the abbreviation used to indicate that someone is/was a member of the Society of Jesus, another Catholic religious order.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOthers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10679", "revid": "36724814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10679", "title": "Five-card draw", "text": "Set of poker rules\nFive-card draw (also known as Cantrell draw) is a poker variant that is considered the simplest variant of poker, and is the basis for video poker. As a result, it is often the first variant learned by new players. It is commonly played in home games but rarely played in casino and tournament play. The variant is also offered by some online venues, although it is not as popular as other variants such as seven-card stud and Texas hold 'em.\nGameplay.\nIn casino play the first betting round begins with the player to the left of the big blind, and subsequent rounds begin with the player to the dealer's left. Home games typically use an ante; the first betting round begins with the player to the dealer's left, and the second round begins with the player who opened the first round.\nPlay begins with each player being dealt five cards, one at a time, all face down. The remaining deck is placed aside, often protected by placing a chip or other marker on it. Players pick up the cards and hold them in their hands, being careful to keep them concealed from the other players, then a round of betting occurs.\nIf more than one player remains after the first round, the \"draw\" phase begins. Each player specifies how many of their cards they wish to replace and discards them. The deck is retrieved, and each player is dealt in turn from the deck the same number of cards they discarded so that each player again has five cards.\nA second \"after the draw\" betting round occurs beginning with the player to the dealer's left or else beginning with the player who opened the first round (the latter is common when antes are used instead of blinds). This is followed by a showdown, if more than one player remains, in which the player with the best hand wins the pot.\nHouse rules.\nA common \"house rule\" in some places is that a player may not replace more than three cards, unless they draw four cards while keeping an ace (or wild card). This rule is useful for low-stakes social games where many players will stay for the draw, and will help avoid depletion of the deck. In more serious games such as those played in casinos it is unnecessary and generally not used. However, a rule used by many casinos is that a player is not allowed to draw five consecutive cards from the deck. In this case, if a player wishes to replace all five of their cards, that player is given four of them in turn, the other players are given their draws, and then the dealer returns to that player to give the fifth replacement card; if no other player draws it is necessary to deal a burn card first.\nAnother common house rule is that the bottom card of the deck is never given as a replacement, to avoid the possibility of someone who might have seen it during the deal using that information. If the deck is depleted during the draw before all players have received their replacements, the last players can receive cards chosen randomly from among those discarded by previous players. For example, if the last player to draw wants three replacements but there are only two cards remaining in the deck, the dealer gives the player the one top card he can give, then shuffles together the bottom card of the deck, the burn card, and the earlier players' discards (but not the player's own discards), and finally deals two more replacements to the last player.\nSample deal.\nThe sample deal is being played by four players as shown to the right with Alice dealing. All four players ante $1. Alice deals five cards to each player and places the deck aside.\nBob opens the betting round by betting $5. Carol folds, David calls, and Alice calls, closing the betting round.\nBob now declares that he wishes to replace three of his cards, so he removes those three cards from his hand and discards them. Alice retrieves the deck, deals a burn card, then deals three cards directly to Bob, who puts them in his hand. David discards one card, and Alice deals one card to him from the deck. Alice now discards three of her own cards, and replaces them with three from the top of the deck.\nNow a second betting round begins. Bob checks, David checks, Alice bets $10, Bob folds, David raises $16, and Alice calls, ending the second betting round and going directly into a showdown. David shows a flush, and Alice shows two pair, so David takes the pot.\nStripped deck variant.\nFive-card draw is sometimes played with a stripped deck. This variant is commonly known as \"seven-to-ace\" or \"ace-to-seven\" (abbreviated as A-7 or 7-A). It can be played by up to five players. When four or fewer players play, a normal 32-card deck without jokers, with ranks ranging from ace to seven, is used. With five players, the sixes are added to make a 36-card deck. The deck thus contains only eight or nine different card ranks, compared to 13 in a standard deck. This affects the probabilities of making specific hands, so a flush ranks above a full house and below four of a kind. Many smaller online poker rooms, such as Boss Media, spread the variant, although it is unheard of in terrestrial casinos.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10680", "revid": "561624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10680", "title": "Flaming (Internet)", "text": "Act of insulting and offending people on the internet\nFlaming, also known as roasting, is the act of posting insults, often including profanity or other offensive language, on the internet. This term should not be confused with the term trolling, which is the act of someone causing discord online or in person. Flaming emerged from the anonymity that Internet forums provide cover for users to act more aggressively. Anonymity can lead to disinhibition, which results in the swearing, offensive, and hostile language characteristic of flaming. Lack of social cues, less accountability of face-to-face communications, textual mediation and deindividualization are also likely factors. Deliberate flaming is carried out by individuals known as flamers, which are specifically motivated to incite flaming. These users specialize in flaming and target specific aspects of a controversial conversation.\nWhile these behaviors may be typical or expected in certain types of forums, they can have dramatic, adverse effects in others. Flame wars can have a lasting impact on some internet communities where even once a flame war has concluded a division or even dissolution may occur.\nThe pleasant commentaries within a chat room or message board can be limited by a \"war of words\" fight or \"flaming\" with the intent to seek out a negative reaction from the reader. Humphreys defines flaming as \"the use of hostile language online, including swearing, insults and otherwise offensive language\"etc. Flaming by perpetrators within the online community is commonly received by messaging through text and rarely by face to face or video communication. By basing their conversations on text and not taking full accountability as the \"flamer\", they have a reduced self-awareness of others feelings, emotions and reactions based on the comments that they provide within the virtual community. The reader now has the perception that this \"flamer\" is difficult, rude and possibly a bully. The flamer may have limited social cues, emotional intelligence to adapt to others reactions and lack of awareness of how they are being perceived. Their personal social norms, may be considered disrespectful to the reader that has different social norms, education and experience with what is and is not appropriate within virtual communities.\nThe individuals that create an environment of flaming and hostility, lead the readers to disengage with the offender and may potentially leave the message board and chat room. The continual use of flaming within the online community can create a disruptive and negative experience for those involved and can lead to limited involvement and engagement within the original chat room and program.\nPurpose.\nSocial researchers have investigated flaming, coming up with several different theories about the phenomenon. These include deindividuation and reduced awareness of other people's feelings (online disinhibition effect), conformance to perceived norms, miscommunication caused by the lack of social cues available in face-to-face communication, and anti-normative behavior.\nJacob Borders, in discussing participants' internal modeling of a discussion, says:Mental models are fuzzy, incomplete, and imprecisely stated. Furthermore, within a single individual, mental models change with time, even during the flow of a single conversation. The human mind assembles a few relationships to fit the context of a discussion. As debate shifts, so do the mental models. Even when only a single topic is being discussed, each participant in a conversation employs a different mental model to interpret the subject. Fundamental assumptions differ but are never brought into the open. Goals are different but left unstated. It is little wonder that compromise takes so long. And even when consensus is reached, the underlying assumptions may be fallacies that lead to laws and programs that fail. The human mind is not adapted to understanding correctly the consequences implied by a mental model. A mental model may be correct in structure and assumptions but, even so, the human mind\u2014either individually or as a group consensus\u2014is apt to draw the wrong implications for the future.Thus, online conversations often involve a variety of assumptions and motives unique to each individual user. Without social context, users are often helpless to know the intentions of their counterparts. In addition to the problems of conflicting mental models often present in online discussions, the inherent lack of face-to-face communication online can encourage hostility. Professor Norman Johnson, commenting on the propensity of Internet posters to flame one another, states:The literature suggests that, compared to face-to-face, the increased incidence of flaming when using computer-mediated communication is due to reductions in the transfer of social cues, which decrease individuals' concern for social evaluation and fear of social sanctions or reprisals. When social identity and ingroup status are salient, computer mediation can decrease flaming because individuals focus their attention on the social context (and associated norms) rather than themselves.A lack of social context creates an element of anonymity, which allows users to feel insulated from the forms of punishment they might receive in a more conventional setting. Johnson identifies several precursors to flaming between users, whom he refers to as \"negotiation partners,\" since Internet communication typically involves back-and-forth interactions similar to a negotiation. Flaming incidents usually arise in response to a perception of one or more negotiation partners being unfair. Perceived unfairness can include a lack of consideration for an individual's vested interests, unfavorable treatment (especially when the flamer has been considerate of other users), and misunderstandings aggravated by the inability to convey subtle indicators like non-verbal cues and facial expressions.\nFactors.\nThere are multiple factors that play into why people would get involved with flaming. For instance, there is the anonymity factor and that people can use different means to have their identity hidden. Through the hiding of one's identity people can build a new persona and act in a way that they normally would not when they have their identity known. Another factor in flaming is proactive aggression \"which is initiated without perceived threat or provocation\" and those who are recipients of flaming may counter with flaming of their own and utilize reactive aggression. Another factor that goes into flaming are the different communication variables. For instance, offline communications networks can impact the way people act online and can lead them to engage in flaming. Finally, there is the factor of verbal aggression and how people who engage in verbal aggression will use those tactics when they engage in flaming online.\nFlaming can range from subtle to extremely aggressive in online behaviors, such as derogatory images, certain emojis used in combination, and even the use of capital letters. These things can show a pattern of behavior used to convey certain emotions online. Victims should do their best to avoid fighting back in an attempt to prevent a war of words. Flaming extends past social media interactions. Flaming can also take place through emails, and it may not matter so much whether someone calls an email a \"flame\", is based on whether she or he considers an email to be hostile, aggressive, insulting, or offensive. What matters is how the person receives the interaction. So much is lost in translation when communicating online versus in person, that it is hard to distinguish someone's intent.\nHistory.\nEvidence of debates which resulted in insults being exchanged quickly back and forth between two parties can be found throughout history. Arguments over the ratification of the United States Constitution were often socially and emotionally heated and intense, with many attacking one another through local newspapers. Such interactions have always been part of literary criticism. For example, Ralph Waldo Emerson's contempt for Jane Austen's works often extended to the author herself, with Emerson describing her as \"without genius, wit, or knowledge of the world\". In turn, Thomas Carlyle called Emerson a \"hoary-headed toothless baboon\"\nIn the modern era, \"flaming\" was used at East Coast engineering schools in the United States as a present participle in a crude expression to describe an irascible individual and by extension to such individuals on the earliest Internet chat rooms and message boards. Internet flaming was mostly observed in Usenet newsgroups although it was known to occur in the WWIVnet and FidoNet computer networks as well. It was subsequently used in other parts of speech with much the same meaning.\nThe term \"flaming\" was seen on Usenet newsgroups in the eighties, where the start of a flame was sometimes indicated by typing \"FLAME ON\", then \"FLAME OFF\" when the flame section of the post was complete. This is a reference to both The Human Torch of the Fantastic Four, who used those words when activating his flame abilities, and to the way text processing programs of the time worked, by placing commands before and after text to indicate how it should appear when printed.\nThe term \"flaming\" is documented in \"The Hacker's Dictionary\", which in 1983 defined it as \"to speak rabidly or incessantly on an uninteresting topic or with a patently ridiculous attitude\". The meaning of the word has diverged from this definition since then.\nJerry Pournelle in 1986 explained why he wanted a kill file for BIX:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;whereas an open computer conference begins with a small number of well-informed and highly interested participants, it soon attracts others. That's all right; it's supposed to attract others. Where else would you get new ideas? But soon it attracts too many, far too many, and some of them are not only ignorant but aggressively \"mis\"informed. Dilution takes place. Arguments replace discussions. Tempers are frayed.\nThe result is that while computer conferencing began by saving time, it starts to eat up all the time it saved and more. Communications come from dozens of sources. Much of it is redundant. Some of it is stupid. The user spends more and more time dealing with irrelevancies. One day the user wakes up, decides the initial euphoria was spurious, and logs off, never to return. This is known as burnout, and it's apparently quite common.\nHe added, \"I noticed something: most of the irritation came from a handful of people, sometimes only one or two. If I could only ignore them, the computer conferences were still valuable. Alas, it's not always easy to do\".\nComputer-mediated communication (CMC) research has spent a significant amount of time and effort describing and predicting engagement in uncivil, aggressive online communication. Specifically, the literature has described aggressive, insulting behavior as \"flaming\", which has been defined as hostile verbal behaviors, the uninhibited expression of hostility, insults, and ridicule, and hostile comments directed towards a person or organization within the context of CMC.\nTypes.\nFlame trolling.\nFlame trolling is the posting of a provocative or offensive message, known as \"flamebait\", to a public Internet discussion group, such as a forum, newsgroup or mailing list, with the intent of provoking an angry response (a \"flame\") or argument.\nFlamebait can provide the poster with a controlled trigger-and-response setting in which to anonymously engage in conflicts and indulge in aggressive behavior without facing the consequences that such behavior might bring in a face-to-face encounter. In other instances, flamebait may be used to reduce a forum's use by angering the forum users. In 2012, it was announced that the US State Department would start flame trolling jihadists as part of Operation Viral Peace.\nAmong the characteristics of inflammatory behavior, the use of entirely capitalized messages, or the multiple repetition of exclamation marks, along with profanity have been identified as typical.\nFlame war.\nA flame war results when multiple users engage in provocative responses to an original post, which is sometimes flamebait. Flame wars often draw in many users, including those trying to defuse the flame war, and can quickly turn into a mass flame war that overshadows regular forum discussion.\nResolving a flame war can be difficult, as it is often hard to determine who is really responsible for the degradation of a reasonable discussion into a flame war. Someone who posts a contrary opinion in a strongly focused discussion forum may be easily labeled a \"baiter\", \"flamer\", or \"troll\".\nFlame wars can become intense and can include \"death threats, ad hominem invective, and textual amplifiers,\u201d but to some sociologists flame wars can actually bring people together. What is being said in a flame war should not be taken too seriously since the harsh words are a part of flaming.\nAn approach to resolving a flame war or responding to flaming is to communicate openly with the offending users. Acknowledging mistakes, offering to help resolve the disagreement, making clear, reasoned arguments, and even self-deprecation have all been noted as worthwhile strategies to end such disputes. However, others prefer to simply ignore flaming, noting that, in many cases, if the flamebait receives no attention, it will quickly be forgotten as forum discussions carry on. Unfortunately, this can motivate trolls to intensify their activities, creating additional distractions.\n\"Taking the bait\" or \"feeding the troll\" refers to someone who responds to the original message regardless of whether they are aware the original message was intended to provoke a response. Often when someone takes the bait, others will point this out to them with the acronym \"YHBT\", which is short for \"You have been trolled\", or reply with \"don't feed the trolls\". Forum users will usually not give the troll acknowledgement; that just \"feeds the troll\".\nIn sociology, history, or any kind of online ethnographic academic study, flame wars as a corpus, in a STS approach of controversies, may be used to understand what is at stake in a community. The idea is that the flame war drives the actors into abandoning a polite stance and forces them to engage into debate and to unveil otherwise concealed arguments. In this respect, the most interesting parts of an online corpus are the flame wars as \"outbursts of heated, short and dense debates, in an ocean of evenly distributed polite messages\".\nMass flamewar.\nA mass flamewar is a flamewar that grows out of a single post or comment into multiple other comments or posts quickly, in the same area where the original post was in. The mass flamewar usually lasts for multiple weeks, months, or even years after the first post was posted and died out. \nPolitical flaming.\nPolitical flaming typically occur when people have their views challenged and they seek to have their anger known. Through the covering of one's identity people may be more likely to engage in political flaming. In a 2015 study conducted by Hutchens, Cicchirillo, and Hmielowski, they found that \"those who were more experienced with political discussions\u2014either online or offline\u2014were more likely to indicate they would respond with a flame\", and they also found that verbal aggression also played a role in a person engaging in political flaming.\nCorporate flaming.\nCorporate flaming is when a large number of critical comments, usually aggressive or insulting, are directed at a company's employees, products, or brands. Common causes include inappropriate behavior of company employees, negative customer experiences, inadequate care of customers and influencers, violation of ethical principles, along with apparent injustices and inappropriate reactions. Flame wars can result in reputational damage, decreased consumer confidence, drops in stock prices and company assets, increased liabilities, increased lawsuits, and a decrease in customers, influencers and sponsors. Based on an assessment of the damage, companies can take years to recover from a flame war that may detract from their core purpose. Kayser notes that companies should prepare for possible flame wars by creating alerts for a predefined \"blacklist\" of words and monitoring fast-growing topics about their company. Alternatively, Kayser, points out that a flame war can lead to a positive experience for the company. Based on the content, it could be shared across multiple platforms and increase company recognition, social media fans/followers, brand presence, purchases, and brand loyalty. Therefore, the type of marketing that results from a flame war can lead to higher profits and brand recognition on a broader scale. Nevertheless, it is encouraged that when a company utilizes social media they should be aware that their content could be used in a flame war and should be treated as an emergency.\nExamples.\nAny subject of a polarizing nature can feasibly cause flaming. As one would expect in the medium of the Internet, technology is a common topic. The perennial debates between users of competing operating systems, such as Windows, Classic Mac OS and macOS operating system, or operating systems based on the Linux kernel and iOS or Android operating system, users of Intel and AMD processors, and users of the Nintendo Switch, Wii U, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One video game systems, often escalate into seemingly unending \"flame wars\", also called software wars. As each successive technology is released, it develops its own outspoken fan base, allowing arguments to begin anew.\nPopular culture continues to generate large amounts of flaming and countless flame wars across the Internet, such as the constant debates between fans of \"Star Trek\" and \"Star Wars\". Ongoing discussion of current celebrities and television personalities within popular culture also frequently sparks debate.\nIn 2005, author Anne Rice became involved in a flame war of sorts on the review boards of online retailer Amazon.com after several reviewers posted scathing comments about her latest novel. Rice responded to the comments with her own lengthy response, which was quickly met with more feedback from users.\nIn 2007, tech expert Kathy Sierra was a victim of flaming as an image of her depicted as a mutilated body was spread around online forums. In addition to the doctored photo being spread virally, her social security number and home address were made public as well. Consequently, Sierra effectively gave up her technology career in response to the ensuing harassment and threats that she received as a result of the flaming.\nIn November 2007, the popular audio-visual discussion site AVS Forum temporarily closed its HD DVD and Blu-ray discussion forums because of, as the site reported, \"physical threats that have involved police and possible legal action\" between advocates of the rival formats.\nThe 2016 Presidential election, saw a flame war take place between Republican candidate Donald Trump and the Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton. The barbs exchanged between the two was highly publicized and is an example of political flaming and a flame war.\nLegal implications.\nFlaming varies in severity and as such so too does the reaction of states in imposing any sort of sanction. Laws vary from country to country, but in most cases, constant flaming can be considered cyber harassment, which can result in Internet Service Provider action to prevent access to the site being flamed. However, as social networks become more and more closely connected to people and their real life, the more harsh words may be considered defamation of the person. For instance, a South Korean Identity Verification law was created to help control flaming and to stop \"malicious use of the internet\" but opponents to the law argue that the law infringes on the right to free speech.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10681", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10681", "title": "Flame war", "text": ""}
{"id": "10683", "revid": "31599192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10683", "title": "Frank Lloyd Wright", "text": "American architect (1867\u20131959)\nFrank Lloyd Wright (June 8, 1867 \u2013 April 9, 1959) was an American architect, designer, writer, and educator.\nHe designed more than 1,000 structures over a creative period of 70 years. Wright played a key role in the architectural movements of the twentieth century, influencing architects worldwide through his works and hundreds of apprentices in his Taliesin Fellowship. Wright believed in designing in harmony with humanity and the environment, a philosophy he called organic architecture. This philosophy was exemplified in Fallingwater (1935), which has been called \"the best all-time work of American architecture\".\nWright was the pioneer of what came to be called the Prairie School movement of architecture and also developed the concept of the Usonian home in Broadacre City, his vision for urban planning in the United States. He also designed original and innovative offices, churches, schools, skyscrapers, hotels, museums, and other commercial projects. Wright-designed interior elements (including leaded glass windows, floors, furniture and even tableware) were integrated into these structures. He wrote several books and numerous articles and was a popular lecturer in the United States and in Europe. Wright was recognized in 1991 by the American Institute of Architects as \"the greatest American architect of all time\". In 2019, a selection of his work became a listed World Heritage Site as \"The 20th-Century Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright\".\nRaised in rural Wisconsin, Wright studied civil engineering at the University of Wisconsin and then apprenticed in Chicago, briefly with Joseph Lyman Silsbee, and then with Louis Sullivan at Adler &amp; Sullivan. Wright opened his own successful Chicago practice in 1893 and established a studio in his Oak Park, Illinois home in 1898. His fame increased and his personal life sometimes made headlines: leaving his first wife Catherine Tobin for Mamah Cheney in 1909; the murder of Mamah and her children and others at his Taliesin estate by a staff member in 1914; his tempestuous marriage with second wife Miriam Noel (m. 1923\u20131927); and his courtship and marriage with Olgivanna Lazovi\u0107 (m. 1928\u20131959).\nEarly life and education.\nChildhood (1867\u20131885).\nWright was born on June 8, 1867, in the town of Richland Center, Wisconsin, but maintained throughout his life that he was born in 1869. In 1987 a biographer of Wright suggested that he may have been christened as \"Frank Lincoln Wright\" or \"Franklin Lincoln Wright\" but these assertions were not supported by any evidence.\nWright's father, William Cary Wright (1825\u20131904), was a \"gifted musician, orator, and sometime preacher who had been admitted to the bar in 1857.\" He was also a published composer. Originally from Massachusetts, William Wright had been a Baptist minister, but he later joined his wife's family in the Unitarian faith.\nWright's mother, Anna Lloyd Jones (1838/39\u20131923) was a teacher and a member of the Lloyd Jones clan; her parents had emigrated from Wales to Wisconsin. One of Anna's brothers was Jenkin Lloyd Jones, an important figure in the spread of the Unitarian faith in the Midwest.\nAccording to Wright's autobiography, his mother declared when she was expecting that her first child would grow up to build beautiful buildings. She decorated his nursery with engravings of English cathedrals torn from a periodical to encourage the infant's ambition. \nWright grew up in an \"unstable household, [...] constant lack of resources, [...] unrelieved poverty and anxiety\" and had a \"deeply disturbed and obviously unhappy childhood\". His father held pastorates in McGregor, Iowa (1869), Pawtucket, Rhode Island (1871), and Weymouth, Massachusetts (1874). Because the Wright family struggled financially also in Weymouth, they returned to Spring Green, where the supportive Lloyd Jones family could help William find employment. In 1877, they settled in Madison, where William gave music lessons and served as the secretary to the newly formed Unitarian society. Although William was a distant parent, he shared his love of music with his children.\nIn 1876, Anna saw an exhibit of educational blocks called the Froebel Gifts, the foundation of an innovative kindergarten curriculum. Anna, a trained teacher, was excited by the program and bought a set with which the 9-year old Wright spent much time playing. The blocks in the set were geometrically shaped and could be assembled in various combinations to form two- and three-dimensional compositions. In his autobiography, Wright described the influence of these exercises on his approach to design: \"For several years, I sat at the little kindergarten table-top... and played... with the cube, the sphere and the triangle\u00a0\u2013 these smooth wooden maple blocks... All are in my fingers to this day... \"\nIn 1881, soon after Wright turned 14, his parents separated. In 1884, his father sued for a divorce from Anna on the grounds of \"... emotional cruelty and physical violence and spousal abandonment\". Wright attended Madison High School, but there is no evidence that he graduated. His father left Wisconsin after the divorce was granted in 1885. Wright said that he never saw his father again.\nEducation (1885\u20131887).\nIn 1886, at age 19, Wright was admitted to the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison as a special student and worked under Allan D. Conover, a professor of civil engineering, before leaving the school without taking a degree. Wright was granted an honorary doctorate of fine arts from the university in 1955. In 1886 Wright collaborated with the Chicago architectural firm of Joseph Lyman Silsbee\u00a0\u2013 accredited as draftsman and construction supervisor\u00a0\u2013 on the 1886 Unity Chapel for Wright's family in Spring Green, Wisconsin.\nCareer.\nSilsbee and other early work experience (1887\u20131888).\nIn 1887, Wright arrived in Chicago in search of employment. As a result of the devastating Great Chicago Fire of 1871 and a population boom, new development was plentiful. Wright later recorded in his autobiography that his first impression of Chicago was as an ugly and chaotic city. Within days of his arrival, and after interviews with several prominent firms, he was hired as a draftsman with Joseph Lyman Silsbee. While with the firm, he also worked on two other family projects: All Souls Church in Chicago for his uncle, Jenkin Lloyd Jones, and the Hillside Home School I in Spring Green for two of his aunts. Other draftsmen who worked for Silsbee in 1887 included future architects Cecil Corwin, George W. Maher, and George G. Elmslie. Wright soon befriended Corwin, with whom he lived until he found a permanent home.\nFeeling that he was underpaid for the quality of his work for Silsbee at $8 a week, the young draftsman quit and found work as an architectural designer at the firm of Beers, Clay, and Dutton. However, Wright soon realized that he was not ready to handle building design by himself; he left his new job to return to Joseph Silsbee\u00a0\u2013 this time with a raise in salary. Although Silsbee adhered mainly to Victorian and Revivalist architecture, Wright found his work to be more \"gracefully picturesque\" than the other \"brutalities\" of the period.\nAdler &amp; Sullivan (1888\u20131893).\nWright learned that the Chicago firm of Adler &amp; Sullivan was \"... looking for someone to make the finished drawings for the interior of the Auditorium Building\". Wright demonstrated that he was a competent impressionist of Louis Sullivan's ornamental designs and two short interviews later, was an official apprentice in the firm. Wright did not get along well with Sullivan's other draftsmen; he wrote that several violent altercations occurred between them during the first years of his apprenticeship. For that matter, Sullivan showed very little respect for his own employees as well. In spite of this, \"Sullivan took [Wright] under his wing and gave him great design responsibility.\" As an act of respect, Wright would later refer to Sullivan as (German for \"Dear Master\"). He also formed a bond with office foreman Paul Mueller. Wright later engaged Mueller in the construction of several of his public and commercial buildings between 1903 and 1923.\nBy 1890, Wright had an office next to Sullivan's that he shared with friend and draftsman George Elmslie, who had been hired by Sullivan at Wright's request. Wright had risen to head draftsman and handled all residential design work in the office. As a general rule, the firm of Adler &amp; Sullivan did not design or build houses, but would oblige when asked by the clients of their important commercial projects. Wright was occupied by the firm's major commissions during office hours, so house designs were relegated to evening and weekend overtime hours at his home studio. He later claimed total responsibility for the design of these houses, but a careful inspection of their architectural style (and accounts from historian Robert Twombly) suggests that Sullivan dictated the overall form and motifs of the residential works; Wright's design duties were often reduced to detailing the projects from Sullivan's sketches. During this time, Wright worked on Sullivan's bungalow (1890) and the James A. Charnley bungalow (1890) in Ocean Springs, Mississippi, the Berry-MacHarg House, James A. Charnley House (both 1891), and the Louis Sullivan House (1892), all in Chicago.\nDespite Sullivan's loan and overtime salary, Wright was constantly short on funds. Wright admitted that his poor finances were likely due to his expensive tastes in wardrobe and vehicles, and the extra luxuries he designed into his house. To supplement his income and repay his debts, Wright accepted independent commissions for at least nine houses. These \"bootlegged\" houses, as he later called them, were conservatively designed in variations of the fashionable Queen Anne and Colonial Revival styles. Nevertheless, unlike the prevailing architecture of the period, each house emphasized simple geometric massing and contained features such as bands of horizontal windows, occasional cantilevers, and open floor plans, which would become hallmarks of his later work. Eight of these early houses remain today, including the Thomas Gale, Robert Parker, George Blossom, and Walter Gale houses.\nAs with the residential projects for Adler &amp; Sullivan, he designed his bootleg houses on his own time. Sullivan knew nothing of the independent works until 1893, when he recognized that one of the houses was unmistakably a Frank Lloyd Wright design. This particular house, built for Allison Harlan, was only blocks away from Sullivan's townhouse in the Chicago community of Kenwood. Aside from the location, the geometric purity of the composition and balcony tracery in the same style as the Charnley House likely gave away Wright's involvement. Since Wright's five-year contract forbade any outside work, the incident led to his departure from Sullivan's firm. Several stories recount the break in the relationship between Sullivan and Wright; even Wright later told two different versions of the occurrence. In \"An Autobiography\", Wright claimed that he was unaware that his side ventures were a breach of his contract. When Sullivan learned of them, he was angered and offended; he prohibited any further outside commissions and refused to issue Wright the deed to his Oak Park house until after he completed his five years. Wright could not bear the new hostility from his master and thought that the situation was unjust. He \"... threw down [his] pencil and walked out of the Adler &amp; Sullivan office never to return\". Dankmar Adler, who was more sympathetic to Wright's actions, later sent him the deed. However, Wright told his Taliesin apprentices (as recorded by Edgar Tafel) that Sullivan fired him on the spot upon learning of the Harlan House. Tafel also recounted that Wright had Cecil Corwin sign several of the bootleg jobs, indicating that Wright was aware of their forbidden nature. Regardless of the correct series of events, Wright and Sullivan did not meet or speak for 12 years.\nTransition and experimentation (1893\u20131900).\nAfter leaving Adler &amp; Sullivan, Wright established his own practice on the top floor of the Sullivan-designed Schiller Building on Randolph Street in Chicago. Wright chose to locate his office in the building because the tower location reminded him of the office of Adler &amp; Sullivan. Cecil Corwin followed Wright and set up his architecture practice in the same office, but the two worked independently and did not consider themselves partners.\nIn 1896, Wright moved from the Schiller Building to the nearby and newly completed Steinway Hall building. The loft space was shared with Robert C. Spencer, Jr., Myron Hunt, and Dwight H. Perkins. These young architects, inspired by the Arts and Crafts Movement and the philosophies of Louis Sullivan, formed what became known as the Prairie School. They were joined by Perkins' apprentice Marion Mahony, who in 1895 transferred to Wright's team of drafters and took over production of his presentation drawings and watercolor renderings. Mahony, the third woman to be licensed as an architect in Illinois and one of the first licensed female architects in the U.S., also designed furniture, leaded glass windows, and light fixtures, among other features, for Wright's houses. Between 1894 and the early 1910s, several other leading Prairie School architects and many of Wright's future employees launched their careers in the offices of Steinway Hall.\nWright's projects during this period followed two basic models. His first independent commission, the Winslow House, combined Sullivanesque ornamentation with the emphasis on simple geometry and horizontal lines. The Francis Apartments (1895, demolished 1971), Heller House (1896), Rollin Furbeck House (1897) and Husser House (1899, demolished 1926) were designed in the same mode. For his more conservative clients, Wright designed more traditional dwellings. These included the Dutch Colonial Revival style Bagley House (1894), Tudor Revival style Moore House I (1895), and Queen Anne style Charles E. Roberts House (1896). While Wright could not afford to turn down clients over disagreements in taste, even his most conservative designs retained simplified massing and occasional Sullivan-inspired details.\nSoon after the completion of the Winslow House in 1894, Edward Waller, a friend and former client, invited Wright to meet Chicago architect and planner Daniel Burnham. Burnham had been impressed by the Winslow House and other examples of Wright's work; he offered to finance a four-year education at the and two years in Rome. To top it off, Wright would have a position in Burnham's firm upon his return. In spite of guaranteed success and support of his family, Wright declined the offer. Burnham, who had directed the classical design of the World's Columbian Exposition and was a major proponent of the Beaux Arts movement, thought that Wright was making a foolish mistake. Yet for Wright, the classical education of the lacked creativity and was altogether at odds with his vision of modern American architecture.\nWright relocated his practice to his home in 1898 to bring his work and family lives closer. This move made further sense as the majority of the architect's projects at that time were in Oak Park or neighboring River Forest. The birth of three more children prompted Wright to sacrifice his original home studio space for additional bedrooms and necessitated his design and construction of an expansive studio addition to the north of the main house. The space, which included a hanging balcony within the two-story drafting room, was one of Wright's first experiments with innovative structure. The studio embodied Wright's developing aesthetics and would become the laboratory from which his next 10\u00a0years of architectural creations would emerge.\nPrairie Style houses (1900\u20131914).\nBy 1901, Wright had completed about 50 projects, including many houses in Oak Park. As his son John Lloyd Wright wrote:\nWilliam Eugene Drummond, Francis Barry Byrne, Walter Burley Griffin, Albert Chase McArthur, Marion Mahony, Isabel Roberts, and George Willis were the draftsmen. Five men, two women. They wore flowing ties, and smocks suitable to the realm. The men wore their hair like Papa, all except Albert, he didn't have enough hair. They worshiped Papa! Papa liked them! I know that each one of them was then making valuable contributions to the pioneering of the modern American architecture for which my father gets the full glory, headaches, and recognition today!\nBetween 1900 and 1901, Frank Lloyd Wright completed four houses, which have since been identified as the onset of the \"Prairie Style\". Two, the Hickox and Bradley Houses, were the last transitional step between Wright's early designs and the Prairie creations. Meanwhile, the Thomas House and Willits House received recognition as the first mature examples of the new style. At the same time, Wright gave his new ideas for the American house widespread awareness through two publications in the \"Ladies' Home Journal\". The articles were in response to an invitation from the president of Curtis Publishing Company, Edward Bok, as part of a project to improve modern house design. \"A Home in a Prairie Town\" and \"A Small House with Lots of Room in it\" appeared respectively in the February and July 1901 issues of the journal. Although neither of the affordable house plans was ever constructed, Wright received increased requests for similar designs in following years. Wright came to Buffalo and designed homes for three of the company's executives: the Darwin D. Martin House (1904), the William R. Heath House 1905), and the Walter V. Davidson House (1908). Other Wright houses considered to be masterpieces of the Prairie Style are the Frederick Robie House in Chicago and the Avery and Queene Coonley House in Riverside, Illinois. The Robie House, with its extended cantilevered roof lines supported by a 110-foot-long (34\u00a0m) channel of steel, is the most dramatic. Its living and dining areas form virtually one uninterrupted space. With this and other buildings, included in the publication of the Wasmuth Portfolio (1910), Wright's work became known to European architects and had a profound influence on them after World War I.\nWright's residential designs of this era were known as \"prairie houses\" because the designs complemented the land around Chicago. Prairie Style houses often have a combination of these features: one or two stories with one-story projections, an open floor plan, low-pitched roofs with broad, overhanging eaves, strong horizontal lines, ribbons of windows (often casements), a prominent central chimney, built-in stylized cabinetry, and a wide use of natural materials\u00a0\u2013 especially stone and wood.\nBy 1909, Wright had begun to reject the upper-middle-class Prairie Style single-family house model, shifting his focus to a more democratic architecture. Wright went to Europe in 1909 with a portfolio of his work and presented it to Berlin publisher Ernst Wasmuth. \"Studies and Executed Buildings of Frank Lloyd Wright\", published in 1911, was the first major exposure of Wright's work in Europe. The work contained more than 100 lithographs of Wright's designs and is commonly known as the Wasmuth Portfolio.\nNotable public works (1900\u20131917).\nWright designed the house of Cornell's chapter of Alpha Delta Phi literary society (1900), the Hillside Home School II (built for his aunts) in Spring Green, Wisconsin (1901) and the Unity Temple (1905) in Oak Park, Illinois. As a lifelong Unitarian and member of Unity Temple, Wright offered his services to the congregation after their church burned down, working on the building from 1905 to 1909. Wright later said that Unity Temple was the edifice in which he ceased to be an architect of structure, and became an architect of space.\nSome other early notable public buildings and projects in this era: the Larkin Administration Building (1905); the Geneva Inn (Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, 1911); the Midway Gardens (Chicago, Illinois, 1913); the Banff National Park Pavilion (Alberta, Canada, 1914).\nDesigning in Japan (1917\u20131922).\nWhile working in Japan, Wright left an impressive architectural heritage. The Imperial Hotel, completed in 1923, is the most important. Thanks to its solid foundations and steel construction, the hotel survived the Great Kanto Earthquake almost unscathed. The hotel was damaged during the bombing of Tokyo and by the subsequent US military occupation of it after World War II. As land in the center of Tokyo increased in value the hotel was deemed obsolete and was demolished in 1968 but the lobby was saved and later re-constructed at the Meiji Mura architecture museum in Nagoya in 1976.\nJiyu Gakuen was founded as a girls' school in 1921. The construction of the main building began in\u00a01921\u00a0under Wright's direction and, after his departure, was continued by Endo. The school building, like the Imperial Hotel, is covered with \u014cya stones.\nThe Yodoko Guesthouse (designed in 1918 and completed in 1924) was built as the summer villa for Tadzaemon Yamamura.\nFrank Lloyd Wright's architecture had a strong influence on young Japanese architects. The Japanese architects Wright commissioned to carry out his designs were Arata Endo, Takehiko Okami, Taue Sasaki and Kameshiro Tsuchiura. Endo supervised the completion of the Imperial Hotel after Wright's departure in 1922 and also supervised the construction of the Jiyu Gakuen Girls' School and the Yodok\u014d Guest House. Tsuchiura went on to create so-called \"light\" buildings, which had similarities to Wright's later work.\nTextile concrete block system.\nIn the early 1920s, Wright designed a \"textile\" concrete block system. The system of precast blocks, reinforced by an internal system of bars, enabled \"fabrication as infinite in color, texture, and variety as in that rug.\" Wright first used his textile block system on the Millard House in Pasadena, California, in 1923. Typically Wrightian is the joining of the structure to its site by a series of terraces that reach out into and reorder the landscape, making it an integral part of the architect's vision. With the Ennis House and the Samuel Freeman House (both 1923), Wright had further opportunities to test the limits of the textile block system, including limited use in the Arizona Biltmore Hotel in 1927. The Ennis house is often used in films, television, and print media to represent the future. Wright's son, Lloyd Wright, supervised construction for the Storer, Freeman, and Ennis Houses. Architectural historian Thomas Hines has suggested that Lloyd's contribution to these projects is often overlooked.\nAfter World War II, Wright updated the concrete block system, calling it the Usonian Automatic system, resulting in the construction of several notable homes. As he explained in \"The Natural House\" (1954), \"The original blocks are made on the site by ramming concrete into wood or metal wrap-around forms, with one outside face (which may be pattered), and one rear or inside face, generally coffered, for lightness.\"\nMidlife problems.\nFamily turmoil.\nIn 1903, while Wright was designing a house for Edwin Cheney (a neighbor in Oak Park), he became enamored of Cheney's wife, Mamah. Mamah Borthwick Cheney was a modern woman with interests outside the home. She was an early feminist, and Wright viewed her as his intellectual equal. Their relationship became the talk of the town; they often could be seen taking rides in Wright's automobile through Oak Park. In 1909, Wright and Mamah Cheney met up in Europe, leaving their spouses and children behind. Wright remained in Europe for almost a year, first in Florence, Italy (where he lived with his eldest son Lloyd) and, later, in Fiesole, Italy, where he lived with Mamah. During this time, Edwin Cheney granted Mamah a divorce, though Kitty still refused to grant one to her husband. After Wright returned to the United States in October 1910, he persuaded his mother to buy land for him in Spring Green, Wisconsin. The land, bought on April 10, 1911, was adjacent to land held by his mother's family, the Lloyd-Joneses. Wright began to build himself a new home, which he called , by May 1911. The recurring theme of also came from his mother's side: in Welsh mythology was a poet, magician, and priest. The family motto, \"\" (\"The Truth Against the World\"), was taken from the Welsh poet , who also had a son named Taliesin. The motto is still used today as the cry of the druids and chief bard of the in Wales.\nTragedy at Taliesin.\nOn August 15, 1914, while Wright was working in Chicago, a servant (Julian Carlton) set fire to the living quarters of Taliesin and then murdered seven people with an axe as the fire burned. The dead included Mamah; her two children, John and Martha Cheney; a gardener (David Lindblom); a draftsman (Emil Brodelle); a workman (Thomas Brunker); and another workman's son (Ernest Weston). Two people survived the mayhem, one of whom, William Weston, helped to put out the fire that almost completely consumed the residential wing of the house. Carlton swallowed hydrochloric acid immediately following the attack in an attempt to kill himself. He was nearly lynched on the spot, but was taken to the Dodgeville jail. Carlton died from starvation seven weeks after the attack, despite medical attention.\nDivorces.\nIn 1922, Kitty Wright finally granted Wright a divorce. Under the terms of the divorce, Wright was required to wait one year before he could marry his then-mistress, Maude \"Miriam\" Noel. In 1923, Wright's mother, Anna (Lloyd Jones) Wright, died. Wright wed Miriam Noel in November 1923, but her addiction to morphine led to the failure of the marriage in less than one year. In 1924, after the separation, but while still married, Wright met Olga (Olgivanna) Lazovich Hinzenburg. They moved in together at Taliesin in 1925, and soon after Olgivanna became pregnant. Their daughter, Iovanna, was born on December 3, 1925.\nOn April 20, 1925, another fire destroyed the bungalow at Taliesin. Crossed wires from a newly installed telephone system were deemed to be responsible for the blaze, which destroyed a collection of Japanese prints that Wright estimated to be worth $250,000 to $500,000 ($ to $ in 2022). Wright rebuilt the living quarters, naming the home \"Taliesin III\".\nIn 1926, Olga's ex-husband, Vlademar Hinzenburg, sought custody of his daughter, Svetlana. In October 1926, Wright and Olgivanna were accused of violating the Mann Act and arrested in Tonka Bay, Minnesota. The charges were later dropped.\nWright and Miriam Noel's divorce was finalized in 1927. Wright was again required to wait for one year before remarrying. Wright and Olgivanna married in 1928.\nLater career.\nTaliesin Fellowship.\nIn 1932, Wright and his wife Olgivanna put out a call for students to come to Taliesin to study and work under Wright while they learned architecture and spiritual development. Olgivanna Wright had been a student of G. I. Gurdjieff who had previously established a similar school. Twenty-three came to live and work that year, including John (Jack) H. Howe, who would become Wright's chief draftsman. A total of 625 people joined The Fellowship in Wright's lifetime. The Fellowship was a source of workers for Wright's later projects, including: Fallingwater; The Johnson Wax Headquarters; and The Guggenheim Museum in New York City.\nConsiderable controversy exists over the living conditions and education of the fellows. Wright was reputedly a difficult person to work with. One apprentice wrote: \"He is devoid of consideration and has a blind spot regarding others' qualities. Yet I believe, that a year in his studio would be worth any sacrifice.\" The Fellowship evolved into The School of Architecture at Taliesin which was an accredited school until it closed under acrimonious circumstances in 2020.Taking on the name \"The School of Architecture\" in June 2020, the school moved to the Cosanti Foundation, which it had worked with in the past.\nUsonian Houses.\nWright is responsible for a series of concepts of suburban development united under the term Broadacre City. He proposed the idea in his book \"The Disappearing City\" in 1932 and unveiled a model of this community of the future, showing it in several venues in the following years. Concurrent with the development of Broadacre City, also referred to as Usonia, Wright conceived a new type of dwelling that came to be known as the Usonian House. Although an early version of the form can be seen in the Malcolm Willey House (1934) in Minneapolis, the Usonian ideal emerged most completely in the Herbert and Katherine Jacobs First House (1937) in Madison, Wisconsin. Designed on a gridded concrete slab that integrated the house's radiant heating system, the house featured new approaches to construction, including walls composed of a \"sandwich\" of wood siding, plywood cores and building paper\u00a0\u2013 a significant change from typically framed walls. Usonian houses commonly featured flat roofs and were usually constructed without basements or attics, all features that Wright had been promoting since the early 20th century.\nUsonian houses were Wright's response to the transformation of domestic life that occurred in the early 20th century when servants had become less prominent or completely absent from most American households. By developing homes with progressively more open plans, Wright allotted the woman of the house a \"workspace\", as he often called the kitchen, where she could keep track of and be available for the children and/or guests in the dining room. As in the Prairie Houses, Usonian living areas had a fireplace as a point of focus. Bedrooms, typically isolated and relatively small, encouraged the family to gather in the main living areas. The conception of spaces instead of rooms was a development of the Prairie ideal. The built-in furnishings related to the Arts and Crafts movement's principles that influenced Wright's early work. Spatially and in terms of their construction, the Usonian houses represented a new model for independent living and allowed dozens of clients to live in a Wright-designed house at relatively low cost. His Usonian homes set a new style for suburban design that influenced countless postwar developers. Many features of modern American homes date back to Wright: open plans, slab-on-grade foundations, and simplified construction techniques that allowed more mechanization and efficiency in building.\nSignificant later works.\n \"Fallingwater\", one of Wright's most famous private residences (completed 1937), was built for Mr. and Mrs. Edgar J. Kaufmann, Sr., at Mill Run, Pennsylvania. Constructed over a 30-foot waterfall, it was designed according to Wright's desire to place the occupants close to the natural surroundings. The house was intended to be more of a family getaway, rather than a live-in home. The construction is a series of cantilevered balconies and terraces, using limestone for all verticals and concrete for the horizontals. The house cost $155,000 (), including the architect's fee of $8,000 (). It was one of Wright's most expensive pieces. Kaufmann's own engineers argued that the design was not sound. They were overruled by Wright, but the contractor secretly added extra steel to the horizontal concrete elements. In 1994, Robert Silman and Associates examined the building and developed a plan to restore the structure. In the late 1990s, steel supports were added under the lowest cantilever until a detailed structural analysis could be done. In March 2002, post-tensioning of the lowest terrace was completed.\nTaliesin West, Wright's winter home and studio complex in Scottsdale, Arizona, was a laboratory for Wright from 1937 to his death in 1959. It is now the home of the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation.\nThe design and construction of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City occupied Wright from 1943 until 1959 and is probably his most recognized masterpiece. The building's unique central geometry was meant to allow visitors to easily experience Guggenheim's collection of nonobjective geometric paintings by taking an elevator to the top level and then viewing artworks by walking down the slowly descending, central spiral ramp.\nThe only realized skyscraper designed by Wright is the Price Tower, a 19-story tower in Bartlesville, Oklahoma. It is also one of the two existing vertically oriented Wright structures (the other is the S.C. Johnson Wax Research Tower in Racine, Wisconsin). The Price Tower was commissioned by Harold C. Price of the H. C. Price Company, a local oil pipeline and chemical firm. On March 29, 2007, Price Tower was designated a National Historic Landmark by the United States Department of the Interior, one of only 20 such properties in Oklahoma.\nMonona Terrace, originally designed in 1937 as municipal offices for Madison, Wisconsin, was completed in 1997 on the original site, using a variation of Wright's final design for the exterior, with the interior design altered by its new purpose as a convention center. The \"as-built\" design was carried out by Wright's apprentice Tony Puttnam. Monona Terrace was accompanied by controversy throughout the 60 years between the original design and the completion of the structure.\nFlorida Southern College, located in Lakeland, Florida, constructed 12 (out of 18 planned) Frank Lloyd Wright buildings between 1941 and 1958 as part of the Child of the Sun project. It is the world's largest single-site collection of Frank Lloyd Wright architecture.\nPersonal style and concepts.\nDesign elements.\nHis Prairie houses use themed, coordinated design elements (often based on plant forms) that are repeated in windows, carpets, and other fittings. He made innovative use of new building materials such as precast concrete blocks, glass bricks, and zinc cames (instead of the traditional lead) for his leadlight windows, and he famously used Pyrex glass tubing as a major element in the Johnson Wax Headquarters. Wright was also one of the first architects to design and install custom-made electric light fittings, including some of the first electric floor lamps, and his very early use of the then-novel spherical glass lampshade (a design previously not possible due to the physical restrictions of gas lighting). In 1897, Wright received a patent for \"Prism Glass Tiles\" that were used in storefronts to direct light toward the interior. Wright fully embraced glass in his designs and found that it fit well into his philosophy of organic architecture. According to Wright's organic theory, all components of the building should appear unified, as though they belong together. Nothing should be attached to it without considering the effect on the whole. To unify the house to its site, Wright often used large expanses of glass to blur the boundary between the indoors and outdoors. Glass allowed for interaction and viewing of the outdoors while still protecting from the elements. In 1928, Wright wrote an essay on glass in which he compared it to the mirrors of nature: lakes, rivers and ponds. One of Wright's earliest uses of glass in his works was to string panes of glass along whole walls in an attempt to create light screens to join solid walls. By using this large amount of glass, Wright sought to achieve a balance between the lightness and airiness of the glass and the solid, hard walls. Arguably, Wright's best-known art glass is that of the Prairie style. The simple geometric shapes that yield to very ornate and intricate windows represent some of the most integral ornamentation of his career. Wright also designed some of his own clothing.\nInfluences and collaborations.\nWright strongly believed in individualism and did not affiliate with the American Institute of Architects during his career, going so far as to call the organization \"a harbor of refuge for the incompetent,\" and \"a form of refined gangsterism\". When an associate referred to him as \"an old amateur\" Wright confirmed, \"I am the oldest.\" Wright rarely credited any influences on his designs, but most architects, historians and scholars agree he had five major influences:\nWright was given a set of Froebel gifts at about age nine, and in his autobiography he cited them indirectly in explaining that he learned the geometry of architecture in kindergarten play: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For several years I sat at the little kindergarten table-top ruled by lines about four inches apart each way making four-inch squares; and, among other things, played upon these 'unit-lines' with the square (cube), the circle (sphere) and the triangle (tetrahedron or tripod)\u2014these were smooth maple-wood blocks. All are in my fingers to this day. Wright later wrote, \"The virtue of all this lay in the awakening of the child-mind to rhythmic structures in Nature\u2026 I soon became susceptible to constructive pattern evolving in everything I saw.\"\nHe routinely claimed the work of architects and architectural designers who were his employees as his own designs, and believed that the rest of the Prairie School architects were merely his followers, imitators, and subordinates. As with any architect, though, Wright worked in a collaborative process and drew his ideas from the work of others. In his earlier days, Wright worked with some of the top architects of the Chicago School, including Sullivan. In his Prairie School days, Wright's office was populated by many talented architects, including William Eugene Drummond, John Van Bergen, Isabel Roberts, Francis Barry Byrne, Albert McArthur, Marion Mahony Griffin, and Walter Burley Griffin. The Czech-born architect Antonin Raymond worked for Wright at Taliesin and led the construction of the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo. He subsequently stayed in Japan and opened his own practice. Rudolf Schindler also worked for Wright on the Imperial Hotel and his own work is often credited as influencing Wright's Usonian houses. Schindler's friend Richard Neutra also worked briefly for Wright and became an internationally successful architect. In the Taliesin days, Wright employed many architects and artists who later become notable, such as Aaron Green, John Lautner, E. Fay Jones, Henry Klumb, William Bernoudy, John Underhill Ottenheimer, and Paolo Soleri.\nJapanese art.\nWright was a passionate Japanophile \u2014 he once proclaimed Japan to be \"the most romantic, artistic, nature-inspired country on earth\" \u2014 and throughout his entire career, Japanese art and architecture held a strong sway over him. He was particularly interested in woodblock prints, to which he claimed he was \"enslaved.\" Wright spent much of his free time selling, collecting, and appreciating these prints \u2014 he held parties and other events centered around them, proclaiming their pedagogical value to his guests and students, and before arriving in Japan, his impressions of the nation were based almost entirely on them.\nWright found particular inspiration in the formal aspects of Japanese art. He described prints as \"organic,\" because of their understatedness, harmony, and ability to be appreciated on a purely aesthetic level. Additionally, he cherished their freeform compositions, where elements of the scene would frequently breach in front of one another, and their lack of extraneous detail, which he called a \"gospel of elimination.\" His interpretation of (tea ceremony venues), mediated by the ideas of Okakura Kakuz\u014d, was that of an architecture which emphasized openness, the \"vacant space between the roof and walls.\" Wright applied these principles on a large scale, and they became trademarks of his practice.\nWright's floor plans exhibit strong similarities to their presumed Japanese forebears. The open living spaces of his early homes were likely appropriated from the World's Columbian Exposition's Ho-O-Den Pavilion, whose sliding-screen dividers were removed in preparation for the event. Likewise, Unity Temple follows a layout, characteristic of Shinto shrines and likely inspired by his 1905 visit to the Rinn\u014d-ji temple complex, and the shape of many of his cantilevered towers, including the Johnson Research Tower, may have been inspired by Japanese pagodas. Wright's ornamental flourishes, as seen in his leaded glass windows and lively architectural drawings, demonstrate a technical indebtedness to . One modern commentator, discussing the Robie House, suggests that such elements combined allow Wright's architecture to exhibit , a particularly Japanese aesthetic value marked by a subdued stylishness.\nHis ideas about the art of Japan appear to have drawn greatly from the activities of Ernest Fenollosa, whose work he likely first encountered between 1890 and 1893. Many of Fenollosa's ideas are quite similar to those of Wright: these include his view of architecture as a \"mother art,\" his condemnation of the West's \"separation of construction and decoration,\" and his identification of an \"organic wholeness\" within prints. Also like Wright, Fenollosa perceived a \"degeneracy\" in Western architecture, with particular emphasis on Renaissance architecture; Wright himself admitted that Japanese prints helped to \"vulgarize\" the Renaissance for him. Wright's art criticism treatise, \"The Japanese Print: An Interpretation\", may be read as a straightforward expansion upon Fenollosa's ideas.\nThough Wright always acknowledged his indebtedness to Japanese art and architecture, he took offense to claims that he copied or adapted it. In his view, Japanese art simply validated his personal principles especially well, and as such it was not a source of special inspiration. Responding to a claim by Charles Robert Ashbee that he was \"trying to adapt Japanese forms to the United States,\" Wright said that such borrowing was \"against [his] very religion.\" Nonetheless, his insistence did not stop others from observing the same throughout his life.\nCommunity planning.\nFrank Lloyd Wright was interested in site and community planning throughout his career. His commissions and theories on urban design began as early as 1900 and continued until his death. He had 41 commissions on the scale of community planning or urban design.\nHis thoughts on suburban design started in 1900 with a proposed subdivision layout for Charles E. Roberts entitled the \"Quadruple Block Plan\". This design strayed from traditional suburban lot layouts and set houses on small square blocks of four equal-sized lots surrounded on all sides by roads instead of straight rows of houses on parallel streets. The houses, which used the same design as published in \"A Home in a Prairie Town\" from the \"Ladies' Home Journal\", were set toward the center of the block to maximize the yard space and included private space in the center. This also allowed for far more interesting views from each house. Although this plan was never realized, Wright published the design in the \"Wasmuth Portfolio\" in 1910.\nThe more ambitious designs of entire communities were exemplified by his entry into the City Club of Chicago Land Development Competition in 1913. The contest was for the development of a suburban quarter section. This design expanded on the Quadruple Block Plan and included several social levels. The design shows the placement of the upscale homes in the most desirable areas and the blue collar homes and apartments separated by parks and common spaces. The design also included all the amenities of a small city: schools, museums, markets, etc. This view of decentralization was later reinforced by theoretical Broadacre City design. The philosophy behind his community planning was decentralization. The new development must be away from the cities. In this decentralized America, all services and facilities could coexist \"factories side by side with farm and home\".\nNotable community planning designs:\nPersonal life and death.\nWright's fashion sense was unique and he usually wore expensive suits, flowing neckties, and capes. He also had a fascination with automobiles, purchasing his first car in 1909, a Stoddard-Dayton roadster, and owned many exotic vehicles over the years. During the cash-strapped Depression, Wright drove cheaper vehicles. Some of his last cars in the 1950s included four Volkswagens and a Chevrolet Nomad station wagon along with flashier articles such as a Jaguar Mark VII. He owned some 50 cars between 1909 and his death, of which 10 are known to survive.\nFamily.\nFrank Lloyd Wright was married three times, fathering four sons and three daughters. He also adopted Svetlana Milanoff, the daughter of his third wife, Olgivanna Lloyd Wright.\nHis wives were:\nHis children with Catherine were:\nHis children with Olgivanna were:\nAs an art dealer.\nThough most famous as an architect, Wright was also an active dealer in Japanese art, primarily . He frequently served as both architect and art dealer to the same clients: he designed a home, then provided the art to fill it. For a time, Wright made more from selling art than from his work as an architect. He also kept a personal collection, which he used as a teaching aid with his apprentices in what were called \"print parties\"; to better suit his taste, he sometimes modified these personal prints using colored pencils and crayons. Wright owned prints from masters such as Okumura Masanobu, Torii Kiyomasu I, Katsukawa Shunsh\u014d, Utagawa Toyoharu, Utagawa Kunisada, Katsushika Hokusai, and Utagawa Hiroshige; he was especially fond of Hiroshige, whom he considered \"the greatest artist in the world.\"\nWright first traveled to Japan in 1905, where he bought hundreds of prints. The following year, he helped organize the world's first retrospective exhibition on Hiroshige, held at the Art Institute of Chicago, a job which strengthened his reputation as an expert in Japanese art. Wright did not cease buying prints in his return trips to Japan, and for many years, he was a major presence in the art world, selling a great number of works both to prominent private collectors and to museums such as the Metropolitan Museum of Art. In sum, Wright spent over five hundred thousand dollars on prints between 1905 and 1923. He penned a book on Japanese art, \"The Japanese Print: An Interpretation\", in 1912.\nIn 1920, many of the prints Wright sold had been found to exhibit signs of retouching, including pinholes and unoriginal pigments. These retouched prints were likely made in retribution by some of his Japanese dealers, who were disgruntled by the architect's under-the-table sales. In an attempt to clear his name, Wright took one of his dealers, Ky\u016bgo Hayashi, to court over the issue; Hayashi was subsequently sentenced to one year in prison, and barred from selling prints for an extended period of time.\nThough Wright protested his innocence, and provided his clients with genuine prints as replacements for those he was accused of retouching, the incident marked the end of the high point of his career as an art dealer. He was forced to sell off much of his art collection to pay off outstanding debts: in 1928, the Bank of Wisconsin claimed Taliesin and sold thousands of his prints \u2014 for only one dollar a piece \u2014 to collector Edward Burr Van Vleck. Nonetheless, Wright continued to collect and deal in prints until his death in 1959, using them as bartering chips and collateral for loans; he often relied upon his art business to remain financially solvent. He once claimed that Taliesin I and II were \"practically built\" by his prints.\nThe extent of his dealings in Japanese art went largely unknown, or underestimated, among art historians for decades. In 1980, Julia Meech, then associate curator of Japanese art at the Metropolitan Museum, began researching the history of the museum's collection of Japanese prints. She discovered \"a three-inch-deep 'clump of 400 cards' from 1918, each listing a print bought from the same seller \u2014 'F. L. Wright'\" \u2014 and a number of letters exchanged between Wright and the museum's first curator of Far Eastern Art, Sigisbert C. Bosch Reitz. These discoveries and subsequent research led to a renewed understanding of Wright's career as an art dealer.\nDeath.\nOn April 4, 1959, Wright was hospitalized for abdominal pains and was operated on April 6. He seemed to be recovering, but he died quietly on April 9 at the age of 91 years. \"The New York Times\" then reported he was 89.\nAfter his death, Wright's legacy was plagued with turmoil for years. His third wife Olgivanna's dying wish had been that she and Wright, and her daughter by her first marriage, would all be cremated and interred together in a memorial garden being built at Taliesin West. According to his own wishes, Wright's body had lain in the Lloyd-Jones cemetery, next to the Unity Chapel, within view of Taliesin in Wisconsin. Although Olgivanna had taken no legal steps to move Wright's remains (and against the wishes of other family members and the Wisconsin legislature), his remains were removed from his grave in 1985 by members of the Taliesin Fellowship. They were cremated and sent to Scottsdale where they were later interred as per Olgivanna's instructions. The original grave site in Wisconsin is now empty but is still marked with Wright's name.\nLegacy.\nArchives.\nAfter Wright's death, most of his archives were stored at the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation in Taliesin (in Wisconsin), and Taliesin West (in Arizona). These collections included more than 23,000 architectural drawings, some 44,000 photographs, 600 manuscripts, and more than 300,000 pieces of office and personal correspondence. It also contained about 40 large-scale architectural models, most of which were constructed for MoMA's retrospective of Wright in 1940. In 2012, to guarantee a high level of conservation and access, as well as to transfer the considerable financial burden of maintaining the archive, the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation partnered with the Museum of Modern Art and the Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library to move the archive's content to New York. Wright's furniture and art collection remains with the foundation, which will also have a role in monitoring the archive. These three parties established an advisory group to oversee exhibitions, symposiums, events, and publications.\nPhotographs and other archival materials are held by the Ryerson and Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of Chicago. The architect's personal archives are located at Taliesin West in Scottsdale, Arizona. The Frank Lloyd Wright archives include photographs of his drawings, indexed correspondence beginning in the 1880s and continuing through Wright's life, and other ephemera. The Getty Research Center, Los Angeles, also has copies of Wright's correspondence and photographs of his drawings in their Frank Lloyd Wright Special Collection. Wright's correspondence is indexed in \"An Index to the Taliesin Correspondence\", ed. by Professor Anthony Alofsin, which is available at larger libraries.\nDestroyed Wright buildings.\nWright designed over 400 built structures of which about 300 survived as of 2023[ [update]]. At least five have been lost to forces of nature: the waterfront house for W. L. Fuller in Pass Christian, Mississippi, destroyed by Hurricane Camille in August 1969; the Louis Sullivan Bungalow of Ocean Springs, Mississippi, destroyed by Hurricane Katrina in 2005; and the Arinobu Fukuhara House (1918) in Hakone, Japan, destroyed in the 1923 Great Kant\u014d earthquake. In January 2006, the Wilbur Wynant House in Gary, Indiana was destroyed by fire. In 2018 the Arch Oboler complex in Malibu, California was gutted in the Woolsey Fire.\nMany other notable Wright buildings were intentionally demolished: Midway Gardens (built 1913, demolished 1929), the Larkin Administration Building (built 1903, demolished 1950), the Francis Apartments and Francisco Terrace Apartments (Chicago, built 1895, demolished 1971 and 1974, respectively), the Geneva Inn (Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, built 1911, demolished 1970), and the Banff National Park Pavilion (built 1914, demolished 1934). The Imperial Hotel (built 1923) survived the 1923 Great Kant\u014d earthquake, but was demolished in 1968 due to urban developmental pressures. The Hoffman Auto Showroom in New York City (built 1954) was demolished in 2013.\nUnbuilt, or posthumously built.\nSeveral of Wright's projects were either built after his death, or remain unbuilt. These include:\nRecognition.\nLater in his life (and after his death in 1959), Wright was accorded significant honorary recognition for his lifetime achievements. He received a Gold Medal award from The Royal Institute of British Architects in 1941. The American Institute of Architects awarded him the AIA Gold Medal in 1949. That medal was a symbolic \"burying the hatchet\" between Wright and the AIA. In a radio interview, he commented, \"Well, the AIA I never joined, and they know why. When they gave me the gold medal in Houston, I told them frankly why. Feeling that the architecture profession is all that's the matter with architecture, why should I join them?\" He was awarded the Franklin Institute's Frank P. Brown Medal in 1953. He received honorary degrees from several universities (including his \"alma mater\", the University of Wisconsin), and several nations named him as an honorary board member to their national academies of art and/or architecture. In 2000, Fallingwater was named \"The Building of the 20th century\" in an unscientific \"Top-Ten\" poll taken by members attending the AIA annual convention in Philadelphia. On that list, Wright was listed along with many of the USA's other greatest architects including Eero Saarinen, I.M. Pei, Louis Kahn, Philip Johnson, and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe; he was the only architect who had more than one building on the list. The other three buildings were the Guggenheim Museum, the Frederick C. Robie House, and the Johnson Wax Building.\nIn 1992, the Madison Opera in Madison, Wisconsin, commissioned and premiered the opera \"Shining Brow\", by composer Daron Hagen and librettist Paul Muldoon based on events early in Wright's life. The work has since received numerous revivals, including a June 2013 revival at Fallingwater, in Bull Run, Pennsylvania, by Opera Theater of Pittsburgh. In 2000, \"\", a play based on the relationship between the personal and working aspects of Wright's life, debuted at the Milwaukee Repertory Theater.\nIn 1966, the United States Postal Service honored Wright with a Prominent Americans series 2\u00a2 postage stamp.\n\"So Long, Frank Lloyd Wright\" is a song written by Paul Simon. Art Garfunkel has stated that the origin of the song came from his request that Simon write a song about the famous architect Frank Lloyd Wright. Simon himself stated that he knew nothing about Wright, but proceeded to write the song anyway.\nIn 1957, Arizona made plans to construct a new capitol building. Believing that the submitted plans for the new capitol were tombs to the past, Frank Lloyd Wright offered \"Oasis\" as an alternative to the people of Arizona.\nIn 2004, one of the spires included in his design was erected in Scottsdale.\nThe city of Scottsdale, Arizona renamed a portion of Bell Road, a major east\u2013west thoroughfare in the Phoenix metropolitan area, in honor of Frank Lloyd Wright.\nEight of Wright's buildings \u2013 Fallingwater, the Guggenheim Museum, the Hollyhock House, the Jacobs House, the Robie House, Taliesin, Taliesin West, and the Unity Temple \u2013 were inscribed on the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites under the title \"The 20th-century Architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright\" in July 2019. UNESCO stated that these buildings were \"innovative solutions to the needs for housing, worship, work or leisure\" and \"had a strong impact on the development of modern architecture in Europe\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10685", "revid": "1153162162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10685", "title": "Filk music", "text": "Folk music of science fiction fandom\nFilk music is a musical culture, genre, and community tied to science fiction, fantasy, and horror fandom and a type of fan labor. The genre has existed since the early 1950s and been played primarily since the mid-1970s.\nEtymology and definitions.\nThe term \"filk\" (originally a typographical error) predates 1955. (See also below.)\nInterfilk, a charity registered in California to \"[promote] cultural exchange through filk music\", offered multiple sources of definitions, without summary, for filk music c.\u20092002\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20092012, but since relies almost entirely on an article by Jordin Kare titled \"Filk Music\", originally published by \"Singout\" magazine, for their definition. Kare quotes Nick Smith of the Los Angeles Filkharmonics as stating:It is a mixture of song parodies and original music, humorous and serious, about subjects like science fiction, fantasy, computers, cats, politics, the space program, books, movies, TV shows, love, war, death... and summarizes that \"almost anything goes at a filksing\".\nFilk has been defined as what is sung or performed by the network of people who originally gathered to sing at science fiction or fantasy conventions.\nAnother definition focuses on filking as a community of those who are interested in filk music and who form part of the social network self-identified with filking. As described later in this article, the origins of filk in science fiction conventions and its current organization emphasizes the social-network aspect of filking. The social aspect of filk as contrasted with the \"performer vs. audience\" dichotomy of much of modern music was described in a speech by ethnomusicologist Sally Childs-Helton.\nStyles and subjects.\nThe range of topics in filk songs stems from its cultural roots in fandom. Many songs honor specific works in science fiction, fantasy, or speculative fiction. Other songs are about science, fantasy, computers, technology in general, or values related to technological change.\nA significant number of filk songs are parodies, whether in the original sense of simply re-using a tune or in the modern sense of specifically humorous re-use.\nOne subtype of filk songs is the \"ose\" song, one on themes of death and gloom. The term derives from the word \"morose\", as in \"ose, morose, even-more-ose\".\nHistory.\nIn the early 1950s, the term \"filk music\" started as a misspelling of \"folk music\" in an essay by Lee Jacobs, \"The Influence of Science Fiction on Modern American Filk Music\". Wrai Ballard, then editor of the Spectator Amateur Press Society refused to publish it for fear that the article's bawdy content could get them into trouble with the Post Office under the Comstock Laws, but found the typo itself amusing, and mentioned it repeatedly; thus, Jacobs' typo became the self-identified term for the genre/subculture while it was still an informal, unrecognized activity at conventions. Its first documented deliberate use was by Karen Anderson in \"Die Zeitschrift f\u00fcr vollst\u00e4ndigen Unsinn\" (\"The Journal for Utter Nonsense\") No. 774 (June 1953), for a song written by her husband Poul Anderson.\nAt the 1974 World Science Fiction Convention author Bob Asprin announced publicly the creation of a group of volunteers he dubbed the Dorsai Irregulars, and a singing session ensued later that night. In the 1970s and 1980s, filking slowly became established as an acknowledged activity at science fiction conventions. Some convention organizers allotted hotel function space late at night for filkers, or filking occurred in hallways, bars or any other place that the filkers could find. Some convention organizers in the 1980s began inviting guests specifically for their filking. Some specialized conventions focused entirely on filk, beginning with FilkCon in Chicago in 1979, organized by Margaret Middleton and Curt Clemmer, later joined by BayFilk in Northern California; the Ohio Valley Filk Fest (OVFF) in Columbus, Ohio; ConChord in Los Angeles and in San Diego, California; GAFilk in Atlanta, Georgia; Musicon in Nashville, Tennessee; FilKONtario near Toronto, Ontario; a rotating British filkcon, and one (NEFilk) in the northeastern US; and the German FilkCONtinental.\nFilk circles.\nPhysical layout.\nAs the name implies, a rough circle of chairs is usually formed. Traditionally, filk circles are started in the evening and tend to continue very late into the night.\nMusical instruments.\nA wide range of instruments can be found in a filk circle, although the most common is the acoustic guitar. Acoustic instruments are more common than electric instruments, although portable keyboards and even theremins are not unheard of.\nTypes.\nFilk circles are often given an organizational structure to make it easier for participants to know when it is time to perform or time to listen to other performers. There are many ways to accomplish this, but the most common types of filk circle are listed below.\nBardic.\nThe advantage of the bardic circle is that it has a clear structure, which enforces politeness. It ensures everyone in the circle gets their turn so that even shy people can have a chance to request or perform. There are disadvantages, however. A bardic circle with large numbers of participants will take a long time to traverse the entire circle, making people wait too long for their turn. Such a circle was lamented in a filk by Suzette Haden Elgin: \"I've been here with my song at the ready since day before yesterday night.\"\nChaos.\nIn a chaos circle, there is no sequential organization. Any performer can simply begin playing a song after the prior song is finished, or any participant can shout out a request. Care must be taken to prevent two songs from starting at the same time. Frequently the word \"follower!\" is shouted in a chaos circle, meaning that a performer believes they have the perfect song to follow the prior song, and they want to play it now.\nThe chaos circle's advantage is its spontaneity and energy. \"Runs\" of songs will frequently get started, with each new song intended to make some sort of connection to or commentary on the prior song's topic. The disadvantage is that it takes concentration and effort to be polite and respectful in a chaos circle: It is easy to accidentally interrupt another performer who's trying to start up a song of their own, especially in a very large circle where one might not be able to easily hear the other performer on the opposite side of the room. Chaos circles thus have a reputation of favoring bold, loud performers who can command attention. One countermeasure to such conflicts is for someone, generally not one of the current/starting-up performers, to shout \"Filker up!\", possibly pointing to the one being interrupted. This alerts the room, and specifically the (usually unintentional) interrupter, to be quiet and pay attention to the filker who has started performing.\nToken bardic.\nA token bardic circle, also known as a \"poker-chip\" bardic circle, attempts to combine the enforced politeness of the bardic circle with the freeform nature of the chaos circle. A container full of some type of token such as poker chips is supplied for the circle. Each person participating in the circle is given a fixed number of tokens when they enter the room (frequently two tokens) and can throw a token into the center of the circle at any time to claim a pick or play turn. When all the active tokens in the circle are used up, they are scooped up and redistributed for the next round.\nEtiquette.\nThe etiquette of the filk circle begins with a respect for all music, including (and perhaps especially) amateur music and amateur performers. Everyone is encouraged to perform, regardless of their skill level. No one is criticized except to occasionally give tips or suggestions.\nCultural perspective.\nAt a deep level, the folk culture of filk validates creative arts in the midst of an explicitly technological culture. When accepting induction into the Filk Hall of Fame in 2003, ethnomusicologist Sally Childs-Helton said, \"We have taken our right to be creative and to literally \"play\" in the best sense of that word.\" Filk combines folk roots, live music circles, and dominant acoustical instrumentation, on the one hand, with high-tech cultural maintenance, on the other hand\u2014a dense network of filkers' web pages, recordings, sound reinforcement at filk conventions, e-mail lists, and so on. The eclectic content of filk frequently contains that assertion of human creativity, especially in connection with technology. (See for example Leslie Fish's Hope Eyrie.) While there are significant numbers of memorial songs, pessimistic songs blame carelessness, incompetence, and corruption, only rarely considering the frailties of a society built on technology or hopes for the future. Because these themes cross international boundaries in filk, they are not explainable as a purely American optimism vis-a-vis technology (in contrast to Nye, 1996).\nThat openness to participation is a marked norm in filking.\nOccasional discussions over the boundaries of filk indicates the extent to which participants in filking are both aware of and keenly interested in the definition of filk as a community. Newsgroup debates over such topics as whether \"Weird Al\" Yankovic is a filker suggest the deep feelings involved. In practice, most formal recognition of filkers in various awards are to those who regularly attend self-identified filk events, not to professional artists whose work may be considered \"found filk\".\nPegasus Awards.\nThe OVFF convention committee solicits nominations for finalists for the Pegasus Awards (the nominating ballot) during the late spring and summer. There is an opinion poll that runs during the year as well to help interested folk brainstorm ideas for the nominating ballot. The finalist ballot is distributed in the early fall and must be returned by the opening night of OVFF. Voting can be done online\u2014either to nominate finalists or to vote for the finalists themselves. The final round of voting happens at OVFF itself, where handwritten ballots are collected after the annual Pegasus concert. The entire process is administered by the OVFF convention committee.\nFilk Hall of Fame.\nThe Filk Hall of Fame was created by David Hayman in 1995 as a complement to the Pegasus Awards.\nAnyone may make a nomination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10686", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10686", "title": "Film Noir", "text": ""}
{"id": "10687", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10687", "title": "Frisbee", "text": "Throwing toy\nA frisbee (pronounced ), also called a flying disc or simply a disc, is a gliding toy or sporting item that is generally made of injection-molded plastic and roughly in diameter with a pronounced lip. It is used recreationally and competitively for throwing and catching, as in flying disc games. The shape of the disc is an airfoil in cross-section which allows it to fly by reducing the drag and increasing lift as it moves through the air, compared to a flat plate. Spinning the disc imparts a stabilizing gyroscopic force, allowing it to be both aimed with accuracy and thrown for distance.\nA wide range is available of flying disc variants. Those for disc golf are usually smaller but denser compared to ultimate frisbee, and tailored for particular flight profiles to increase or decrease stability and distance. The longest recorded disc throw is by David Wiggins Jr. with a distance of . Disc dog sports use relatively slow-flying discs made of more pliable material to better resist a dog's bite and prevent injury to the dog. Flying rings are also available which typically travel significantly farther than any traditional flying disc. Illuminated discs are made of phosphorescent plastic or contain chemiluminescent fluid or battery-powered LEDs for play after dark. Others whistle when they reach a certain velocity in flight.\nThe term \"frisbee\" is often used generically to describe all flying discs, but Frisbee is a registered trademark of the Wham-O toy company. This protection results in organized sports such as ultimate or disc golf having to forgo use of the word \"Frisbee\".\nHistory.\nWalter Frederick Morrison and his future wife Lucile had fun tossing a popcorn can lid after a Thanksgiving Day dinner in 1937. They soon discovered a market for a light-duty flying disc when they were offered 25 cents for a cake pan that they were tossing back and forth on a beach near Los Angeles, California, United States. \"That got the wheels turning, because you could buy a cake pan for five cents, and if people on the beach were willing to pay a quarter for it, well\u2014there was a business,\" Morrison told \"The Virginian-Pilot\" newspaper in 2007.\nThe Morrisons continued their business until World War II, when Walter served in the Army Air Force flying P-47s, and then was a prisoner of war. After the war, Morrison sketched a design for an aerodynamically improved flying disc that he called the Whirlo-Way, after the famous racehorse. He and business partner Warren Franscioni began producing the first plastic discs by 1948, after design modifications and experimentation with several prototypes. They renamed them the Flyin' Saucer in the wake of reported unidentified flying object sightings.\n\"We worked fairs, demonstrating it,\" Morrison told the \"Virginian-Pilot\". The two of them once overheard someone saying that the pair were using wires to make the discs hover, so they developed a sales pitch: \"The Flyin' Saucer is free, but the invisible wire is $1.\" \"That's where we learned we could sell these things,\" he said, because people were enthusiastic about them.\nMorrison and Franscioni ended their partnership in early 1950, and Morrison formed his own company in 1954 called American Trends to buy and sell Flyin' Saucers, which were being made of a flexible polypropylene plastic by Southern California Plastics, the original molder. He discovered that he could produce his own disc more cheaply, and he designed a new model in 1955 called the Pluto Platter, the archetype of all modern flying discs. He sold the rights to Wham-O on January 23, 1957. In 1958, Morrison was awarded U.S. Design Patent D183,626 for his product.\nIn June 1957, Wham-O co-founders Richard Knerr and Arthur \"Spud\" Melin gave the disc the brand name \"Frisbee\" after learning that college students were calling the Pluto Platter by that term, which was derived from the Connecticut-based pie manufacturer Frisbie Pie Company, a supplier of pies to Yale University, where students had started a campus craze tossing empty pie tins stamped with the company's logo\u2014the way that Morrison and his wife had in 1937.\nIn November 1957, in what may be the first rock musical ever performed, \"Anything &amp; Everything\", written by visionary pioneer of information technology Ted Nelson (Theodor H. Nelson) when he was a junior at Swarthmore College (with Richard L. Capian), the game of Frisbee (spelled Frisby) is described (perhaps for the first time that the frisbee appeared in a formal manuscript) in the song \"Friz Me the Frisby,\u201d as a frisbee was passed among stooges in the audience. The scene was expressly intended as a way to introduce the game to the audience.\nThe man behind the Frisbee's success, however, was the Southern Californian Ed Headrick, hired in 1964 as Wham-O's general manager and vice president of marketing. Headrick redesigned the Pluto Platter by reworking the mold, mainly to remove the names of the planets, but fortuitously increasing the rim thickness and mass in the process, creating a more controllable disc that could be thrown more accurately.\nWham-O changed their marketing strategy to promote Frisbee use as a new sport, and sales increased. In 1964, the first professional model went on sale. Headrick patented its design; it featured raised ridges (the \"Rings of Headrick\") that were claimed to stabilize flight.\nHeadrick became known as the father of Frisbee sports; he founded the International Frisbee Association and appointed Dan Roddick as its head. Roddick began establishing North American Series (NAS) tournament standards for various Frisbee sports, such as Freestyle, Guts, Double Disc Court, and overall events. Headrick later helped to develop the sport of disc golf, which was first played with Frisbees and later with more aerodynamic beveled-rim discs, by inventing standardized targets called \"pole holes.\" When Headrick died, he was cremated, and his ashes were molded into memorial discs and given to family and close friends and sold to benefit The Ed Headrick Memorial Museum.\nThe Frisbee was inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame in 1998.\nVariations of flying discs.\nFlying discs, or known as Frisbee, have variations produced for different purposes to optimize variations between branches of disc sports. The three main categories are: ultimate disc, golf disc, and freestyle disc. Disc types are distinguished by differences in weight, diameter, and density. But all types of discs are created by designing molds in factories where plastic materials are melted and then injected into the molding machine.\nUltimate disc.\nUltimate discs are designed to be used in the sport of Ultimate. Ultimate frisbees are made of durable plastic (often polyethylene) and are designed to be thrown for maximum distance and accuracy. Ultimate frisbee has a unique standard with a diameter of 10.75 inches and a weight of 175 grams. For competition uses, WFDF or other official organizations set disc standards to ensure quality. Ultimate discs have a convexed rim and a flat top, which allows for precise throws and catches. The unit price for an ultimate disc is normally bounded within 10-20 USD.\nDisc golf.\nAnother type of flying disc is the disc golf disc, which is used in the sport of disc golf. Disc golf discs are similar in size and shape to ultimate discs, but have different weights and designs. The material often used to make golf discs is polypropylene. There are three main types of disc golf discs: drivers, mid-range discs, and putters. Each type is designed for a specific purpose, with drivers being used for long-distance throws, mid-range discs for more controlled shots, and putters for short and accurate throws into the target. The rim for golf discs are sharper than ultimate frisbee, to reduce wind drag. For each type of the golf disc, there are hundreds of variations. However, there is a uniform requirement in the size of discs: the minimum diameter of a golf disc is 21 centimeters (8.27 inches). Price of a single golf disc is around 8-20 USD depending on quality and brand.\nFreestyle disc.\nFreestyle discs are another variation of flying discs that are used in freestyle Frisbee competitions. These discs are usually smaller and lighter than other types of flying discs. Most freestyle discs have a diameter of 10 inches or less and a weight of around 160 grams, but this is subjected to change\u00a0according to the performer's need. They are designed to be highly maneuverable, with a more rounded shape and a low profile that makes them easy to catch and perform tricks with.\nOverall, all ultimate frisbees share the same size, weight, and shape. Whereas golf disc has many variations for different uses just as golf shafts in the traditional golf sport. Freestyle disc more depends on the performers' needs and weather conditions.\nDisc sports.\nThe IFT guts competitions in Northern Michigan, the Canadian Open Frisbee Championships (1972), Toronto, Ontario, the Vancouver Open Frisbee Championships (1974), Vancouver, British Columbia, the Octad (1974), New Jersey, the American Flying Disc Open (1974), Rochester, New York, and the World Frisbee Championships (1974), Pasadena, California, are the earliest Frisbee competitions that presented the Frisbee as a new disc sport. Before these tournaments, the Frisbee was considered a toy and used for recreation.\nDouble disc court was invented and introduced in 1974 by Jim Palmeri, a sport played with two flying discs and two teams of two players. Each team defends its court and tries to land a flying disc in the opposing court.\nDogs and their human flying disc throwers compete in events such as distance catching and somewhat choreographed freestyle catching.\nThis is a precision and accuracy sport in which individual players throw a flying disc at a target pole hole. In 1926, In Bladworth, Saskatchewan, Canada, Ronald Gibson and a group of his Bladworth Elementary school chums played a game using metal lids, they called \"Tin Lid Golf\". In 1976, the game of disc golf was standardized with targets called \"pole holes\" invented and developed by Wham-O's Ed Headrick.\nIn 1974, freestyle competition was created and introduced by Ken Westerfield and Discraft's Jim Kenner. Teams of two or three players are judged as they perform a routine that consists of a series of creative throwing and catching techniques set to music.\nA half-court disc game derived from ultimate, similar to hot box. The object is to advance the disc on the field of play by passing, and score points by throwing the flying disc to a teammate in a small scoring area.\nThe game of guts was invented by the Healy Brothers in the 1950s and developed at the International Frisbee Tournament (IFT) in Eagle Harbor, Michigan. Two teams of one to five team members stand in parallel lines facing each other across a court and throw flying discs at members of the opposing team.\nA patented game scoring points by throwing and deflecting the flying disc and hitting or entering the goal. The game ends when a team scores exactly 21 points or \"chogs\" the disc for an instant win.\nThe most widely played disc game began in the late 1960s with Joel Silver and Jared Kass. In the 1970s, it developed as an organized sport with the creation of the Ultimate Players Association by Dan Roddick, Tom Kennedy and Irv Kalb. The object of the game is to advance the disc and score points by eventually passing the disc to a team member in the opposing team's end zone. Players may not run while holding the disc.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10689", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10689", "title": "History of the Falkland Islands", "text": "The history of the Falkland Islands () goes back at least five hundred years, with active exploration and colonisation only taking place in the 18th century. Nonetheless, the Falkland Islands have been a matter of controversy, as they have been claimed by the French, British, Spaniards and Argentines at various points.\nThe islands were uninhabited when discovered by Europeans. France established a colony on the islands in 1764. In 1765, a British captain claimed the islands for Britain. In early 1770 a Spanish commander arrived from Buenos Aires with five ships and 1,400 soldiers forcing the British to leave Port Egmont. Britain and Spain almost went to war over the islands, but the British government decided that it should withdraw its presence from many overseas settlements in 1774. Spain, which had a garrison at Puerto Soledad on East Falklands, administered the garrison from Montevideo until 1811 when it was compelled to withdraw as a result of the war against Argentine independence and the pressures of Peninsular War. In 1833, the British returned to the Falkland Islands. Argentina invaded the islands on 2 April 1982. The British responded with an expeditionary force that forced the Argentines to surrender.\nClaims of pre-Columbian discovery.\nWhen the world sea level was lower in the Ice Age, the Falkland Islands may have been joined to the mainland of South America.\nWhile Fuegians from Patagonia could have visited the Falklands, the islands were uninhabited when discovered by Europeans. Recent discoveries of arrowheads in Lafonia (on the southern half of East Falkland) as well as the remains of a wooden canoe provide evidence that the Yaghan people of Tierra del Fuego may have made the journey to the islands. It is not known if these are evidence of one-way journeys, but there is no known evidence of pre-Columbian buildings or structures. However, it is not certain that the discovery predates arrival of Europeans. A Patagonian Missionary Society mission station was founded on Keppel Island (off the west coast of West Falkland) in 1856. Yahgan people were at this station from 1856 to 1898 so this may be the source of the artifacts that have been found. In 2021, a paper was published on deposits of marine animal bones (primarily South American sea lion and Southern rockhopper penguin) on New Island off the coast of West Falkland, at the same site where a quartzite arrowhead made of local stone had been found in 1979. The sites dated to 1275 to 1420 CE, and were interpreted as processing or midden sites where marine animals had been butchered. A charcoal spike consistent with anthropogenic causes (i.e. caused by humans) on New Island was also dated to 550 BP (1400 CE). The Yaghan people were capable seafarers, and are known to have travelled to the Diego Ram\u00edrez Islands around south of Cape Horn, and were suggested to be responsible for the creation of the mounds.\nThe past presence of the Falkland Islands wolf, \"Dusicyon australis\", has often been cited as evidence of pre-European occupation of the islands, but this is contested. The animal was observed in the Falklands by Charles Darwin, but is now extinct.\nThe islands had no native trees when discovered but there is some ambiguous evidence of past forestation, which may be due to wood being transported by oceanic currents from Patagonia. All modern trees have been introduced by Europeans.\nEuropean discovery.\nAn archipelago in the region of the Falkland Islands appeared on Portuguese maps from the early 16th century. Researchers Pepper and Pascoe cite the possibility that an unknown Portuguese expedition may have sighted the islands, based on the existence of a French copy of a Portuguese map from 1516. Maps from this period show islands known as the \"Sanson\" islands in a position that could be interpreted as the Falklands.\nSightings of the islands are attributed to Ferdinand Magellan or Est\u00eav\u00e3o Gomes of \"San Antonio\", one of the captains in the expedition, as the Falklands fit the description of those visited to gather supplies. The account given by Antonio Pigafetta, the chronicler of Magellan's voyage, contradicts attribution to either Gomes or Magellan, since it describes the position of islands close to the Patagonia coast, with the expedition following the mainland coast and the islands visited between a latitude of 49\u00b0 and 51\u00b0S and also refers to meeting \"giants\" (described as Sans\u00f3n or Samsons in the chronicle) who are believed to be the Tehuelche Indians. Although acknowledging that Pigafetta's account casts doubt upon the claim, the Argentine historian Laurio H. Destefani asserts it probable that a ship from the Magellan expedition discovered the islands citing the difficulty in measuring longitude accurately, which means that islands described as close to the coast could be further away. Destefani dismisses attribution to Gomes since the course taken by him on his return would not have taken the ships near the Falklands.\nDestefani also attributes an early visit to the Falklands by an unknown Spanish ship, although Destefani's firm conclusions are contradicted by authors who conclude the sightings refer to the Beagle Channel.\nThe name of the archipelago derives from Lord Falkland, the Treasurer of the Admiralty, who organized the first expedition to South Atlantic with the intention to explore the Islands.\nWhen English explorer John Davis, commander of , one of the ships belonging to Thomas Cavendish's second expedition to the New World, separated from Cavendish off the coast of what is now southern Argentina, he decided to make for the Strait of Magellan in order to find Cavendish. On 9 August 1592 a severe storm battered his ship, and Davis drifted under bare masts, taking refuge \"among certain Isles never before discovered\". Davis did not provide the latitude of these islands, indicating they were away from the Patagonian coast (they are actually away). Navigational errors due to the longitude problem were a common problem until the late 18th century, when accurate marine chronometers became readily available, although Destefani asserts the error here to be \"unusually large\".\nIn 1594, they may have been visited by English commander Richard Hawkins with his ship the \"Dainty\", who, combining his own name with that of Queen Elizabeth I, the \"Virgin Queen\", gave a group of islands the name of \"Hawkins' Maidenland\". However, the latitude given was off by at least 3 degrees and the description of the shore (including the sighting of bonfires) casts doubts on his discovery. Errors in the latitude measured can be attributed to a simple mistake reading a cross staff divided into minutes, meaning the latitude measured could have been 50\u00b0 48' S. The description of bonfires can also be attributed to peat fires caused by lightning, which is not uncommon in the outer islands of the Falklands in February. In 1925, Conor O'Brian analysed the voyage of Hawkins and concluded that the only land he could have sighted was Steeple Jason Island. The British historian Mary Cawkell also points out that criticism of the account of Hawkins' discovery should be tempered by the fact it was written nine years after the event; Hawkins was captured by the Spanish and spent eight years in prison.\nOn 24 January 1600, the Dutchman Sebald de Weert visited the Jason Islands and called them the Sebald Islands (in Spanish, \"Islas Sebaldinas\" or \"Sebaldes\"). This name remained in use for the entire Falkland Islands for a long time; William Dampier used the name \"Sibbel de Wards\" in his reports of his visits in 1684 and 1703, while James Cook still referred to the Sebaldine Islands in the 1770s. The latitude that De Weert provided (50\u00b0 40') was close enough as to be considered, for the first time beyond doubt, the Falkland Islands.\nEnglish Captain John Strong, commander of \"Welfare\", sailed between the two principal islands in 1690 and called the passage \"Falkland Channel\" (now Falkland Sound), after Anthony Cary, 5th Viscount Falkland (1656\u20131694), who as Commissioner of the Admiralty had financed the expedition and later became First Lord of the Admiralty. From this body of water the island group later took its collective name.\nEarly colonisation.\nThe French explorer Louis Antoine de Bougainville established a colony at Port St. Louis, on East Falkland's Berkeley Sound coast in 1764. The French name \"\u00celes Malouines\" was given to the islands \u2013 \"malouin\" being the adjective for the Breton port of Saint-Malo. The Spanish name \"Islas Malvinas\" is a translation of the French name of \"\u00celes Malouines\".\nIn 1765, Captain John Byron, who was unaware the French had established Port Saint Louis on East Falkland, explored Saunders Island around West Falkland. After discovering a natural harbour, he named the area Port Egmont and claimed the islands for Britain on the grounds of prior discovery. The next year Captain John MacBride established a permanent British settlement at Port Egmont.\nUnder the alliance established by the Pacte de Famille, in 1766 France agreed to leave after the Spanish complained about French presence in territories they considered their own. Spain agreed to compensate Louis de Bougainville, the French admiral and explorer who had established the settlement on East Falkland at his own expense. In 1767, the Spanish formally assumed control of Port St. Louis and renamed it \"Puerto Soledad\" (English: Port Solitude).\nIn early 1770 Spanish commander, Don Juan Ignacio de Madariaga, briefly visited Port Egmont. On 10 June he returned from Argentina with five armed ships and 1400 soldiers forcing the British to leave Port Egmont. This action sparked the Falkland Crisis between 10 July 1770 to 22 January 1771 when Britain and Spain almost went to war over the islands. However, conflict was averted when the colony was re-established by Captain John Stott with the ships , HMS \"Hound\" and HMS \"Florida\" (a mail ship which had already been at the founding of the original settlement). Egmont quickly became an important port-of-call for British ships sailing around Cape Horn.\nWith the growing economic pressures stemming from the upcoming American War of Independence, the British government decided that it should withdraw its presence from many overseas settlements in 1774. On 20 May 1776 the British forces under the command of Royal Naval Lieutenant Clayton formally left Port Egmont, while leaving a plaque asserting Britain's continuing sovereignty over the islands. For the next four years, British sealers used Egmont as a base for their activities in the South Atlantic. This ended in 1780 when they were forced to leave by Spanish authorities who then ordered that the British colony be destroyed.\nThe Spanish withdrew from the islands under pressure as a result of the Napoleonic invasion and the Argentine War of Independence. The Spanish garrison of Puerto Soledad was removed to Montevideo in 1811 aboard the brigantine \"G\u00e1lvez\" under an order signed by Francisco Javier de El\u00edo. On departure, the Spanish also left a plaque proclaiming Spain's sovereignty over the islands as the British had done 35 years before. The total depopulation of the Falkland Islands took place.\nInter-colonial period.\nFollowing the departure of the Spanish settlers, the Falkland Islands became the domain of whalers and sealers who used the islands to shelter from the worst of the South Atlantic weather. By merit of their location, the Falkland Islands have often been the last refuge for ships damaged at sea. Most numerous among those using the islands were British and American sealers, where typically between 40 and 50 ships were engaged in exploiting fur seals. This represents an itinerant population of up to 1,000 sailors.\n\"Isabella\".\nOn 8 February 1813 \"Isabella\", a British ship of 193 tons en route from Sydney to London, ran aground off the coast of Speedwell Island, then known as Eagle Island. Among the ship's 54 passengers and crew, all of whom survived the wreck, was the United Irish general and exile Joseph Holt, who subsequently detailed the ordeal in his memoirs. Also aboard had been the heavily pregnant Joanna Durie, who on 21 February 1813 gave birth to Elizabeth Providence Durie.\nThe next day, 22 February 1813, six men who had volunteered to seek help from any nearby Spanish outposts that they could find set out in one of the Isabella's longboats. Braving the South Atlantic in a boat little more than long, they made landfall on the mainland at the River Plate just over a month later. The British gun brig under the command of Lieutenant William D'Aranda was sent to rescue the survivors.\nOn 5 April Captain Charles Barnard of the American sealer \"Nanina\" was sailing off the shore of Speedwell Island, with a discovery boat deployed looking for seals. Having seen smoke and heard gunshots the previous day, he was alert to the possibility of survivors of a ship wreck. This suspicion was heightened when the crew of the boat came aboard and informed Barnard that they had come across a new moccasin as well as the partially butchered remains of a seal. At dinner that evening, the crew observed a man approaching the ship who was shortly joined by eight to ten others. Both Barnard and the survivors from \"Isabella\" had harboured concerns the other party was Spanish and were relieved to discover their respective nationalities.\nBarnard dined with the \"Isabella\" survivors that evening and finding that the British party were unaware of the War of 1812 informed the survivors that technically they were at war with each other. Nevertheless, Barnard promised to rescue the British party and set about preparations for the voyage to the River Plate. Realising that they had insufficient stores for the voyage he set about hunting wild pigs and otherwise acquiring additional food. While Barnard was gathering supplies, however, the British took the opportunity to seize \"Nanina\" and departed leaving Barnard, along with one member of his own crew and three from \"Isabella\", marooned. Shortly thereafter, \"Nancy\" arrived from the River Plate and encountered \"Nanina\", whereupon Lieutenant D'Aranda rescued the erstwhile survivors of \"Isabella\" and took \"Nanina\" itself as a prize of war.\nBarnard and his party survived for eighteen months marooned on the islands until the British whalers and \"Asp\" rescued them in November 1814. The British admiral in Rio de Janeiro had requested their masters to divert to the area to search for the American crew. In 1829, Barnard published an account of his survival entitled \"A Narrative of the Sufferings and Adventures of Capt Charles H. Barnard\".\nArgentine colonisation attempts.\nIn March 1820, , a privately owned frigate that was operated as a privateer under a license issued by the United Provinces of the River Plate, under the command of American Colonel David Jewett, set sail looking to capture Spanish ships as prizes. He captured \"Carlota\", a Portuguese ship, which was considered an act of piracy. A storm resulted in severe damage to \"Hero\u00edna\" and sank the prize \"Carlota\", forcing Jewett to put into Puerto Soledad for repairs in October 1820.\nCaptain Jewett sought assistance from the British explorer James Weddell. Weddell reported the letter he received from Jewett as:\nSir, I have the honor of informing you that I have arrived in this port with a commission from the Supreme Government of the United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata to take possession of these islands on behalf of the country to which they belong by Natural Law. While carrying out this mission I want to do so with all the courtesy and respect all friendly nations; one of the objectives of my mission is to prevent the destruction of resources necessary for all ships passing by and forced to cast anchor here, as well as to help them to obtain the necessary supplies, with minimum expenses and inconvenience. Since your presence here is not in competition with these purposes and in the belief that a personal meeting will be fruitful for both of us, I invite you to come aboard, where you'll be welcomed to stay as long as you wish; I would also greatly appreciate your extending this invitation to any other British subject found in the vicinity; I am, respectfully yours. Signed, Jewett, Colonel of the Navy of the United Provinces of South America and commander of the frigate \"Hero\u00edna\".\nMany modern authors report this letter as representing the declaration issued by Jewett.\nJewett's ship received Weddell's assistance in obtaining anchorage off Port Louis. Weddell reported only 30 seamen and 40 soldiers fit for duty out of a crew of 200, and how Jewett slept with pistols over his head following an attempted mutiny earlier in the voyage. On 6 November 1820, Jewett raised the flag of the United Provinces of the River Plate (a predecessor of modern-day Argentina) and claimed possession of the islands. In the words of Weddell, \"In a few days, he took formal possession of these islands for the patriot government of Buenos Ayres, read a declaration under their colours, planted on a port in ruins, and fired a salute of twenty-one guns.\"\nJewett departed from the Falkland Islands in April 1821. In total he had spent no more than six months on the island, entirely at Port Luis. In 1822, Jewett was accused of piracy by a Portuguese court, but by that time he was in Brazil.\nLuis Vernet's enterprise.\nIn 1823, the United Provinces of the River Plate granted fishing rights to Jorge Pacheco and Luis Vernet. Travelling to the islands in 1824, the first expedition failed almost as soon as it landed, and Pacheco chose not to continue with the venture. Vernet persisted, but the second attempt, delayed until winter 1826 by a Brazilian blockade, was also unsuccessful. The expedition intended to exploit the feral cattle on the islands but the boggy conditions meant the gauchos could not catch cattle in their traditional way. Vernet was by now aware of conflicting British claims to the islands and sought permission from the British consulate before departing for the islands.\nIn 1828, the United Provinces government granted Vernet all of East Falkland including all its resources, and exempted him from taxation if a colony could be established within three years. He took settlers, including British Captain Matthew Brisbane (who had sailed to the islands earlier with Weddell), and before leaving once again sought permission from the British Consulate in Buenos Aires. The British asked for a report for the British government on the islands, and Vernet asked for British protection should they return.\nOn 10 June 1829, Vernet was designated as 'civil and military commandant' of the islands (no governor was ever appointed) and granted a monopoly on seal hunting rights. A protest was lodged by the British Consulate in Buenos Aires. By 1831, the colony was successful enough to be advertising for new colonists, although 's report suggests that the conditions on the islands were quite miserable. Charles Darwin's visit in 1833 confirmed the squalid conditions in the settlement, although Captain Matthew Brisbane (Vernet's deputy) later claimed that this was the result of the \"Lexington\" raid.\nUSS \"Lexington\" raid.\nIn 1831, Vernet attempted to assert his monopoly on seal hunting rights. This led him to capture the American ships \"Harriet\", \"Superior\" and \"Breakwater\". As a reprisal, the United States consul in Buenos Aires sent Captain Silas Duncan of USS \"Lexington\" to recover the confiscated property. After finding what he considered proof that at least four American fishing ships had been captured, plundered, and even outfitted for war, Duncan took seven prisoners aboard \"Lexington\" and charged them with piracy.\nAlso taken on board, Duncan reported, \"were the whole of the (Falklands') population consisting of about forty persons, with the exception of some 'gauchos', or cowboys who were encamped in the interior.\" The group, principally German citizens from Buenos Aires, \"appeared greatly rejoiced at the opportunity thus presented of removing with their families from a desolate region where the climate is always cold and cheerless and the soil extremely unproductive\". However, about 24 people did remain on the island, mainly gauchos and several Charr\u00faa Indians, who continued to trade on Vernet's account.\nMeasures were taken against the settlement. The log of \"Lexington\" reports destruction of arms and a powder store, while settlers remaining later said that there was great damage to private property. Towards the end of his life, Luis Vernet authorised his sons to claim on his behalf for his losses stemming from the raid. In the case lodged against the US Government for compensation, rejected by the US Government of President Cleveland in 1885, Vernet stated that the settlement was destroyed.\nPenal colony and mutiny.\nIn the aftermath of the \"Lexington\" incident, Major Esteban Mestivier was commissioned by the Buenos Aires government to set up a penal colony. He arrived at his destination on 15 November 1832 but his soldiers mutinied and killed him. The mutiny was suppressed by armed sailors from the French whaler \"Jean Jacques\", whilst Mestivier's widow was taken on board the British sealer \"Rapid\". \"Sarand\u00ed\" returned on 30 December 1832 and Major Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Pinedo took charge of the settlement.\nBritish return.\nThe Argentinian assertions of sovereignty provided the spur for Britain to send a naval task force in order to finally and permanently return to the islands.\nOn 3 January 1833, Captain James Onslow, of the brig-sloop , arrived at Vernet's settlement at Port Louis to request that the flag of the United Provinces of the River Plate be replaced with the British one, and for the administration to leave the islands. While Major Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Pinedo, commander of the schooner \"Sarand\u00ed\", wanted to resist, his numerical disadvantage was obvious, particularly as a large number of his crew were British mercenaries who were unwilling to fight their own countrymen. Such a situation was not unusual in the newly independent states in Latin America, where land forces were strong, but navies were frequently quite undermanned. As such he protested verbally, but departed without a fight on 5 January. Argentina claims that Vernet's colony was also expelled at this time, though sources from the time appear to dispute this, suggesting that the colonists were encouraged to remain initially under the authority of Vernet's storekeeper, William Dickson and later his deputy, Matthew Brisbane.\nInitial British plans for the Islands were based upon the continuation of Vernet's settlement at Port Louis. An Argentine immigrant of Irish origin, William Dickson, was appointed as the British representative and provided with a flagpole and flag to be flown whenever ships were in harbour. In March 1833, Vernet's Deputy, Matthew Brisbane returned and presented his papers to Captain Robert FitzRoy of , which coincidentally happened to be in harbour at the time. Fitzroy encouraged Brisbane to continue with Vernet's enterprise with the proviso that whilst private enterprise was encouraged, Argentine assertions of sovereignty would not be welcome.\nBrisbane reasserted his authority over Vernet's settlement and recommenced the practice of paying employees in promissory notes. Due to Vernet's reduced status, the promissory notes were devalued, which meant that the employees received fewer goods at Vernet's stores for their wages. After months of freedom following the \"Lexington\" raid this accentuated dissatisfaction with the leadership of the settlement. In August 1833, under the leadership of Antonio Rivero, a gang of Creole and Indian gauchos ran amok in the settlement. Armed with muskets obtained from American sealers, the gang killed five members of Vernet's settlement including both Dickson and Brisbane. Shortly afterward the survivors fled Port Louis, seeking refuge on Turf Island in Berkeley Sound until rescued by the British sealer \"Hopeful\" in October 1833.\nLt Henry Smith was installed as the first British resident in January 1834. One of his first actions was to pursue and arrest Rivero's gang for the murders committed the previous August. The gang was sent for trial in London but could not be tried as the Crown Court did not have jurisdiction over the Falkland Islands. In the British colonial system, colonies had their own, distinct governments, finances, and judicial systems. Rivero was not tried and sentenced because the British local government and local judiciary had not yet been installed in 1834; these were created later, by the 1841 British Letters Patent. Subsequently, Rivero has acquired the status of a folk hero in Argentina, where he is portrayed as leading a rebellion against British rule. Ironically it was the actions of Rivero that were responsible for the ultimate demise of Vernet's enterprise on the Falklands.\nCharles Darwin revisited the Falklands in 1834; the settlements Darwin and Fitzroy both take their names from this visit.\nAfter the arrest of Rivero, Smith set about restoring the settlement at Port Louis, repairing the damage done by the \"Lexington\" raid and renaming it 'Anson's Harbour'. Lt Lowcay succeeded Smith in April 1838, followed by Lt Robinson in September 1839 and Lt Tyssen in December 1839.\nVernet later attempted to return to the Islands but was refused permission to return. The British Crown reneged on promises and refused to recognise rights granted by Captain Onslow at the time of the reoccupation. Eventually, after travelling to London, Vernet received paltry compensation for horses shipped to Port Louis many years before. G.T. Whittington obtained a concession of from Vernet that he later exploited with the formation of the Falkland Islands Commercial Fishery and Agricultural Association.\nBritish colonisation.\nImmediately following their return to the Falkland Islands and the failure of Vernet's settlement, the British maintained Port Louis as a military outpost. There was no attempt to colonise the islands following the intervention, instead there was a reliance upon the remaining rump of Vernet's settlement. Lt. Smith received little support from the Royal Navy and the islands developed largely on his initiative but he had to rely on a group of armed gauchos to enforce authority and protect British interests. Smith received advice from Vernet in this regard, and in turn continued to administer Vernet's property and provide him with regular accounts. His superiors later rebuked him for his ideas and actions in promoting the development of the small settlement in Port Louis. In frustration, Smith resigned but his successors Lt. Lowcay and Lt. Tyssen did not continue with the initiatives Smith had pursued and the settlement began to stagnate.\nIn 1836, East Falkland was surveyed by Admiral George Grey, and further in 1837 by Lowcay. Admiral George Grey, conducting the geographic survey in November 1836 had the following to say about their first view of East Falkland:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We anchored a little after sunset off a creek called 'Johnson's Harbour'. The day having been cloudy with occasional showers, these islands at all times dreary enough, looked particularly so on our first view of them, the shores of sound, steep, with bare hills intersected with ravines rising from them, these hills without a tree and the clouds hanging low, gave them exactly the appearance of the Cheviots or a Scotch moor on a winter's day and considering we were in the May of these latitudes, the first impression of the climate was not favourable, the weather however, was not called, the thermometer was [17\u00a0\u00b0C] which is Howick mid-summer temperature.\nPressure to develop the islands as a colony began to build as the result of a campaign mounted by British merchant G. T. Whittington. Whittington formed the Falkland Islands Commercial Fishery and Agricultural Association and (based on information indirectly obtained from Vernet) published a pamphlet entitled \"The Falkland Islands\". Later a petition signed by London merchants was presented to the British Government demanding the convening of a public meeting to discuss the future development of the Falkland Islands. Whittington petitioned the Colonial Secretary, Lord Russell, proposing that his association be allowed to colonise the islands. In May 1840, the British Government made the decision to colonise the Falkland Islands.\nUnaware of the decision by the British Government to colonise the islands, Whittington grew impatient and decided to take action of his own initiative. Obtaining two ships, he sent his brother, J. B. Whittington, on a mission to land stores and settlers at Port Louis. On arrival he presented his claim to land that his brother had bought from Vernet. Lt. Tyssen was taken aback by Whittington's arrival, indicating that he had no authority to allow this; however, he was unable to prevent the party from landing. Whittington constructed a large house for his party, and using a salting house built by Vernet established a fish-salting business.\nEstablishment of Port Stanley.\nIn 1833 the United Kingdom asserted authority over the Falkland Islands and Richard Clement Moody, a highly esteemed Royal Engineer, was appointed as Lieutenant Governor of the islands. This post was renamed Governor of the Falkland Islands in 1843, when he also became Commander-in-Chief of the Falkland Islands. Moody left England for Falkland on 1 October 1841 aboard the ship \"Hebe\" and\narrived in Anson's Harbour later that month. He was accompanied by twelve sappers and miners and their families; together with Whittington's colonists this brought the population of Anson's Harbour to approximately 50. When Moody arrived, the Falklands was 'almost in a state of anarchy', but he used his powers 'with great wisdom and moderation' to develop the Islands' infrastructure and, commanding detachment of sappers, erected government offices, a school and barracks, residences, ports, and a new road system.\nIn 1842, Moody was instructed by Lord Stanley the British Secretary of State for War and the Colonies to report on the potential of the Port William area as the site of the new capital. Moody assigned the task of surveying the area to Captain Ross, leader of the Antarctic Expedition. Captain Ross delivered his report in 1843, concluding that Port William afforded a good deep-water anchorage for naval vessels, and that the southern shores of Port Jackson was a suitable location for the proposed settlement. Moody accepted the recommendation of Ross and construction of the new settlement started in July 1843. Inn July 1845, at Moody's suggestion, the new capital of the islands was officially named Port Stanley after Lord Stanley. Not everyone was enthused with the selection of the location of the new capital, J. B. Whittington famously remarked that \"Of all the miserable bog holes, I believe that Mr Moody has selected one of the worst for the site of his town.\"\nThe structure of the Colonial Government was established in 1845 with the formation of the Legislative Council and Executive Council and work on the construction of Government House commenced. The following year, the first officers appointed to the Colonial Government took their posts; by this time a number of residences, a large storage shed, carpenter's shop and blacksmith's shop had been completed and the Government Dockyard laid out. In 1845 Moody introduced tussock grass into Great Britain from Falkland, for which he received the gold medal of the Royal Agricultural Society. The Coat of arms of the Falkland Islands notably includes an image of tussock grass. Moody returned to England in February 1849. Moody Brook is named after him.\nWith the establishment of the deep-water anchorage and improvements in port facilities, Stanley saw a dramatic increase in the number of visiting ships in the 1840s in part due to the California Gold Rush. A boom in ship provisioning and ship-repair resulted, aided by the notoriously bad weather in the South Atlantic and around Cape Horn. Stanley and the Falkland Islands are famous as the repository of many wrecks of 19th-century ships that reached the islands only to be condemned as unseaworthy and were often employed as floating warehouses by local merchants.\nAt one point in the 19th century, Stanley became one of the world's busiest ports. However, the ship-repair trade began to slacken off in 1876 with the establishment of the Plimsoll line, which saw the elimination of the so-called coffin ships and unseaworthy vessels that might otherwise have ended up in Stanley for repair. With the introduction of increasingly reliable iron steamships in the 1890s the trade declined further and was no longer viable following the opening of the Panama Canal in 1914. Port Stanley continued to be a busy port supporting whaling and sealing activities in the early part of the 20th century, British warships (and garrisons) in the First and Second World War and the fishing and cruise ship industries in the latter half of the century.\nGovernment House opened as the offices of the Lieutenant Governor in 1847. Government House continued to develop with various additions, formally becoming the Governor's residence in 1859 when Governor Moore took residence. Government House remains the residence of the Governor.\nMany of the colonists begin to move from Ansons' Harbour to Port Stanley. As the new town expanded, the population grew rapidly, reaching 200 by 1849. The population was further expanded by the arrival of 30 married Chelsea Pensioners and their families. The Chelsea Pensioners were to form the permanent garrison and police force, taking over from the Royal Sappers and Miners Regiment which had garrisoned the early colony.\nThe Exchange Building opened in 1854; part of the building was later used as a church. 1854 also saw the establishment of Marmont Row, including the Eagle Inn, now known as the Upland Goose Hotel. In 1887, Jubilee Villas were built to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria. Jubilee Villas are a row of brick built houses that follow a traditional British pattern; positioned on Ross road near the waterfront, they became an iconic image during the Falklands War.\nPeat is common on the islands and has traditionally been exploited as a fuel. Uncontrolled exploitation of this natural resource led to peat slips in 1878 and 1886. The 1878 peat slip resulted in the destruction of several houses, whilst the 1886 peat slip resulted in the deaths of two women and the destruction of the Exchange Building.\nChrist Church Cathedral was consecrated in 1892 and completed in 1903. It received its famous whalebone arch, constructed from the jaws of two blue whales, in 1933 to commemorate the centenary of continuous British administration. Also consecrated in 1892 was the Tabernacle United Free Church, constructed from an imported timber kit.\nDevelopment of agriculture and the Camp.\nA few years after the British had established themselves in the islands, a number of new British settlements were started. Initially many of these settlements were established in order to exploit the feral cattle on the islands. Following the introduction of the Cheviot breed of sheep to the islands in 1852, sheep farming became the dominant form of agriculture on the Islands.\nSalvador Settlement was one of the earliest, being started in the 1830s, by a Gibraltarian immigrant (hence its other name of \"Gibraltar Settlement\"), and it is still run by his descendants, the Pitalugas.\nVernet furnished Samuel Fisher Lafone, a British merchant operating from Montevideo, with details of the Falkland Islands including a map. Sensing that the exploitation of feral cattle on the islands would be a lucrative venture, in 1846 he negotiated a contract with the British Government that gave him exclusive rights to this resource. Until 1846 Moody had allotted feral cattle to new settlers and the new agreement not only prevented this but made Stanley dependent upon Lafone for supplies of beef.\nCattle were concentrated in the southern part of East Falkland, an area that became known as Lafonia. Lafone was an absentee landlord and never actually set foot on the islands. His activities were not monitored by the British and rather than introducing more British settlers as he promised, he brought large numbers of Spanish and Indian gauchos to hunt cattle. In 1846, they established Hope Place on the south shores of Brenton Loch and in 1849 a sod wall (the Boca wall) was built across the isthmus at Darwin to control the movement of cattle.\nLafone continued to develop his business interests and in 1849 looked to establish a joint stock company with his London creditors. The company was launched as The Royal Falkland Land, Cattle, Seal and Fishery Company in 1850 but soon thereafter was incorporated under Royal Charter as The Falkland Islands Company Limited. Lafone became a director and his brother-in-law J.P. Dale the company's first manager in the islands. By 1852, the feral cattle had been hunted virtually to extinction by gauchos and the company switched to sheep farming with the introduction of the Cheviot breed of sheep. Hope Place proved to be an unsuitable location and the operation moved to Darwin. In 1860, the Lafone Beef contract was terminated but the Falkland Islands Company was given a grant to Lafonia. Ownership of the remaining cattle outside of Lafonia reverted to the Crown and hunting cattle without permission was banned.\nIn the second half of the 19th century, Darwin, Goose Green, Fox Bay and Port Howard were established. Port Howard was founded by James Lovegrove Waldron, and his brother in 1866; the Waldron brothers later left for Patagonia, but left the farm under local management.\nDarwin was initially the haunt of gauchos and cattle farmers, but sheep farming came to dominate the area, and Scottish shepherds were brought in. A few years later, the first large tallow works in the islands (though not the first) was set up by the FIC in 1874. It handled 15,891 sheep in 1880.\nFrom the 1880s, until 1972, Darwin and Fox Bay had their own separate medical officers. Nowadays, most medical care is based in Stanley.\nExploitation of maritime resources.\nThe Falkland Islands were used as a base for whaling ships hunting the southern right whale and sperm whale from the 1770s until British authority was established over the islands and surrounding seas. Whaling was briefly revived with the establishment of a whaling station on New Island from 1909 to 1917 until whaling operations moved to South Georgia.\nFur seals had long been exploited for their pelts but numbers entered a drastic decline in the early 19th century. As a result, seal hunting died off, although continuing at a low level. In order to conserve stocks, a ban on the hunting of fur seals during summers months was enacted in 1881, but it was not until 1921 that hunting was banned entirely.\nElephant seals were exploited for oil but like the fur seals their numbers declined drastically in the mid-1850s. Sealers instead turned their attention to the South American sea lion resulting in a dramatic decline in their numbers that made sealing uneconomic. Attempts to revive the trade, including a sealing station at Port Albemarle, were unsuccessful.\nEven penguins were exploited for oil. Rockhopper and gentoo penguins were rendered down in trypots from 1860 until the 1880s.\nTwentieth century.\nEstablishment of communications.\nAlthough the first telephone lines were installed by the Falkland Islands Company in the 1880s, the Falkland Islands Government was slow to embrace telephony. It was not until 1897 that a telephone line was installed between Cape Pembroke lighthouse and the police station. The islands isolation was broken in 1911 when Guglielmo Marconi installed a wireless telegraphy station that enabled telegrams to be sent to mainland Uruguay.\nA line was laid between Darwin and Stanley, with the ship \"Consort\" landing poles on the coast. Construction commenced in 1906 and was finished in 1907 (a length of nearly ). The line was initially only for business but the public could make calls occasionally. Lines continued to be laid to most of the major settlements in the islands, with the Falkland Islands police responsible for their maintenance until 1927. Communications among the settlements relied on the telephone network until radio telephones were introduced in the 1950s, although the telephone network continued until 1982. Telecommunications improved dramatically after the Falklands War, when an earth station was installed to allow direct dialling for the first time. In 1997, an Internet service was launched and by 2002 nearly 90% of Falkland homes had Internet access.\nEconomic development.\nIn 1911 the islands had 3,275 inhabitants of whom 916 lived in Port Stanley.\nA canning factory was opened in 1911 at Goose Green and was initially extremely successful. It absorbed a large proportion of surplus sheep but during the postwar slump it suffered a serious loss and closed in 1921.\nDespite this setback, a mere year later, the settlement grew after it became the base for the Falkland Islands Company's sheep farm in Lafonia in 1922, with improved sheep handling and wool shed being built. In 1927, the settlement's huge sheep shearing shed was built, which is claimed to be the world's largest, with a capacity of five thousand sheep. In 1979, 100,598 sheep were shorn at Goose Green.\nThe mid-20th century saw a number of abortive attempts to diversify the islands' economy away from large scale sheep ranching.\nIn the period just after the Second World War, Port Albemarle, in the south west of West Falkland, was enlarged by the Colonial Development Company and included its own power station, jetty, Nissen huts etc.; this was an attempt to revive the old sealing industry which had flourished during the 19th century. However, the project proved to be nonviable, not least because seal numbers had declined massively.\nSimilarly, Ajax Bay on Falkland Sound, was developed by the Colonial Development Corporation in the 1950s, which was also responsible for developing Port Albemarle. It was mainly a refrigeration plant, and was supposed to freeze Falkland mutton, but this was found to be economically nonviable, despite the huge expense incurred. Many of the pre-fabricated houses here were moved to Stanley. The site later became a British field hospital during the landings of Operation Sutton.\nThe seas around the Falkland Islands were not well policed prior to the Falklands War, and many foreign boats fished off the islands, despite protests that potential revenue was being lost. Fishing licences were only later to be introduced.\nEducation.\nIn 1956, J. L. Waldron Ltd built a school at Port Howard, possibly inspired by the \"gift\" of the FIC at Darwin, a few years earlier.\nUp until the 1970s, Goose Green was the site of a boarding school, run by the state. \"Camp\" children boarded here, and there were 40 spaces. The boarding school was later transferred to Stanley, although the recent emphasis has been on locally based education. The school itself became an Argentine HQ, and was burnt down. A new (day) school has been built for local children.\nFirst World War.\nPort Stanley became an important coaling station for the Royal Navy. This led to ships based there being involved in major naval engagements in both the First and Second World Wars.\nThe strategic significance of the Falkland Islands was confirmed by the second major naval engagement of the First World War. Admiral Graf Maximilian von Spee's German East Asia Squadron called at the islands on its trip from the Pacific Ocean back to Germany, intending to destroy the Royal Navy radio relay station and coaling depot there. Unknown to von Spee, a British squadron, including two battlecruisers considerably more powerful than his forces, had been sent to hunt down his squadron and happened to be in the harbour coaling. In the one-sided battle which followed, most of von Spee's squadron was sunk. Canopus Hill, south of Stanley, is named after , which had fired the first shot in the battle.\nSecond World War.\nThe Falkland Islands Defence Force was called out to man gun positions and signalling posts around Stanley as soon as word was received of Britain's declaration of war on 3 September 1939. Mounted patrols were carried out in the Camp, and coast-watching stations were created around the islands to guard against the approach of enemy ships and the landing of enemy forces. The Falkland Islanders experienced much the same kind of war-time privations and restrictions as the British population, including black-outs, travel restrictions, and rationing.\nIn December 1939, in the immediate aftermath of the Battle of the River Plate, heavy cruiser , which had been self-refitting in the Falkland Islands at the time of the battle, steamed to join and at the mouth of the River Plate, trapping the . Convinced by British propaganda and false intelligence that a major naval task force awaited his ship and short of ammunition, Captain Langsdorf of \"Admiral Graf Spee\" chose instead to scuttle the ship rather than face the Royal Navy.\nOperation Tabarin, an expedition to the Antarctic, was mounted from the islands during the war. The purpose of the expedition was to assert Britain's claims on the continent, as well as gather scientific data. Operation Tabarin was later replaced by the Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey, which was later renamed the British Antarctic Survey.\nIn 1942, in response to the Japanese entry into the war, additional forces were sent to the islands to strengthen their defence against invasion. The largest component of these additional forces was a battalion of the West Yorkshire Regiment. In 1944, as a result of the reduced threat of invasion from Japan, the West Yorks were replaced by a smaller contingent of the Royal Scots.\nOver the whole war more than 150 Falkland Islanders out of a population of only 2,300 volunteered for the British armed forces - 6.5% of the entire population - 24 of whom did not return. In July 1944, all volunteers were given the right to be identified by a \"Falkland Islands\" shoulder-flash. In addition to these contributions to the British war-effort, the Falkland Islands also donated five Supermarine Spitfires to the British Royal Air Force.\nArgentine incursions.\nWith the exception of an attempt by President Juan Per\u00f3n to buy the Falkland Islands in 1953 which was rejected as inconceivable by the British government, the immediate post-war period was fairly uneventful. However, a series of incidents in the 1960s marked the intensification of Argentine sovereignty claims.\nThe first of these took place in 1964, when a light plane piloted by Miguel Fitzgerald touched down on the racecourse at Stanley. Leaping from the aircraft, he handed a letter claiming sovereignty to a bemused islander before flying off again. The stunt was timed to coincide with Argentine diplomatic efforts at the UN Decolonisation Committee.\nA more serious incident took place on 28 September 1966 when eighteen young Peronists staged a symbolic invasion of the Islands by hijacking an Aerol\u00edneas Argentinas airliner and landing it in Stanley; the group called this action Operativo C\u00f3ndor. There, they raised seven Argentine flags and took four islanders hostage. The planning had been done during a trip to the islands that one of the leaders had made as a tourist.\n The airliner left at from Buenos Aires, bound for R\u00edo Gallegos with 48 passengers on board, including Argentine Rear Admiral Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Guzm\u00e1n, who was on his way to Tierra del Fuego, an Argentine territory of which he was governor. Two armed men entered the flight deck and ordered the pilot to change course toward the Falklands. The pilot attempted to land at the racecourse but the plane hit telegraph poles, and the undercarriage sank into the mud. Islanders, assuming that the plane was in trouble, rushed to assist but found themselves taken hostage by the hijackers (included in the group of four was a young police sergeant, Terry Peck, who became a local hero in the Falklands War). Les Gleadell, acting Governor of the Falkland Islands, ordered that the DC-4 be surrounded. He received three of the invaders, who announced that they had as much right as anyone to be there and in reply were firmly told that they should disarm and give up. The result of this meeting was an agreement that seven men, including Peck and Captain Ian Martin, commanding a four-man Royal Marines detachment, should be exchanged for the hostages aboard the aircraft. The 26 passengers were then allowed to disembark and sent to lodge with local families, as the island had no hotel. On being taken past the governor's residence, Guzm\u00e1n laughingly commented: \"Mi casa\" (\"my house\").\nAfter a bitterly cold night in the aircraft, which contained only brandy, wine, orange juice and a few biscuits, the kidnappers surrendered. They were kept locked up in an annex to St Mary's Church for a week until they were put aboard an Argentine ship, the \"Bah\u00eda Buen Suceso,\" which had lingered outside the harbor awaiting conclusion of the affair. The men were tried in Argentina on crimes that included illegal deprivation of freedom, possession of weapons of war, illegal association, piracy, and robbery in the open. The leaders were sentenced to three years in prison and the others to nine months.\nOn October of the same year a group of Argentine naval special forces conducted covert landings from the submarine ARA \"Santiago del Estero\". The 12-man team, which landed some from Stanley, was led by Juan Jos\u00e9 Lombardo who later, as Chief of Naval Operations, planned the 1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands.\nIn November 1968, Miguel Fitzgerald was hired by the Argentine press to attempt a reprise of his 1964 landing. Accompanied by one of the 1966 hijackers, he flew to Stanley but on arrival found he could not land at the racecourse due to obstacles placed following the hijacking. The plane was forced to crash land on Eliza Cove Road, but the two occupants were unharmed. The stunt was intended to coincide with the visit of Lord Chalfont to the islands.\nThe latter incident proved counter-productive to the Argentine sovereignty push, as Lord Chalfont had been talking to a public meeting at the time of the plane's arrival. The islanders made it plain to Lord Chalfont that they rejected a Memorandum of Agreement negotiated between Britain and Argentina that August which stated that Britain was prepared to discuss sovereignty provided the islanders' wishes were respected. This spurred the formation of the Falkland Islands Committee by London barrister Bill Hunter-Christie and others. The Emergency Committee, as it became known, proved to be an effective lobbying organisation, constantly undermining Foreign Office initiatives on sovereignty negotiations. In December 1968, the lobbying effort managed to force the British Government to state that the islanders' wishes would be paramount.\nGrowing links with Argentina.\nPartly as the result of diplomatic pressure, economic and political links with Argentina increased in the 1960s and 1970s. These became severed after the end of the Falklands War, but before the war they were not entirely negative, and some islanders sent their children to boarding schools in Argentina.\nRealising that any talks on the sovereignty issue would be derailed if it did not meet with the islanders' wishes, the British and Argentine Governments enacted a series of measures designed to encourage dependence on Argentina. In 1971, following secret talks between the two Governments (and without consulting the islanders), the communications agreement was signed. The thrust of the agreement was the establishment of direct air and sea links between the islands and Argentina, together with agreements on postal and telephony services. Following the agreement the subsidised shipping link with Montevideo ended, a passenger and cargo ship service to the mainland (that would ameliorate any dependence on Argentina) was promised by the British but never provided.\n\"L\u00edneas A\u00e9reas del Estado\" (LADE), the airline operated by the Argentine Air Force (\"Fuerza A\u00e9rea Argentina\" or FAA), began an air link to the islands. Initially this service operated amphibious aircraft between Comodoro Rivadavia and Stanley using Grumman HU-16 Albatross aircraft. The inauguration of the service was commemorated by a series of stamps issued by both the Argentine and Falkland Island postal services. In 1972, a temporary airstrip was constructed by Argentina near Stanley. Britain constructed a small permanent airstrip in 1976 suitable only for short haul flights.\nAs part of the agreement, islanders had to travel via Argentina and were forced to carry Argentine Identity Cards issued in Buenos Aires. The \"Tarjeta Provisoria\" or \"white card\" as they were known were hated by the islanders, who felt they were a \"de facto\" Argentine passport, since only islanders were required to use them and not other temporary residents of the islands. Tensions were raised further with the agreement that male Falkland Islanders would not have to undertake conscription into the Argentine Army, since this carried the implication that Falkland Islanders were Argentine citizens.\nLADE set up an office in Stanley and mail was routed through Argentina. Medical treatments unavailable in the islands were provided in Argentina and scholarships were made available for study in Buenos Aires, C\u00f3rdoba and other Argentine cities. Spanish language teachers were provided by Argentina. Foreign Office officials in Stanley were instructed to do everything possible to foster good relations between the Falkland Islands and Argentina.\nThe islands became more dependent upon Argentina, when the British and Argentine governments agreed that the islands would be supplied with petrol, diesel and oil by YPF, the Argentine national oil and gas company.\nDespite these tensions relationships between the islanders and the Argentines operating the new services in the islands were cordial. Although there was apprehension, politics were generally avoided and on a one-to-one basis there was never any real hostility.\nOn the international level, relations began to sour in 1975 when Argentine delegates at the London meeting of the International Parliamentary Union condemned Britain's \"act of international piracy\" in establishing a colony in the Falkland Islands. Diplomatic relations between Britain and Argentina were broken but resumed in 1976.\nIn October 1975, the British Government tasked Lord Shackleton (son of the Antarctic explorer Sir Ernest Shackleton) with an economic survey of the Falkland Islands. The Argentine Government reacted furiously and refused permission for Lord Shackleton to travel via Argentina. Later the ship transporting Shackleton to the islands, , was fired upon by the Argentine destroyer ARA \"Almirante Storni\".\nIn 1976, after a military junta took control of the country, Argentina covertly established a military base on Southern Thule. It was discovered by the British Antarctic Survey ship in 1977. The British protested but restricted their response to a diplomatic protest. Backing up the diplomatic efforts, the British Prime Minister Jim Callaghan sent a naval task force consisting of surface ships and a nuclear submarine. Nevertheless, Argentine aircraft and warships harassed ships fishing in Falkland waters.\nLord Shackleton's report was delivered in 1977 and documented the economic stagnation in the islands. It nevertheless concluded that the islands made a net contribution to the British economy and had economic potential for development. Recommendations included oil exploration, exploitation of the fisheries, extension of the Stanley runway, the creation of a development agency, the expansion of the road network, expansion of the facilities at Stanley harbour and the breakdown of absentee landlord owned farms into family units. The report was largely ignored at the time, as it was felt that acting upon it would sour relations with Argentina. A reprise of the report by Lord Shackleton in 1982 following the Falklands War became the blueprint for subsequent economic development of the islands.\nFalklands War.\nArgentina invaded the islands on 2 April 1982, using special forces, which landed at Mullet Creek and advanced on Government House in Stanley, with a secondary force coming in from Yorke Bay. They encountered little opposition, there being only a small force of fifty-seven British marines and eleven sailors, in addition to the Falkland Islands Defence Force (who were later sent to Fox Bay). There was only one Argentine fatality. The event garnered international attention at a level which the islands had never experienced before, and made them a household name in the UK.\nFor a brief period, the Falkland Islands found themselves under Argentine control. This included Spanish-language signage, and attempts to make the islanders drive on the right (although few roads in the Falklands at the time actually had two lanes). In many parts of the Camp, such as Goose Green and Pebble Island, the islanders found themselves under house arrest.\nThe British responded with an expeditionary force that landed seven weeks later and, after fierce fighting, forced the Argentine garrison to surrender on 14 June 1982. The war proved to be an anomaly in a number of different respects, not least that it proved that small arms still had a role to play. It also had major consequences for the military junta, which was toppled soon afterwards.\nMargaret Thatcher's general political legacy remains controversial and divisive within the UK and within the context of the Falklands her government's withdrawal of HMS \"Endurance\" is a stated contributing factor to the causes of the conflict because it gave the wrong signals about the UK attitude towards maintaining its possession. However, within the Falklands, she is considered a heroine because of the determination of her response to the Argentine invasion. The islanders celebrate Margaret Thatcher Day on 10 January; and Thatcher Drive in Stanley is named after her.\nPost-war.\nFollowing the war, Britain focused on improving its facilities on the islands. It increased its military presence significantly, building a large base at RAF Mount Pleasant and its port at Mare Harbour. It also invested heavily in improving facilities in Stanley and transportation and infrastructure around the islands, tarmacking the Stanley\u2013Mount Pleasant road and many roads within Stanley. The population has risen due to the growth of Stanley, but has declined in \"Camp\" (the countryside). Since November 2008, a regular ferry service has linked East and West Falkland, carrying cars, passengers and cargo serviced by MV \"Concordia Bay\", a twin-screw shallow draught landing craft.\nA major change to the governance of the Falkland Islands was introduced by the 1985 constitution. The Falkland Islands Government (FIG) became a parliamentary representative dependency, whose members are democratically elected; while the governor, as head of government and representative of the Queen, is purely a figurehead without executive powers. Effectively, the Falkland Islands are self-governing, with the exception of foreign policy. (The FIG represents itself at the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonisation, as the British Government no longer attends.)\nLinks with Argentina were severed in the post-war period, and laws introduced forbidding Argentine citizens from buying land. An alternative trading partner was found in Chile, with links developing over the years, including flights to Punta Arenas (in the far south of Patagonian Chile, near Tierra del Fuego). In recent years, Argentines have been allowed to visit the islands again, often to visit the military cemeteries where their friends and loved ones are buried.\nLand mines were a persistent problem for 38 years following the war. Land mine clearance was completed by November 2020.\nIn 1983, the UK passed the British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act granting full British citizenship to the islanders. High-profile dignitaries visited to show British commitment to the islands, including Margaret Thatcher, the Prince of Wales, and Princess Alexandra. In 1985, the Falkland Islands Dependency was split into the Falkland Islands proper and a newly separate territory of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands.\nRelations between the UK and Argentina remained hostile after 1982. Although the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution calling on the UK and Argentina to return to negotiations over the Islands' future, the UK ruled out further talks over the islands' sovereignty. The UK also maintained the arms embargo against Argentina that they initiated during the war, compelling the Argentine armed forces (a traditional UK buyer) to switch to other markets. Diplomatic relations were restored in 1989.\nRelations between the UK and Argentina improved further in the 1990s. In 1998, Argentine President Carlos Menem visited London, where he reaffirmed Argentina claims to the Islands, but stated that only peaceful means would be used for their recovery. In 2001, UK Prime Minister Tony Blair visited Argentina, where he stated his hope that the UK and Argentina could resolve their differences. However, no talks on sovereignty took place during the visit.\nIncreased British military presence and new bases.\nAfter the war, the British still faced potential future aggression, so an aircraft carrier was kept on station guarding the islands with its squadron of Sea Harriers, while the local airfield was prepared for jet aircraft. took guard duty first, whilst went north to change a gearbox. \"Invincible\" then returned to relieve \"Hermes\", which urgently needed to have its boilers cleaned. \"Invincible\" remained until was rushed south (being commissioned during the journey). Once the Port Stanley runway was ready for jets, several RAF F-4 Phantoms were stationed there, relieving \"Illustrious.\"\nThe islands lacked barracks for a permanent garrison, so the Ministry of defence chartered two former car ferries as barracks ships: from the Union Company of New Zealand and from Sealink in Britain. \"Rangatira\" arrived in Port Stanley on 11 July 1982 and stayed until 26 September 1983.\nLater, the British government decided to construct a new RAF base as the centrepiece of plans to strengthen the island defences and deter any further attempts to take the Falklands by force. This was a massive undertaking \u2014 including construction of the world's longest corridor, linking the barracks, messes, recreation and welfare areas of the base. The base is occasionally referred to by residents as \"the Death Star\" because of its vast size and sometimes confusing layout.\nMount Pleasant, to the west of Stanley, was chosen as the site for the new base. The airfield was opened by The Duke of York in 1985, and became fully operational in 1986.\nUsing the IATA airport code MPN, RAF Mount Pleasant also acts as the Falkland Islands' only international airport, in addition to its military role. Flights open to civilian passengers are operated twice-weekly.\nThese flights are currently operated by a civilian airline on behalf of the Royal Air Force, and fly to and from RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire, UK with a refuelling stop at RAF Ascension Island in the south-central Atlantic Ocean. Chilean airline LAN Airlines also operate weekly flights from Santiago.\nAttempts at diversifying the economy.\nBefore the Falklands War, sheep-farming was the Falkland Islands' only industry. Since the late 1980s, when two species of squid popular with consumers were discovered in substantial numbers near the Falklands, fishing has become the largest part of the economy.\nOn 14 September 2011, Rockhopper Exploration announced plans under way for oil production to commence in 2016, through the use of Floating production storage and offloading (FPSO) technology, replicating the methodology used on the Foinaven field off the Shetland Islands. The production site will require approximately 110 people working offshore and another 40 working onshore. The oil is expected to trade at 90\u2013105% of the Brent crude price.\nSome small businesses attempted at Fox Bay have included a market garden, a salmon farm and a knitting mill with \"Warrah Knitwear\".\nTourism is the second-largest part of the economy. The war brought the islands newfound fame; now tourists come both to see wildlife and go on war tours. Cruise ships often visit, frequently as a tie-in to Antarctica. Nonetheless, the remoteness of the archipelago, and the lack of direct flights to major cities, make the Falklands an expensive destination.\nConservation.\nIn line with increasing global interest in environmental issues, some nature reserves have been established around the islands, although there are no national parks. In 1990, the Clifton family who owned Sea Lion Island sold it to the Falkland Island Development Company. They had planted 60,000 stands of tussac grass, considered important because on the main islands much tussac has been depredated by grazing. A similar trend may be seen on Bleaker Island, where the farm \"went organic\" in 1999. Also in the 1990s, Steeple Jason Island and Grand Jason Island were bought by New York philanthropist Michael Steinhardt, who later donated them to the Bronx Zoo-based Wildlife Conservation Society. He also gave them US$425,000 to build a conservation station named after himself and his wife Judy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10690", "revid": "392351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10690", "title": "Geography of the Falkland Islands", "text": "Geography of the Falkland Islands\nThe Falkland Islands are located in the South Atlantic Ocean between 51\u00b0S and 53\u00b0S on a projection of the Patagonian Shelf, part of the South American continental shelf. In ancient geological time this shelf was part of Gondwana, and around 400 million years ago split from what is now Africa and drifted westwards from it. Today the islands are subjected to the Roaring Forties, winds that shape both their geography and climate.\nThe Falklands comprise two main islands, West Falkland and East Falkland, and about 776 small islands.\nGeology.\nThe geological history of the Falkland Islands began during the Precambrian era more than 1 billion years ago, when Proterozoic granites and gneisses were laid down in Gondwana. These rocks became part of the Cape Meredith/ formation and outcrop at the Cape. During the Siluro-Devonian era, these rocks were overlain with quartzose and subarkosic sandstones with some siltstone and mudstone, rocks that are particularly erosion- and weather-resistant, giving these parts of the islands a rugged landscape and coastline.\nTectonic forces continued to form the region: a mountain chain formed, part of which now creates Wickham Heights on East Falkland Island and extends westwards through West Falkland into the Jason Islands. A basin developed and was filled with land-based, or terrigenous, sediments. These layers of sand and mud filled the basin as it sank and as they hardened they produced the rocks of the sedimentary Lafonia Group of the Falklands. These rocks are similar to those in southern Africa's Karoo basin.\nAbout 290 million years ago, in the Carboniferous period, an ice age engulfed the area as glaciers advanced from the polar region eroding and transporting rocks. These rocks were deposited as extensive moraines and glacial till, or they sank in the sea while the glacier floated in a layer of ice. When the glacial sediments were turned into stone they formed the rocks that now make up the Fitzroy Tillite Formation in the Falklands. Identical rocks are found in southern Africa.\nDuring the break-up of Gondwana and the formation of the Atlantic Ocean some 200 million years ago, minor crustal fragments that were to become the Falkland Islands detached themselves from the nascent African continent and drifted westwards, dividing and rotating as they did so before settling on the Patagonian Shelf. Most of the layers of West Falkland and its surrounding islands are slightly inclined from the horizontal. This inclination shows different types of rocks in different places. The quartzites of Port Stephens and Stanley are more resistant than the arenaceous sediments of the formation at Fox Bay. The Hornby Mountains, near Falkland Sound have experienced tectonic forces of uplift and folding which has inclined the quartzite beds of Stanley to the vertical.\nRocks from more recent geological periods such as the Jurassic, Cretaceous, and Tertiary periods usually contain lime-rich rocks. The absence of such rocks has led to an acidic substrate which manifests itself in the nature of the soil.\nTopographical description.\nThe Falkland Islands are an archipelago of 778 islands with an area of located in the South Atlantic Ocean on a projection of the Patagonian Shelf. The two principal islands, East Falkland and West Falkland, account for 91% of the land area. These two islands, which have a combined distance of from east to west and from north to south, are separated by the Falkland Sound, a channel that averages in width and has a typical depth of . Cape Meredith on West Falkland is about north-west of the tip of Tierra del Fuego and Westpoint, also on West Falkland and adjacent to West Point Island, is about from the Patagonian coast. It is believed that at times during the Pleistocene epoch, relative sea level was some lower than the present time\u2013sufficient for the sound to be bridged.\nEast Falkland.\nEast Falkland, which has an area of , a little over half the total area of the islands consists of two land masses of approximately equal size \u2013 the southerly part known as Lafonia, but the northerly part has no specific name. These land masses are joined by an isthmus of width that separates two deep fjords, Choiseul Sound and Brenton Loch-Grantham Sound from each other. The island's coastline has many smaller bays, inlets and headlands. Over 70% of the population of the Falkland Islands live in the capital, Stanley, which is located in East Falkland.\nThe northern part of the island, apart from the coastal strip bordering the Choiseul Sound, is largely underlain by Palaeozoic rocks in the form of quartzite and slate, which tend to form rugged landscapes and coastlines and to cause the soil to be poor and acidic. The principal range of hills, the Wickham Heights runs from north-east to south-west. The highest point of the range (also the highest point in the Falklands), is Mount Usborne which has a height of . The area away from the mountain range consists chiefly of low undulating ground, a mixture of pasture and morass, with many shallow freshwater tarns, and small streams running in the valleys. Two inlets, Berkeley Sound and Port William, run far into the land at the north-eastern extremity of the island and provide anchorage for shipping.\nIn contrast, Lafonia is underlain by Mesozoic age sandstone, a younger rock than the Palaeozoic rock to the north, giving a flatter landscape than is seen elsewhere on the island. Sheets of liquid basalt intruded into the cracks that formed between the sedimentary layers. The resulting solidified sheets can now be seen in the form of dikes that cut the oldest sedimentary layers, those that lie principally in the southern part of East Falkland and in South Africa.\nWest Falkland.\nWest Falkland has an area of , making it smaller than East Falkland. Mount Adam, the highest point in the island and part of the Hornby Hills, is above sea level. The Hornby Hills which are the principal range on the island run approximately north\u2013south parallel with Falkland Sound.\n Geologically this range is a continuation of the Wickham Heights on East Falkland.\nIn West Falkland there are several dykes that cut the rocks of the western islands, but these dykes, unlike the previous ones, are chemically more unstable and have been eroded. The only indications of their existence are the aligned linear depressions. In the margins of these depressions there is evidence of contact baking or hornfels formation adjacent to the once molten basalt dyke.\nWest Falkland is more hilly on the side closest to East Falkland.\nThe southernmost point of West Falkland is Cape Meredith, and the most south-westerly point is Calm Head. On the southerly side lie high cliffs with an abundance of seabirds.\nSmaller islands.\nIn addition to the two main islands, the Falkland Islands have over 700 further islands, many no more than a few hectares in area. The islands to the north west of West Falkland include Pebble Island (103\u00a0km2), Keppel Island (36\u00a0km2), Saunders Island (131\u00a0km2), Carcass Island, West Point Island and the Jason group of islands (33\u00a0km2) that lie some from West Falkland.\nThe principal islands to the south west of West Falkland include New Island (22\u00a0km2), Weddell Island (265\u00a0km2), Beaver Island (48\u00a0km2) and Staats Island. The group of islands that are separated from Lafonia by the Eagle Passage include Speedwell Island (51\u00a0km2), and George Island (24\u00a0km2). Other islands off the Lafonia coast include Bleaker Island (21\u00a0km2), Sealion Island, Lively Island (56\u00a0km2), Barren Island. In addition, Beauchene Island, a rocky outcrop lies some from the Lafonia coast.\nMany of the islands are nature reserves, either in whole or in part.\nSeabed.\nThe Patagonian Shelf, which in ancient geological time was part of Gondwana and which broke from what is now Africa, drifted westwards relative to Africa. It is now the widest continental shelf in the world covering 1,200,000 km2.\nIt protrudes some into the South Atlantic Ocean from the Patagonian coastline and slopes gently to before falling away; the Falkland Islands being located two thirds of the way along this protrusion. The base of the plateau is about below sea level to the west of the islands (400\u00a0km from the Patagonian coast), sloping to to the east of the islands where it falls away into the South Atlantic Ocean. The Falklands Plateau, a slightly shallower stretch of water lies to the immediate east of the Falkland Islands.\nTo the immediate south of the islands, the Falklands Plateau is split into two by the Falklands Trough, a submarine valley that separates the plateau proper from the Scotia Arc \u2013 an underwater ridge that links Tierra Del Fuego with the Burdwood Bank (where the water is only deep) and, further into the Atlantic Ocean/Great Southern Ocean, with a number of islands including South Orkneys, South Sandwich Islands and South Georgia.\nBurdwood Bank was the location of several landslides some three million years ago. This in turn produced tsunami like events that hit the Falkland Islands on its southern coast. Estimates of the size of the waves vary from up to at the southern coast and up to where the capital, Port Stanley, is located.\nLicences to harvest the large variety of fish that live on the shelf provides a major source of income for the islands as does the licensing of oil exploration.\nClimate.\nThe Falkland Islands have a maritime climate in the transition region between the tundra and subarctic zones (K\u00f6ppen classifications \"ET\" and \"Cfc\" respectively) which is characterised by both low seasonal and diurnal temperature ranges and no marked wet and dry season while in the sub-arctic zone the average monthly maximum temperature exceeds for no more than four months of the year and the average monthly minimum does not drop below . The Falkland Islands climate is very much influenced by both the cool ocean currents and the shielding effect of the Andes.\nThe cold Antarctic Coastal Current flows in an easterly direction around Cape Horn where part of it is diverted northwards as the Falklands Current. Subsurface temperatures in the vicinity of the Falklands are of the order of 6\u00a0\u00b0C. The Falklands Current meets the warm South Brazilian Current at about 40\u00b0S (see Brazil\u2013Falkland Confluence), some north of the islands. The prevailing winds at the Falklands' latitude are the westerlies that gather moisture across the Pacific Ocean, but the Andes form a barrier causing a rain shadow across the Patagonia and to a lesser extent, the Falkland Islands.\nThe January average maximum temperature is about 13\u00a0\u00b0C (55\u00a0\u00b0F), and the July maximum average temperature is about 4\u00a0\u00b0C (39\u00a0\u00b0F). The rainfall varies between 300\u00a0mm in parts of Lafonia to 1400\u00a0mm in the mountain ranges with an average annual rainfall of 573\u00a0mm. Humidity and winds, however, are constantly high. Snow is rare but can occur at almost any time of year. Gales are very frequent, particularly in winter.\nIn addition to parts of the Falklands, a maritime subarctic climatic zone is found in parts of coastal Iceland, Faroe Islands, north western coastal Norway, southern islands of Alaska and parts of the Alaskan Panhandle, the southern tip of South America and mountainous areas of Europe including the Scottish Highlands and south-western Norway.\nFlora and fauna.\nBiogeographically, the Falkland Islands are classified as part of the Antarctic ecozone and Antarctic Floristic Kingdom. Strong connections exist with the flora and fauna of Patagonia in South America. The only terrestrial mammal upon the arrival of Europeans was the warrah, the \"loup-renard\" of Louis Antoine de Bougainville, a kind of fox found on both major islands that became extinct in the mid-19th century. Slater suggests that the warrah was introduced into the Falkland Islands either by rafting or by dispersal of glacial ice during one of the glaciations of the late Pleistocene epoch (2.5 million and 15,000 years ago).\nA total of 14 species of marine mammals have been identified in the surrounding waters: elephant seal, fur seal and sea lions all breed on the islands with the largest elephant seal breeding site has over 500 animals. A total of 227 bird species have been seen on the islands, over 60 of which are known to breed on the islands. There are two endemic species and 14 endemic subspecies of bird. Five penguin species including the Magellanic penguin breed on the islands as do over 60% of the global black-browed albatross population.\nThere are no native reptiles or amphibians on the islands. Over 200 species of insects have been recorded, along with 43 spider species and 12 worm species. Only 13 terrestrial invertebrates are recognised as endemic, although information on many species is lacking and it is suspected up to two thirds of species found are actually endemic. Due to the island environment, many insect species have developed reduced or absent wings. There are around 129 freshwater invertebrates, the majority being rotifer; however, the identification of some species remains in dispute. Six species of fish are found in freshwater areas, including zebra trout and falklands minnows.\nThe islands claim a territorial sea of and an exclusive fishing zone of , which has been a source of disagreement with Argentina. Different species of krill are found in Falkland waters, with Lobster Krill inhabiting the warmer waters in the north. The waters around the Falkland Islands are part of the Patagonian Shelf Large Marine Environment. Fin fish that are harvested in the Falkland waters include southern blue whiting (\"Micromesistius australis\"), rock cod (\"Patagonotothen\"), Blue grenadier or Hoki (\"Macruronus magellanicus\") and the principal species of squid that are harvested are the Illex squid (\"Illex argentinus\") and the Patagonian squid (\"Loligo gahi\"). The squid spawn in the mouth of the R\u00edo de la Plata close to the confluence of the cold Falklands current and the warm Brazilian current, migrate southwards along the Patagonian Shelf into the Falklands waters and then return to their spawning grounds along that lies off the continental shelf.\nThere are no native tree species on the archipelago, although two species of bushes, fachine and native box are found. Other vegetation consists of grasses and ferns. Around 363 species of vascular plants, 21 species of ferns and clubmosses and 278 species of flowering plants have been recorded on the islands. Of the vascular plants, 171 are believed to be native and 13 to be endemic. Some bogs and fens exist and support some freshwater plant species, but these are not common on the islands. Tussac grass, which averages in height but can reach up to , is found within 300\u00a0m (1,000\u00a0ft) of the coast where it forms bands around larger islands. The dense canopies formed create an insulated micro-climate suitable for many birds and invertebrates. The pale maiden (\"Olsynium filifolium\") is the islands' proposed national flower.\nHuman geography.\nPrior to 1812, various colonial powers had small settlements on the Falkland Islands. In that year the islands were abandoned but within twenty years the British had re-established a settlement. In the 1851 census, the settlement's population was recorded as 287, increasing to 2,043 in 1901 and 2,563 in 2012.\nHuman settlements and activities.\nThe main settlements in the islands are at Stanley which as of 2012 had a population of 2,121, and RAF Mount Pleasant, which in 2006 had a population of about 1,700. A further 351 people lived in \"Camp\" (outside Stanley) \u2212 just over half in East Falkland, a third in West Falkland and the remainder on outlying islands. The principal settlements on East Falkland (excluding Stanley and Mount Pleasant) are at Darwin and Goose Green, on West Falkland at Port Howard and Fox Bay and elsewhere, the Pebble Island Settlement. At the time of the Falklands War, the settlements in \"Camp\" were connected by tracks that were often impassable in wet weather, but by 2007 the Falkland Islands had a road network of , with further roads planned for construction to link all occupied mainland settlements by 2013.\nIn the early nineteenth century, the main economic activity on the islands was seal hunting. Later the islands became a re-provisioning depot for clippers sailing from Australia to the United Kingdom via Cape Horn.\nOver 80% of the islands' land is given over to sheep farming, with half a million animals being supported on 11,239\u00a0km2 of farmland, of which 40\u00a0km2 was perennial pasture. Roughly 40% of the national flock are on West Falkland and 60% on East Falkland. In addition to dairy and pig farming, a small amount of reindeer farming is carried out, for example on the Beaver group of islands. This herd was the only herd in the world that was unaffected by the Chernobyl disaster.\nIn the last decade of the twentieth century and the early twenty-first century tourism and fishing have made a major economic impact on the islands and as of 2012 an oil exploration industry was developing.\nImpact of human activity.\nThere is little long-term data on habitat changes, so the extent of human impact is unclear. Vegetation such as tussac grass, fachine, and native box (\"Veronica elliptica\") have been heavily affected by introduced grazing animals. Many breeding birds similarly only live on offshore islands, where introduced animals such as cats and rats are not found. Virtually the entire area of the islands is used as pasture for sheep. There is also an introduced reindeer population, which was brought to the islands in 2001 for commercial purposes. Rats and grey foxes have been introduced and are having a detrimental impact on birds that nest on the shores, as are feral cats. Twenty-two introduced plant species are thought to provide a significant threat to local flora.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10691", "revid": "4460308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10691", "title": "Demographics of the Falkland Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "10692", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10692", "title": "Politics of the Falkland Islands", "text": "The politics of the Falkland Islands takes place in a framework of a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary representative democratic dependency as set out by the constitution, whereby the Governor exercises the duties of head of state in the absence of the monarch and the Chief Executive is the head of the Civil Service, with an elected Legislative Assembly to propose new laws, national policy, approve finance and hold the executive to account.\nThe Falkland Islands, an archipelago in the southern Atlantic Ocean, are a self-governing British overseas territory. Executive power is exercised on behalf of the King by an appointed Governor, who primarily acts on the advice of the Executive Council. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Legislative Assembly. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The military defence and foreign policy of the islands is the responsibility of the United Kingdom. No political parties exist on the islands currently and so Members stand as independents, however the governmental and legal proceedings very closely resemble British standards.\nFollowing the Falklands War in 1982, Lord Shackleton published a report on the economy of the Falkland Islands which recommended many modernisations. On 1 January 1983 the Falkland Islanders gained British citizenship under the British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act 1983, and on 3 October 1985 the Constitution of the Falkland Islands was established. A new constitution came into force on 1 January 2009 which modernised the Chapter on fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, embedding self-determination in the main body of the constitution. The new constitution also replaced the Legislative Council with the Legislative Assembly, and better explained the role of the Governor and the Chief Executive.\nSovereignty issues.\nThe Argentine Republic claims the Falkland Islands (known in Spanish as \"Islas Malvinas\") to be part of its territory. This claim is disputed by the Falkland Islanders and the United Kingdom. In 1982, Argentina invaded and occupied the islands, starting the Falklands War. The islands were subsequently liberated by British forces just 74 days after the start of the war, which led to the collapse of the military dictatorship in Argentina.\nThe sovereignty of the Falklands remains in dispute, with Argentina claiming the islands are an integral and indivisible part of its territory, 'illegally occupied by an occupying power'. The United Kingdom and the Government of the Falkland Islands maintains that the Islanders have the right to determine the sovereignty of their birthplace. In a referendum in 2013 the people of the Falkland Islands soundly rejected Argentina's claim to the islands, with 99.8% of voters supporting the Falklands remaining an Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom.\nExecutive.\nExecutive authority on the Falkland Islands is vested in Charles III, who has been the head of state since his accession to the British throne on 8 September 2022. As the King is absent from the islands for most of the time, executive authority is exercised \"in His Majesty's name and on His Majesty's behalf\" by the Governor of the Falkland Islands. Alison Blake has been Governor since 23 July 2022.\nThe Governor normally acts only on the advice of the Executive Council of the Falkland Islands, which is composed of three Members of the Legislative Assembly elected by the Assembly to serve on the Council every year, the Chief Executive, the Director of Finance and the Governor, who acts as presiding officer. The only members with a vote to progress a change in law or policy are the democratically elected Members of the Legislative Assembly who are serving on Executive Council. The constitution does permit the Governor to act without consulting the Executive Council and even going against its instructions, but in both cases the Governor must immediately inform the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs in the United Kingdom, who can overrule the Governor's actions.\nGovernment policy and the execution thereof is primarily decided by the 3 officio Executive Council MLAs. The Chief Executive leads the civil service and undertakes actions from Executive Council. \nLegislature.\nThe legislative branch consists of a unicameral Legislative Assembly. General elections must take place at least once every four years, in which the islanders elect eight members to the Legislative Assembly (five from Stanley and three from Camp) through universal suffrage using block voting. There are also two ex officio members of the Assembly (the Chief Executive and the Director of Finance) who take part in proceedings but are not permitted to vote in the Assembly.\nThe following major conventions apply to the Falkland Islands and should be taken into account during the drafting of legislation:\nUntil 2009, when the new constitution came into force and created the Legislative Assembly, the legislature of the islands was the Legislative Council, which had existed since the 19th century.\nJudiciary.\nThe judicial branch consists of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the Summary Court and the Magistrates' Court. The judiciary is strictly independent of the executive and legislature, although it has links with the other branches of the government through the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy. The government also employs six lawyers (the Attorney General, Law Commissioner, two Crown Counsels and two Legislative Drafters), a Policy Adviser and one Policy Officer.\nCourts.\nThe court system of the Falklands is set out by and closely resembles the system in England and Wales. The Supreme Court of the Falkland Islands has unlimited jurisdiction to hear and determine any civil or criminal proceedings, and consists of the Chief Justice (CJ) who is generally a senior barrister or solicitor with a good amount of judicial experience in the United Kingdom. The CJ is not resident in the Falkland Islands but travels to the islands if and when necessary to hear cases. The most serious criminal and civil matters are reserved for the Supreme Court. In civil matters, generally there is no jury however, in criminal matters, the defendant can elect trial by judge and jury or judge alone. There are only a few criminal cases which must be heard before the Supreme Court; these are murder, manslaughter, rape, piracy, treason and arson with the intent to endanger life. The CJ also hears appeals from the Magistrates' Court.\nFrom the Supreme Court, appeals are sent to the Falkland Islands Court of Appeal, which is based on the Court of Appeal of England and Wales. The Court of Appeal consists of a President and two Justices of Appeal, as well as the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court who serves as an ex officio member. The President and Justices of Appeal are normally from the UK and are Judges of the Court of Appeal of England and Wales. Appeals from the Court of Appeal are sent to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.\nThe Falkland Islands does not have its own bar or law society, but has a \"Falkland Islands Legal Community\". There is no differentiation between being a barrister or a solicitor; the private practitioners being called legal practitioners. The Legal Practitioners Ordinance defines who can hold themselves out as being a legal practitioner and therefore have rights of audience before the Falkland Islands courts. Only the Chief Justice of the Falkland Islands can prohibit a legal practitioner from practising.\nIn the court system on the islands, there is a panel of Justices of the Peace (JPs) who sit in the Summary Court, which has no jury. JPs are all non-lawyers and are made up of \"upstanding members of the community\". They hear the most simple of criminal cases (or sit when the Senior Magistrate is not in the Islands) and they also act as the Licensing Justices who deal with alcohol-related applications, such as extended opening hours, special occasion licences, etc.\nThe Senior Magistrate (SM) is appointed by the Governor and presides over the Magistrates' Court, which again has no jury. The SM is usually a UK qualified lawyer, with at least 10 years experience as an advocate and, usually, with some judicial experience. The SM holds office for a maximum of three years and is then replaced. The SM is resident in the Islands and hears the majority of cases from simple criminal and civil matters right up to very serious criminal matters or complex civil cases. The SM also hears appeals from the Summary Court.\nAdvisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy.\nThe Governor has the power to grant a pardon to any person concerned in or convicted of an offence, but the Governor can only use this power after consultation with the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy. The Committee consist of two elected members of the Legislative Assembly (appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Legislative Assembly), the Chief Executive, the Attorney General and the Chief Medical Officer.\nAttorney general.\nThe Attorney General (AG), appointed by the Governor, is the main legal adviser to the Falkland Islands Government. The AG's primary role is to determine the legality of government proceedings and action, and has the power to institute and undertake criminal proceedings before any court of law, to take over and continue any criminal proceedings that may have been instituted by another person or authority, or to discontinue at any stage before judgment any criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by another person or authority. In the exercise of his or her powers, the AG is not subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.\nThe Attorney General is also a member of the Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy and acts as presiding officer during Speaker elections in the Legislative Assembly, and has a constitutional right to attend all meetings of the Assembly and all meetings of the Executive Council.\nThe current Attorney General is Simon Young, who took office in December 2017.\nFinances.\nThe Director of Finance of the Falkland Islands is responsible for government expenditure on the islands, acting with authorisation from the Legislative Assembly. The Director is also an ex officio member of both the Legislative Assembly and the Executive Council.\nThere is also a Public Accounts Committee consisting of a chairman and two other members appointed by the Governor (in consultation with the elected MLAs) and two elected members of the Legislative Assembly. Reporting to the Legislative Assembly, the Committee overseas the economy, government expenditure, all public accounts and audit reports on the islands. The Director of Finance is not permitted to be a member of the Public Accounts Committee.\nElections and parties.\nAs in many parliamentary democracies, there are no direct elections for the executive branch of the Falkland Islands Government. Instead the people elect the legislature which then advises and forms part of the executive. General elections, which elect the Legislative Assembly, must take place at least once every four years. Suffrage is universal in the Falklands, with the minimum voting age at eighteen. The Legislative Assembly has ten members, eight of which are elected using block voting (five from the Stanley constituency and three from the Camp constituency) and two \"ex officio\" members (the Chief Executive and the Director of Finance).\nIn the last general election, which took place on 4 November 2021, only non-partisans were elected as there are no active political parties in the Falkland Islands. The next elections will take place in 2025.\nReferences and sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10693", "revid": "37477853", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10693", "title": "Economy of the Falkland Islands", "text": "National economy\nThe economy of the Falkland Islands, which first involved sealing, whaling and provisioning ships, became heavily dependent on sheep farming from the 1870s to 1980. It then diversified and now has income from tourism, commercial fishing, and servicing the fishing industry as well as agriculture. The Falkland Islands use the Falkland pound, which is backed by the British pound.\nHistorical development.\nDuring the 19th century, the supply and maintenance depot for ships at Stanley developed into a port serving ships rounding Cape Horn. There was also trade in cow hides from the wild descendants of cattle introduced by French settlers in the late 18th century. Sheep farming was then introduced, taking over from the cattle trade in the 1870s and becoming self-supporting by 1885. The islands also provided a base for whaling and sealing, with factories being built on East Falkland and South Georgia Island, but these industries ended.\nBy the Falklands War of 1982 sheep farming was the islands' only industry and their economic viability was in doubt, but after the war there was a new commitment from the Government of the United Kingdom. The Falkland Islands Development Corporation was formed in mid 1984 and in its annual report at the end of that year it set out to increase employment opportunities by encouraging diversification, to increase population levels through selective immigration, to aim for long-term self-sufficiency and to improve community facilities. To achieve this, the Corporation identified agricultural improvements, tourism, self-sufficiency in energy, development of the industrial and service sector, fisheries, and land subdivision as areas to tackle.\nThe largest company in the islands used to be the Falkland Islands Company (FIC), a publicly quoted company on the London Stock Exchange. The company was responsible for the majority of the economic activity on the islands, though its farms were sold in 1991 to the Falkland Islands Government. The company now operates several retail outlets in Stanley and is involved in port services and shipping operations.\nBy 2002 the Falklands' economy was booming, with income from tourism and the sale of squid fishing licences as well as from indigenous fishing companies with locally registered boats. Fishing boats visit the islands from Spain, Korea, Taiwan and Japan, and obtain supplies and services from the islands. An islander told the BBC that \"we were the luckiest people that was ever mixed up in a war\", and British diplomats joked that the Falklands should have a monument to Leopoldo Galtieri, the Argentinean dictator who invaded the islands. In 2007, Argentina withdrew from a 1995 agreement that set terms for exploitation of offshore resources. It is thought that there might be up to of oil under the sea bed surrounding the islands. Desire Petroleum and Rockhopper Exploration began drilling for oil in the vicinity of the Falklands in the first half of 2010, sparking strong protest from the Argentine government. Diplomatic disputes with Argentina disrupted tourism slightly in 2004. Buenos Aires refused permission for charter flights from Chile that served cruise ships to fly over Argentina to reach the islands.\nEconomic overview.\nThe Falkland Islands have a GDP of $164.5\u00a0million, and a per capita GDP of $70,800 (2015 estimate) compared with the United Kingdom GDP per capita of $35,200 (2009 estimate). The contributors to the GDP by sector (2010 forecast) are:\nIn the 2009/10 financial year, the government revenue was \u00a342.4\u00a0million of which \u00a314.5\u00a0million came from fishery licences and services and \u00a310.5\u00a0million from taxes. During the same period the government expenditure was \u00a347.6\u00a0million.\nOther economic indicators include:\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n19 million kWh (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source: (2016 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n17.67 million kWh (2016 est.)\nInstalled nameplate capacity of electric generation\n12,100 kW (2016 est.)\nBanking.\nThe Falkland Islands do not have a central bank but the Standard Chartered Bank has a single branch in Stanley that offers retail, commercial and wholesale banking facilities.\nThe constitution requires the governor of the islands to seek the approval of a British Secretary of State before assenting to any bill that affects \"\"the currency of the Falkland Islands or relating to the issue of banknotes\" or any bill that establishes \"any banking association or altering the constitution, rights or duties of any such association\"\". These restrictions effectively give the British Government the ability to prevent the island's government from declaring the islands to be a tax haven or from establishing a central bank.\nAgriculture.\nFarmland accounts for a little over 80% of the Falklands land area and a sheep appears on the islands' coat of arms, but agriculture is now less than 2% of the economy. , 670,000 sheep resided on the islands; a 2011 report estimated the sheep population at over one million.\nRoughly 40% of the national flock are on West Falkland and 60% on East Falkland. The base flock are Corriedale and Polwarth breeds with Dohne Merino, South African Meat Merinos, Afrinos and other breeds having been introduced to improve the fineness of wool and meat characteristics. The wool price suffered a slump in 2005/6 and a peak in 2008. Since 2003 the relative premium commanded by higher quality wool has increased with coarser wool missing out on the high prices in 2008. A summary of the prices for the period 2002 to 2010, which are often dictated by Australian exchange rate and weather conditions is shown below:\nAlthough the production of wool is spread across the islands, the breeding of animals for slaughter is concentrated on East Falkland where the EU accredited Send Bay abattoir is situated. An additional cost borne by producers on West Falklands is the fare charged for crossing the Falklands Sound. As of 2010, the ferry company making the crossing charged commercial vehicles \u00a330 per metre for a single trip plus \u00a32 per head of sheep. Wool on the other hand is charged \"\u00a345 per tonne delivered to Stanley\".\nAn increasing number of farmers are supplying lamb to the Falkland Islands Meat Company. The abattoir received export accreditation in December 2002 and began exporting meat in May 2003. The number of farms supplying lambs increased from 6 in 2003 to 27 in 2007 while the number of lambs sent to the abattoir rose from 2600 to 11,963 in the same period.\nSelected statistics for the year 2008/9 relating to sheep farming are given below:\nThere are also a small number of cows, pigs and horses on the islands that are reared for local use.\nFishing.\nFishing is the largest part of the economy. Although Lord Shackleton's Report (1982) recommended the setting up of a fisheries limit which gave an impetus to the fishing industry, the report did not go into much detail regarding the expansion of the industry. The Falkland Islands Development Corporation which formed as a result of the Shackleton Report provided the impetus for the Falkland Islands to exploit their marine environment.\nFishing grounds.\nThe Falkland Islands' fishing waters form part of the 2.7 million square kilometre Patagonian Shelf large marine ecosystem and are located on a spur from the Patagonian Continental Shelf.\nMost of the fishing takes place in water up to deep on this spur or on the Burdwood Bank - another spur lying on an undersea ridge to the south of the Falkland Islands and separated from the islands by a deep channel known as the Falklands Trough. At its highest point, the Burdwood Bank is below sea level.\nThe principal ocean currents in the Falkland Island waters are the West Wind Drift, a cold current from the Southern Pacific Ocean that flows westwards to the south of the Burdwood Bank and the north flowing cold Falklands current, an offshoot of the West Wind Drift that curls around the east of Falklands Plateau and along the Falklands and Patagonian escarpments. It joins the saltier warm Brazil Current in the vicinity of the mouth of the R\u00edo de la Plata to form the South Atlantic Current.\nIn 1986 the Falklands opened up their fishing industry to outsiders with the declaration of a radius Fisheries Conservation &amp; Management Zone centered on the Falkland Sound. This zone was later to become the Falklands Inner Conservation Zone (FICZ). Apart from the Falkland Trough, this zone lies within the continental shelf. In 1990 the Falklands Outer Conservation Zone (FOCZ) was declared \u2013 a zone that lay between the perimeter of the FICZ and the Falklands 200-nautical-mile economic zone boundary. The FOCZ includes part of the Burdwood Bank, borders on the confines of the continental shelf and includes part of the Falklands Escarpment - a undersea escarpment running east\u2013west.\nAt the same time that the FOCZ was declared, the Argentine declared its 200-nautical-mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and together with the British Government (acting on behalf of the Falkland Islands) set up the South Atlantic Fisheries Commission (SAFC) to coordinate the management of fishing stocks in the area.\nFish stocks.\nMost of the fish that are harvested in the Falkland Islands waters are either squid or finfish. Other types of fish form an insignificant part of the Falkland Islands' catch. A significant number of the fish that are taken are migratory with the spawning grounds and feeding grounds of some species being highly dependent on the water temperature.\nSquid.\nThe Illex squid (\"Illex argentinus\") which typically has a mantle length of and a weight of is the most important fish to the Falklands economy followed by its smaller cousin, the Patagonian squid (\"Doryteuthis gahi\") which typically has a mantle length of and a weight of . Neither species was discovered in substantial numbers near the Falklands until the late 1980s.\nThe lllex squid has its spawning grounds at the mouth of the R\u00edo de la Plata and a migratory pattern that takes it southwards along the Patagonian Shelf as far as the FICZ to its feeding grounds. It then returns to its spawning grounds via a route that lies off the continental shelf. In some years, such as 2007, it enters the FICZ with a resultant good harvest, it other years, such as 2009, it does not migrate as far south as the FICZ at all. The catch for the 2010 season in the Falklands recovered to 12105\u00a0tonnes, but still the fourth lowest since the beginning of the licensing system. This has been attributed to the lower than usual sea temperatures during the feeding season in February\u2013May.\nThe Patagonian squid, unlike the Illex, remain in Falkland Island waters all year and are concentrated in the \"Loloigo box\"\u2014an area within the Falklands Plateau to the east and south-east of the islands and are harvested during both the austral spring and autumn.\nFinfish.\nIn the 1970s many fin fish, particularly the rock cod, a high volume low value fish were exploited to near-extinction. The levels of rock cod taken in the whole of the South Atlantic dropped by 99.3% in the space of two years between the 1969\u201370 and 1971\u201372 seasons. while the patagonian rockcod was fished to near-extinction in the Shag Rock area. This resulted in a ban on fishing which was lifted in 2005. Following the collapse of the Illex industry in 2008/9, the rock cod has become, by weight, the most heavily harvested species in the area.\nIn 2006, a Spanish vessel on an exploratory trawl found commercial quantities of grenadiers (\"Macrourus spp., Coelorhynchus spp.\") to the south and east of the Falkland Islands at depths between depths in the eastern part of FICZ. It has been estimated that this species needs a stock biomass of 40000\u00a0tonnes to produce a sustainable harvest of 3000\u00a0tonnes per annum and is now reflected as a separate entry in the tables below.\nLicense quota policy and revenue.\nWith the establishment of the FICZ, the Falklands Fisheries Department issued licences that enable foreign vessels to fish in Falklands waters. Initially there were seven classes of licence, but as of the 2009 season, this was increased to ten classes of licence. Each class of licence has its own characteristics \u2013 species or combination of species that may be taken, net sizes that may be used and seasons when the licence is valid. The main fishing areas are in waters that are up to deep with principal concentrations close to the confluence of the FOCZ, FICZ and EEZ to the north west of the Islands and also on the Burwood Bank \u2013 a shallow water to the south of the Islands. Initially licences were issued on a total allowable effort (TAE) but in 2007, the toothfish longline fishery became the first fishery in the Falkland Islands to be issued on a total allowable catch (TAC) basis.\nApart from the Islander's own fleet, the principal fishing fleets come from Spain, Korea and Taiwan. When the Falkland Islands first opened up her waters, the Polish fishing fleet had a presence as did the Japanese, but the Poles stopped fishing in the area in the mid-1990s and the Japanese in the middle of the first decade of the twenty-first century. By 2002 the license revenue was so great that the island government had no debt and had built up more than \u00a380 million in savings.\nSince 1993, the principal licence classes have been:\nRevenue from licence fees (\u00a3 millions)\nInternational cooperation.\nThe Antarctic Treaty was signed by both the United Kingdom and Argentina in 1959. In its wake, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), a treaty signed by 24 nations and covering the area that includes most of the Falkland Islands waters, came into force in 1982, having been signed by the United Kingdom on 31 August 1981 and Argentina on 28 May 1982. The convention covers Southern Ocean ecosystem which is generally accepted as being south of approximately 50\u00b0 to 55\u00b0S. The CCAMLR provides a forum for exchanging information regarding marine life in the Antarctic region and has the authority to ban the harvesting of certain type of fish and also to ban or put restrictions on the use of certain methods of harvesting. The convention requires that member states who are not parties to the Antarctic Treaty accept certain provisions of that treaty.\nThe South Atlantic Fisheries Commission (SAFC) was set up in 1990 between the Argentine and the United Kingdom (acting on behalf of the Falkland Islands) to exchange information and to coordinate fishing activities in the South Atlantic. One of their prime activities was the monitoring of the Illex spawning stock biomass (SSB). If the SSB drops below a threshold of 40000\u00a0tonnes the SAFC recommend will early closure of the fishing season. Since 2005 the SAFC has been largely moribund as the Argentine Government reduced co-operation, declining to continue the routine joint meeting process and suspending joint scientific activities. She has since extended her claim to all of the Falkland Island waters.\nCatch statistics.\nThe table below shows the average catch in tonnes of various species (as categorised by FIFD - Falkland Island Fishing Department) for successive five-year periods.\nTourism.\nTourism is the second-largest part of the economy. In 1982, an average of only 500 tourists visited the Falklands per annum but by 2007, this figure had grown to 55,000 and the Falkland Islands Tourist Board hired its first tourism director that year. In 2010, the transport and hospitality sector was expected to contribute \u00a37.8 million or 7.7% of the island's GDP. Tourism forms a significant part of this figure with land-based visitors expected to contribute \u00a32.7 million to the Islands' economy in 2010. The islands have become a regular port of call for the growing market of cruise ships to Antarctica and elsewhere in the South Atlantic. Attractions include the scenery and wildlife conservation including 1,000,000 penguins, seabirds, seals, and sea lions, as well as visits to battlefields, golf, fishing and wreck diving. In addition to accommodation in Stanley, there are tourist lodges at Port Howard, Darwin, Pebble Island, Carcass Island, and Sea Lion Island. Self-catering accommodation at holiday cottages on island farms. The total contribution of tourism to the Islands' is expected to reach \u00a35.4 million in 2010.\nDuring the 2008\u20132009 season almost 69,000 tourists visited the Falklands, with 62,600 of these arriving onboard cruise or expedition vessels. Since cruise liners have their own accommodation, substantial numbers of tourists can be accommodated at once, such as an occasion in 2005 when 3000 tourists visited the islands in one day. In 2013 passengers from cruise ships faced protests in Latin American ports over the British military presence. The cruise industry is expecting passenger numbers to decline from 39,500 in 2013\u20132014 to 34,000 for 2014\u20132015. However land tourism is increasing which is offsetting the effect of a decrease in cruise tourism.\nOther sources of \"tourist\" revenue include spending by the British military personnel based on the islands, by business travellers and by pilgrims to the graves of both British and Argentine soldiers who fell in the 1982 Falklands War. Although there is still a resentment in the Islands to the Argentine occupation, the Falkland Islands Government continues \"to respect the need for Argentine veterans of the 1982 conflict and their next of kin to visit the battlefield sites and the cemetery at Darwin\". Such visits are arranged in conjunction with LAN Airlines (Chile) who, on such occasions, use larger aircraft than normal for the weekly flights.\nEnergy and minerals.\nPetroleum exploration.\nFour sedimentary basins that could potentially contain hydrocarbons have been identified in the Falkland Island waters. They are:\nThe latter three basins are part of a larger contiguous formation.\nAn agreement signed in 1995 with Argentina had set the terms for exploitation of offshore resources including large oil reserves as it was thought that there might be up to of oil under the sea bed surrounding the islands. However, in 2007 Argentina unilaterally withdrew from the agreement. In response, Falkland Oil &amp; Gas has signed an agreement with BHP Billiton to investigate the potential exploitation of oil reserves. Climatic conditions of the southern seas mean that exploitation will be a difficult task, though economically viable, and the continuing Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute with Argentina is hampering progress.\nSome 2012 exploration results have indicated that taxation on oil revenues, even though they will be amongst the lowest in the world, are expected to more than double the country's revenue.\nNorth Falklands basin.\nIn February 2010, exploratory drilling for oil was begun by Desire Petroleum, but the results from the first test well were disappointing. Two months later, on 6 May 2010, when Rockhopper Exploration announced that \"it may have struck oil\", Argentina's Foreign Minister warned that his country would take all possible lawful steps to impede British oil exploration and production there. On 17 September 2010, Rockhopper Exploration published the results of the borehole analysis \u2013 the well was drilled in water 451\u00a0m deep and a flow test showed that a payable oil column of 53\u00a0m was capable of producing over . In February 2011 Rockhopper Exploration commenced an appraisal programme of the Sea-Lion discovery. An update of the first appraisal drill was released on Monday 21 March 2011 indicating a significant reservoir package with a downhole mini Drill Stern Test flowing oil at better rates then the September 2010 flow test: confidence in the commerciality of the Sea Lion discovery has been increased by this first appraisal.\nOn 14 September 2011 Rockhopper Exploration announced plans are under way for oil production to commence in 2016, through the use of Floating production storage and offloading (FPSO) technology, replicating the methodology used on the Foinaven oilfield off the Shetland Islands. The proposal envisages a FPSO vessel located 200\u00a0km offshore servicing 24 production wells and 12 water injection wells in about 450\u00a0m of water. The wells will be arranged in clusters of 6 wells per drill centre. The two water injection well clusters will be 3.0\u00a0km from the four oil well clusters. Oil will be transferred from the FPSO vessel to shuttle oil tankers. Each year thereafter the production date has been pushed back another year.\nThe production site will require approximately 110 people working offshore and another 40 working onshore. The oil expected to trade at 90 - 105% of the Brent crude price.\nIn May 2015 oil was discovered in Isobel deep in May 2015 by a consortium of oil companies including Falkland Oil &amp; Gas, Premier Oil, and Rockhopper Oil &amp; Gas.\nEast and south Falklands fields.\nAs of 2011 the East and South Falklands Fields had not been fully evaluated; \"Leiv Eiriksson\", a 5th generation semi-submersible drilling rig, is expected to drill two exploratory wells for Falkland oil and gas in 2012.\nRenewable energy sources.\nThe islands have been investing in windpower \u2013 in 2010, three 330\u00a0kW wind turbines were installed at Sand Bay, about from Stanley on the opposite side of the valley from three turbines that were installed in 2007. The island's government has plans to install a 2\u00a0MWh battery storage system which will allow surplus wind energy to be stored. The first three turbines resulted in a 20% reduction in the Stanley power station's fuel consumption and it was hoped that the second set of three turbines would double this figure. In parallel, there are on-going investigations into other forms of renewable energy for remote locations on the islands.\nTransport in the Falkland Islands.\nThe Falkland Islands currently has three primary means of transport - road, sea and air. There is now an international airport, a domestic airport, a number of airstrips, a growing road network and a much-improved ferry service between the two main islands.\nPhilately and numismatics.\nIn October 1877, the Secretary of State of the Colonial Office, the Earl of Carnarvon began the process of application for the Falkland Islands to join the General Postal Union (renamed Universal Postal Union in 1879). The first stamps, 1d, 6d, and 1 shilling values featuring the usual profile of Queen Victoria, were issued 19 June 1878. Since then the islands have issued their own stamps, which are a source of revenue from overseas collectors. Between 2000 and 2008, the islands issued between six and eight sets of commemorative stamps. The workload placed on the Falkland Islands Post Office by overseas collectors led to the establishments in 1978 of the Falkland Islands Philatelic Bureau. The Bureau also handles philately-related sales on behalf of the governments of Government of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands and of the British Antarctic Territory.\nCoins and banknotes may only be issued by the Falkland Islands Government with the authorisation of the British Government. Coins for local use were first struck in 1974 and are the same size as the corresponding British coins. There is a flourishing business in the issue of commemorative coins struck on behalf of the Falkland Island Government for collectors \u2013 in particular the 2007 series of coins that commemorated the 25th anniversary of the liberation of islands attracted much attention. The Falkland Islands Government (FIG) is required to deposit 110% of the face value of any coins struck on its behalf into its currency fund, thereby effectively backing the Falkland pound with the pound sterling. In the case of commemorative coins that are unlikely to be redeemed, this money represents a long-term investment. In many cases the set-up and production costs are carried by the mint concerned, who pay the FIG a royalty on coins that it sells to collectors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10694", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10694", "title": "Telecommunications in the Falkland Islands", "text": "Telecommunications in the Falkland Islands includes radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nThe Falkland Islands Radio Service (FIRS) operates a radio network in conjunction with the BBC World Service, while the British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS) operates three networks of its own. KTV Ltd. also operates two relay stations, KTV Radio Nova, a rebroadcast of BBC World Service, and KTV Radio Nova Saint FM, a rebroadcast of Saint FM. \nSix free-to-air digital channels are provided by BFBS: BBC One, BBC Two, ITV, Channel 4, Sky News and BFBS Extra for non-military audiences. Entitled personnel within British Forces South Atlantic can also receive Sky Sports 1, Sky Sports 2 and BFBS Sport.\nA local subscription service, KTV carries satellite channels such as ESPN, Discovery, CNN International and Turner Classic Movies (from the United States) along with BBC World News from the United Kingdom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10695", "revid": "33560060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10695", "title": "Transport in the Falkland Islands", "text": "The Falkland Islands currently has three primary means of transport - road, sea and air. However, in 1946, when Sir Miles Clifford arrived as governor, there were no air services, no roads outside Stanley and an indifferent sea service. Sir Miles was instrumental in starting the Falkland Islands Government Air Service in December 1948. The inaugural flight involved a mercy flight from North Arm Settlement to Stanley to bring a girl with peritonitis to life-saving medical help in Stanley. There is now an international airport, a domestic airport, a number of airstrips, a growing road network and a much-improved ferry service between the two main islands.\nRoad.\nIn 1982, the Falkland Islands had no roads outside Stanley, only tracks. By 2007, the Falkland Islands had a road network of with a further roads planned for construction link to all occupied mainland settlements by 2013. In 2012, the Falkland Islands Government classified the road network - East Falkland and West Falkland - into \"A\" roads, \"B\" roads and \"C\" roads for purposes of \"Highways Asset Management Plan\". The \"A\" roads are the link between Stanley and New Haven (East Falkland) and the link between Port Howard and Fox Bay (West Falkland). \nAll roads within Stanley are asphalted as are the ones at Mount Pleasant Airport (MPA). The road between Stanley and MPA is mostly gravel all-weather roads (as like the rest of the roads in the islands) with some short asphalted sections. The road between Stanley and MPA has a large trench on either side, which will ground any vehicle driving into it. These trenches were allegedly dug deeper than they needed to be as annual rainfall was taken as a number for the monthly rainfall.\nStanley has two taxi services which can be used for travel within the town and the surrounding areas. A variety of four-wheel drive vehicles can be hired in Stanley, which are essential for travel along unpaved roads that are potentially badly potholed. \nA bus service ferries passengers between the main airport for international flights at Mount Pleasant and Stanley.\nBicycles can also be hired, though because of the unsealed roads and hilly terrain, these are more suitable for use around the Stanley area.\nSpeed limits are 25\u00a0mph (40\u00a0km/h) in built-up areas and 40\u00a0mph (64\u00a0km/h) elsewhere.\nSea.\nThere are two seaports in the Falkland Islands, Stanley (East Falkland) and Fox Bay (West Falkland). The designated harbours in Stanley area include Berkeley Sound, Port William and Stanley Harbour itself. Fox Bay is also a customs entry point for West Falkland. In 2020 the Government awarded a contract to BAM Nuttall to design and build a new port for the Falklands. The Falkland Islands do not have a merchant navy. \nSince November 2008, a regular ferry service has linked the two main islands, carrying cars, passengers and cargo. The ferry, \"MV Concordia Bay\", a 42.45\u00a0m twin-screw shallow draft (2.59\u00a0m) landing craft runs between Port Howard in West Falkland and New Haven in East Falkland. She has a deck, 30\u00a0m in length and 10\u00a0m in width which is sufficient for 16 one-ten Land Rovers (or equivalent) and accommodation for 30 passengers. She also has a crane that is capable of lifting 10 tonnes at 7\u00a0m. She also visits some of the smaller islands.\nOther smaller boats may be chartered in advance.\nTourist cruise ships often visit many of the islands, making use of inflatable boats where adequate docking facilities are not available.\nRail.\nA gauge railway, known as the Camber Railway, was built along the north side of Stanley Harbour in 1915-1916 and used until the 1920s. It was about long. The trackbed is still visible.\nAir.\nThe Falkland Islands have two airports with paved runways. The main international airport is RAF Mount Pleasant, west of Stanley. \nLAN Airlines operate weekly flights to Punta Arenas. Once a month, this flight also stops in R\u00edo Gallegos, Argentina.\nThe Royal Air Force operates flights from RAF Mount Pleasant to RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire, England, with a refuelling stop at RAF Ascension Island. This service is called the South Atlantic Airbridge.\nBritish International (BRINTEL) also operate two Sikorsky S61N helicopters, based at RAF Mount Pleasant, under contract to the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence, primarily for moving military personnel, equipment and supplies around the islands.\nThe smaller Port Stanley Airport, outside the city, is used mainly for internal flights. The Falkland Islands Government Air Service (FIGAS) operates Islander aircraft that can use the grass airstrips that most settlements have. Flight schedules are decided a day in advance according to passenger needs and the next day's timetable is published every evening. The schedules are based on three routes - a Northern Shuttle and the Southern Shuttle that each have one flight a day and the East - West Shuttle that has a morning and an evening flight every day.\nThe British Antarctic Survey operates a transcontinental air link between Port Stanley Airport and the Rothera Research Station on the Antarctic Peninsula and servicing also other British bases in the British Antarctic Territory using a de Havilland Canada Dash 7.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10696", "revid": "40325129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10696", "title": "Military of the Falkland Islands", "text": "Military unit\nThe Falkland Islands are a British overseas territory and, as such, rely on the United Kingdom for the guarantee of their security. The other UK territories in the South Atlantic, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, fall under the protection of British Forces South Atlantic Islands (BFSAI), formerly known as British Forces Falkland Islands (BFFI), which includes commitments from the British Army, Royal Air Force and Royal Navy. They are headed by the Commander, British Forces South Atlantic Islands (CBFSAI), a brigadier-equivalent appointment that rotates among all three services (Navy, British Army, and RAF).\nArgentina invaded and took control of the Falklands on 2 April 1982. After recapturing the territory in June 1982, the UK invested heavily in the defence of the islands, the centrepiece of which was a new airfield at RAF Mount Pleasant, west of Stanley. The base was opened in 1985, and became fully operational in 1986.\nFalkland Islands Defence Force.\nThe Falkland Islands maintains its own part-time volunteer force, the Falkland Islands Defence Force (FIDF), previously known as the Falkland Islands Volunteer Corps. Although this unit existed in 1982 as a reinforcement for the Governor's detachment of Royal Marines, it did not play any part in the main conflict during the war of 1982, its members having spent the duration of the hostilities under house arrest by the Argentines after their surrender on the Argentine capture of the islands. The FIDF is now a platoon to company-strength light infantry unit with a permanent training Warrant Officer seconded from the Royal Marines. The FIDF operates in a number of roles and is fully integrated into the defence scheme for the islands.\nFIDF soldiers can deploy aboard the Falklands Government patrol vessel for sovereignty protection duties if the vessel requires an armed presence. As of 2023, the Falklands Government sovereignty and fisheries patrol vessel is the MV \"Lilibet\", which arrived in the islands in April and is tasked with policing the exclusive economic zone around the islands. The ship is named in honour of the late Queen Elizabeth II, and has been leased to the Falklands Government by Seagull Maritime Limited for fifteen years. Civilian-crewed, the vessel is a Damen Stan 5009 patrol ship with a maximum speed of up to and a crew of up to 28 persons. She has an endurance of 30 days, though sixty days of provisions can be carried. If patrolling at 10 knots she can reportedly operate for 42 days with a range of up to 10,000 nautical miles. She is fitted with two Browning .50 caliber heavy machine gun mounts though she routinely deploys unarmed.\nRoyal Navy.\nRAF Mount Pleasant has its own port facility called Mare Harbour, operated by Naval Party 2010 (NP2010). The Royal Navy deploys a River-class offshore patrol vessel, , in the south Atlantic and the ship is the principal naval presence permanently close to the islands. In addition, an Ice Patrol Ship, , is on station close to Antarctica during the regional summer months.\nPrior to 2015 a major warship and RFA vessel commonly carried out the Atlantic Patrol Task (South) mission, which provides for \"a maritime presence to protect the UK's interests in the region\". The Type 42 destroyer took over the South Atlantic Patrol Task in October 2006, replacing . Prior to \"Southampton\"'s deployment in August 2005, the role was filled by , which was decommissioned on return to the UK. As of February 2010, the on-station warship was the Type 42 destroyer . In late April 2010, \"York\" was relieved by the Type 23 frigate . In August 2010, \"Portland\" was relieved by the Type 42 destroyer . On 21 April 2011, \"York\" returned to the East Cove Military Port in the Falkland Islands, beginning patrol duties for the islands. October 2011 saw the arrival of the Type 23 frigate , generating a statement from UNASUR (Union of South American Nations). The Type 45 guided missile destroyer replaced \"Montrose\" as of April 2012. In the second half of 2013, was deployed on the Royal Navy's south Atlantic patrol duty. \"Portland\" was again deployed in January 2014 and deployed in 2015. As of 2023, \"Lancaster's\" deployment was the last time a frigate deployed on this tasking.\nSince 2015, with the commitment to deploy a destroyer or frigate scaled back, HMS \"Forth\" has been the principal Royal Navy asset permanently in the south Atlantic having replaced in 2020. HMS \"Forth\" is expected to be tasked to the south Atlantic mission for a decade or more. HMS \"Clyde\" returned to Britain in late 2019 for decommissioning, after itself having relieved the s and which maintained the patrol vessel commitment on rotation up to 2007.\nThe Royal Navy also has and -class nuclear submarines that it can deploy to the area, though such deployments are classified and likely rare. In February 2012, a \"Trafalgar\"-class submarine may have been deployed to the Falkland Islands. The threat posed by submarines to hostile ships was demonstrated during the Falklands War when sank the Argentine cruiser . The Royal Navy's current fleet submarines also carry BGM-109 Tomahawk cruise missiles, which have a range of .\nBritish Army.\nThe British Army maintains a garrison on the Falkland Islands based at Mount Pleasant. The force is made up of a roulement infantry company, an engineer squadron, a signals unit (part of the Joint Communications Unit \u2013 see below), a logistics group and supporting services.\nGround-based air defence of RAF Mount Pleasant is provided by the 16th Regiment Royal Artillery of the British Army's 7th Air Defence Group. Up until 2021, the detachment was equipped with the Rapier FSC surface-to-air missile system. Rapier has been replaced with the new Sky Sabre surface-to-air missile system incorporating an expanded capability. Sky Sabre achieved informal initial operating capability at RAF Mount Pleasant in October 2021. In the same month Rapier was fully withdrawn from service on the Falklands.\nThe British Army contributed to the Joint Service Explosive Ordnance Disposal group in the Falkland Islands, providing 33 Engineer Regiment (EOD) and RLC EOD teams. This was subsequently reduced to a team of 11 personnel. In November 2020, it was announced that all remaining land mines had been cleared from the islands.\nMain article: Land mines in the Falkland Islands\nRoyal Air Force.\nRoyal Air Force elements in the Falklands are under the command of No. 905 Expeditionary Air Wing which, as of 2023, consists of two flights: Typhoon multi-role fighters of No. 1435 Flight RAF and Voyager KC.2/A400M Atlas aircraft of No. 1312 Flight RAF.\nRAF Mount Pleasant was built in 1985\u201386, able to accept large trans-Atlantic aircraft such as the Lockheed TriStar. The TriStar was initially purchased mainly for the UK-Falklands route; until their entry into service, the UK used leased 747s and 767s. As of the early 2023, all major RAF transport aircraft are able to fly into RAF Mount Pleasant, as may be required. Utilizing RAF Ascension Island, a station which reports to the Commander BFSAI, these aircraft maintain direct air links between the U.K. and the Falklands.\nFour Typhoon multi-role fighter aircraft of No. 1435 Flight RAF provide air defence for the islands and surrounding territories and have a secondary ground attack/anti-ship role.\nOriginally Lockheed Hercules C.1K were used for air-to-air refuelling missions, but these were later replaced by a VC10. On 31 August 2013 the VC10 was temporarily replaced by a TriStar K.1, which was itself replaced by a Voyager KC.2 in March 2014. The Voyager is deployed in the islands for air refueling operations but is unable to fit within a hangar at RAF Mount Pleasant due to its size.\nInitially, a C-130 Hercules was used for transport, search and rescue and maritime patrol until replaced with an A400M Atlas aircraft in April 2018. The aircraft is used for both regional operations, as well as for providing support for the British Antarctic Survey. In August 2022, an RAF A400M aircraft flying from RAF Ascension Island was refueled for the first time by a Voyager KC.2 aircraft flying out of RAF Mount Pleasant. In January 2023, an RAF A400M Atlas supported by a Voyager tanker aircraft, dropped the first of 300 fuel drums as part of a tasking to resupply the Sky Blu facility of the British Antarctic Survey.\nFor a lengthy period, the helicopters of No. 1564 Flight (formerly No. 78 Squadron) provided tactial air transport support. The Sea Kings carried out short and medium range search and rescue missions, until their retirement. AAR Corp was awarded a contract for helicopter search and rescue services in the Falkland Islands to replace 1564 Flight, using AgustaWestland AW189 helicopters in the role from 2016. In March 2015, the UK announced that a pair of Chinooks would be stationed in the Falklands again, the first of which started flying in June 2016. 1564 Flight disbanded in March 2016 being subsequently replaced by the Chinooks of No. 1310 Flight.\nThese military helicopters only remained on the islands for a short period and, as of 2022, Chinooks are no longer based in the Falklands. In lieu of this military capability, the firm British International Helicopters operates two AW189s (in the Search and Rescue role) and two S61N helicopters (in the support role) from RAF Mount Pleasant.\nThere were initially two air defence radar units, both located on West Falkland; No. 7 Signals Unit at Byron Heights and No. 751 Signals Unit at Mount Alice. Byron Heights and Mount Alice were later augmented by a further radar installation on Mount Kent, designated No. 303 Signals Unit. No. 7 Signals Unit and No. 751 Signals Unit were eventually disbanded and all three radar installations were reduced to Remote Radar Heads under the control of No. 303 Signals Unit who moved into a purpose-built operations building at Mount Pleasant Complex to form the Control and Reporting Centre. The building was officially opened on 4 October 1998 by Air Chief Marshall Sir Richard Johns, then Chief of the Air Staff.\nJoint Service.\nThe Joint Communications Unit Falkland Islands (JCUFI) provides the electronic warfare and command and control systems for the Royal Navy, Army and RAF stationed there. It incorporates the Army's signals unit and RAF personnel. \nCommanders.\nThe following have served as Commander British Forces Falkland Islands/South Atlantic Islands:\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10697", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10697", "title": "Falkland Islands/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "10698", "revid": "1159786810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10698", "title": "History of the Faroe Islands", "text": "Historical development of the Faroe Islands\nThe early details of the history of the Faroe Islands are unclear. It is possible that Brendan, an Irish monk, sailed past the islands during his North Atlantic voyage in the 6th century. He saw an 'Island of Sheep' and a 'Paradise of Birds', which some say could be the Faroes with its dense bird population and sheep. This does suggest however that other sailors had got there before him, to bring the sheep. Norsemen settled the Faroe Islands in the 9th or 10th century. The islands were officially converted to Christianity around the year 1000, and became a part of the Kingdom of Norway in 1035. Norwegian rule on the islands continued until 1380, when the islands became part of the dual Denmark\u2013Norway kingdom, under king Olaf II of Denmark.\nFollowing the 1814 Treaty of Kiel that ended the dual Denmark\u2013Norway kingdom, the Faroe Islands remained under the administration of Denmark as a county. During World War II, after Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany, the British invaded and occupied the Faroe Islands until shortly after the end of the war. Following an independence referendum in 1946 that took place unrecognized by Denmark, the Faroe Islands were in 1948 granted extended self-governance with the Danish Realm with the signing of the \"Home Rule Act of the Faroe Islands\".\nEarly Gaelic and Norse settlements.\nThere is some evidence of settlement on the Faroe Islands before Norse Viking settlers arrived in the ninth century AD. Scientific researchers found burnt grains of domesticated barley and peat ash deposited in two phases: the first dated between the mid-fourth and mid-sixth centuries, and another between the late-sixth and late-eighth centuries. Researchers have also found sheep DNA in lake-bed sediments, which were dated to around the year 500. Barley and sheep had to have been brought to the islands by humans. It is unlikely the Norse would have sailed near the Faroes long before the early 800s. The first settlers may have come from the British Isles. Archaeologist Mike Church suggested that the people living there might have been from Ireland, Scotland or Scandinavia, or from all three.\nAccording to a ninth-century voyage tale, the Irish saint Brendan visited islands resembling the Faroes in the sixth century. This description, however, is not conclusive.\nThe earliest text which has been claimed to be a description of the Faroe Islands was written by the Irish monk Dicuil c.825 in his work \"Liber de Mensura Orbis Terrae\" (description of the sphere of the earth). Dicuil had met a \"man worthy of trust\" who related to his master, the abbot Sweeney (Suibhne), how he had landed on islands in the far north after sailing \"two days and a summer night in a little vessel of two banks of oars\" (\"in duobus aestivis diebus, et una intercedente nocte, navigans in duorum navicula transtrorum\").\n\"Many other islands lie in the northerly British Ocean. One reaches them from the northerly islands of Britain, by sailing directly for two days and two nights with a full sail in a favourable wind the whole time... Most of these islands are small, they are separated by narrow channels, and for nearly a hundred years hermits lived there, coming from our land, Ireland, by boat. But just as these islands have been uninhabited from the beginning of the world, so now the Norwegian pirates have driven away the monks; but countless sheep and many different species of sea-fowl are to be found there...\"\nNorse settlement of the Faroe Islands is recorded in the F\u00e6reyinga saga, whose original manuscript is lost. Portions of the tale were inscribed in three other sagas: the \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\", the Saga of \u00d3l\u00e1fr Tryggvason, and AM 62 fol. Similar to other sagas, the historical credibility of the F\u00e6reyinga saga is highly questioned.\nBoth the Saga of \u00d3lafr Tryggvason and the \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\" claim that Gr\u00edmr Kamban was the first man to discover the Faroe Islands. The two sources disagree, however, on the year in which he left and the circumstances of his departure. The \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\" details the emigration of Gr\u00edmr Kamban as sometime during the reign of Harald H\u00e5rfagre, between 872 and 930 AD. The Saga of \u00d3l\u00e1fr Tryggvason indicates that Kamban was residing in the Faroes long before the rule of Harald H\u00e5rfagre, and that other Norse were driven to the Faroe Islands due to his chaotic rule. This mass migration to the Faroe Islands shows a prior knowledge of the Viking settlements' locations, furthering the claim of Gr\u00edmr Kamban's settlement much earlier. While Kamban is recognized as the first Viking settler of the Faroe Islands, his surname is of Gaelic origin. Writings from the Papar, an order of Irish monks, show that they left the Faroe Islands due to ongoing Viking raids.\nPre-14th century.\nThe name of the islands is first recorded on the Hereford \"Mappa Mundi\" (1280), where they are labelled \"farei\".\nThe name has long been understood as based on Old Norse \"f\u00e1r\" \"livestock\", thus \"f\u00e6r-\u00f8er\" \"sheep islands\".\nThe main historical source for this period is the 13th-century work \"F\u00e6reyinga saga\" (\"Saga of the Faroese\"), though it is disputed as to how much of this work is historical fact.\n\"F\u00e6reyinga saga\" only exists today as copies in other sagas, in particular the manuscripts called \"Saga of \u00d3l\u00e1fr Tryggvason\", \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\" and one registered as AM 62 fol.\nAccording to Flateyjarb\u00f3k, Gr\u00edmr Kamban settled in Faroe when Harald H\u00e5rfagre was king of Norway (872\u2013930). A slightly different account is found in the version of \"F\u00e6reyinga saga\" in \u00d3lafs Saga Tryggvasonar:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Ma\u00f0ur er nefndur Gr\u00edmur kamban; hann bygg\u00f0i fyrstur manna F\u00e6reyjar. En \u00e1 d\u00f6gum Haralds hins h\u00e1rfagra fl\u00fd\u00f0u fyrir hans ofr\u00edki fj\u00f6ldi manna; settust sumir \u00ed F\u00e6reyjum og bygg\u00f0u \u00fear, en sumir leitu\u00f0u til annarra ey\u00f0ilanda\".\n\"There was a man named Gr\u00edmr Kamban; he first settled in Faroe. But in the days of Harold Fairhair many men fled before the king's overbearing. Some settled in Faroe and began to dwell there, and others sought to other waste lands.\"\nThe text suggests that Gr\u00edmr Kamban settled in the Faroes some time before the flight from Harald H\u00e5rfagre, perhaps even hundreds of years before. His first name, \"Gr\u00edmr\", is Norse, but his last, \"Kamban\", suggests a Gaelic origin (\"Camb\u00e1n\"). He may have been of mixed Norse and Irish origin and have come from a settlement in the British Isles: a so-called Norse-Gael. The Norse-Gaels had intermarried with speakers of Irish, a language also spoken at the time in Scotland (being the ancestor of Scottish Gaelic). Evidence of a mixed cultural background in later settlers may be found in the Norse-Irish ring pins found in the Faroe Islands, and in features of Faroese vocabulary. Examples of such words (derived from Middle Irish) are: \"blak/bla\u00f0ak\" (buttermilk), Irish \"bl\u00e1thach\"; \"drunnur\" (animal tail), Irish \"dronn\" (chine); \"gr\u00fakur\" (head), Irish \"gruaig\" (hair); \"l\u00e1mur\" (hand, paw), Irish \"l\u00e1mh\" (hand); \"tarvur\" (bull), Irish \"tarbh\"; and \"\u00e6rgi\" (pasture in the outfield), Irish \"\u00e1irge\" (byre, milking place: Mod. Irish \"\u00e1ir\u00ed\"). The discovery at Toftanes on Eysturoy of wooden devotional crosses apparently modelled on Irish or Scottish exemplars suggests that some of the settlers were Christian. It has also been suggested that the typical curvilinear stone-built walls enclosing early ecclesiastical sites in the Faroes (as in Norse settlements elsewhere) reflect a Celtic Christian style, seen in the circular enclosures of early ecclesiastical sites in Ireland. Indirect support for this theory has been found in genetic research showing that many Norse settler women in the Faroe Islands had Celtic forebears.\nIf there was settlement in the Faroes in the reign of Harald H\u00e5rfagre, it is possible that people already knew about the Faroes because of previous visitors or settlers.\nThe fact that immigrants from Norway also settled in the Faroe Islands is proven by a runestone (\"see Sandav\u00e1gur stone\") found in the village of Sandav\u00e1gur on V\u00e1goy Island. It says: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"\u00deorkil Onundsson, austma\u00fer af Hrua-lande, bygg\u00fee \u00fee(n)a sta\u00fe fyrst\". \n\"Thorkil Onundsson, eastman (Norwegian) from Rogaland, settled first in this place (Sandav\u00e1gur)\"\nThis description \"eastman\" (from Norway) has to be seen together with the description \"westman\" (from Ireland/Scotland), which is to be found in local place-names such as \"Vestmanna-havn\" i.e. \"Irishmen's harbour\" in the Faroe Isles, and \"Vestmannaeyjar\" i.e. \"Irishmen's islands\" in Iceland.\nAccording to \"F\u00e6reyinga saga\" there was an ancient institution on the headland called Tinganes in T\u00f3rshavn on the island of Streymoy. This was an \"Al\u00feing\" or Althing (All-council.) This was the place where laws were made and disputes solved. All free men had the right to meet in the Al\u00feing. It was a parliament and law court for all, thus the name. Historians estimate the Al\u00feing to have been established from 800 to 900.\nThe islands were officially converted to Christianity around the year 1000, with the Diocese of the Faroe Islands based at Kirkjub\u00f8ur, southern Streymoy, of which there were 33 Catholic bishops.\nThe Faroes became a part of the Kingdom of Norway in 1035. Early in the 11th century Sigmund or Sigmundur Brestisson, whose family had flourished in the southern islands but had been almost exterminated by invaders from the islands of the north, was sent from Norway, to where he had escaped, to take possession of the islands for Olaf Tryggvason, king of Norway. He introduced Christianity, and, though he was subsequently murdered, Norwegian supremacy was upheld and continued.\nKing Sverre of Norway was brought up in the Faroes, being stepson of a Faroese man, and relative to Roe, bishop of the islands.\nForeign commercial interest: 14th century to Second World War.\nThe 14th century saw the start of what would prove to be a long era of foreign encroachment on the Faroese economy. At this time trading regulations were set up so that all Faroese commerce had to pass through Bergen, Norway in order to collect customs tax. Meanwhile, the Hanseatic League was gaining in power, threatening Scandinavian commerce. Though Norway tried to halt this, it was forced to desist after the Black Death decimated its population.\nNorwegian supremacy continued until 1380, when the islands became part of the Kalmar Union. The islands were still a possession of the Norwegian crown since the crowns had not been joined. In 1380 the Al\u00feting was renamed the L\u00f8gting, though it was by now little more than a law court.\nIn 1390s, Henry I Sinclair, Earl of Orkney, took possession of the islands (as vassal of Norway, however) and for some time they were part of the Sinclair principality in the North Atlantic.\nArchaeological excavations on the islands indicate sustained pig keeping up to and beyond the 13th century, a unique situation when compared to Iceland and Greenland. The Faroese at Junkarinsfl\u00f8tti remained dependent upon bird resources, especially puffins, far longer and to a greater degree than with any of the other Viking Age settlers of the North Atlantic islands.\nEnglish adventurers gave great trouble to the inhabitants in the 16th century, and the name of Magnus Heinason, a native of Streymoy, who was sent by Frederick II to clear the seas, is still celebrated in many songs and stories.\nReformation era.\nIn 1535 Christian II, the deposed monarch, tried to regain power from King Christian III who had just succeeded his father Frederick I. Several of the powerful German companies backed Christian II, but he eventually lost. In 1537 the new King Christian III gave the German trader Thomas K\u00f6ppen exclusive trading rights in the Faroes. These rights were subject to the following conditions: only good quality goods were to be supplied by the Faroese and were to be made in numbers proportionate to the rest of the market; the goods were to be bought at their market value; and the traders were to deal fairly and honestly with the Faroese.\nChristian III also introduced Lutheranism to the Faroes, to replace Catholicism. This process took five years to complete, in which time Danish was used instead of Latin and church property was transferred to the state. The bishopric at Kirkjub\u00f8ur, south of T\u00f3rshavn, where remains of the cathedral may be seen, was also abolished.\nAfter K\u00f6ppen, others took over the trading monopoly, though the economy suffered as a result of the Dano-Swedish war between Denmark\u2013Norway and Sweden. During this period of the monopoly most Faroese goods (wool products, fish, meat) were taken to the Netherlands, where they were sold at pre-determined prices. The guidelines of the trading agreement, however, were often ignored or corrupted. This caused delays and shortages in the supply of Faroese goods and a reduction in quality. With the trading monopoly nearing collapse smuggling and piracy were rife.\n1600s onwards.\nThe Danish king tried to solve the problem by giving the Faroes to the courtier Christoffer Gabel (and later on his son, Frederick) as a personal feudal estate. However, the Gabel rule was harsh and repressive, breeding much resentment in the Faroese. This caused Denmark\u2013Norway, in 1708, to entrust the islands and trading monopoly once more to the central government. However, they too struggled to keep the economy going, and many merchants were trading at a loss. Finally, on 1 January 1856 the trading monopoly was abolished.\nThe Faroe Islands, Iceland and Greenland became a part of Denmark at the Peace of Kiel in 1814, when the union of Denmark\u2013Norway was dissolved.\nIn 1816 the L\u00f8gting (the Faroese parliament) was officially abolished and replaced by a Danish judiciary. Danish was introduced as the main language, whilst Faroese was discouraged. In 1849 a new constitution came into use in Denmark and was promulgated in the Faroes in 1850, giving the Faroese two seats in the Rigsdag (Danish parliament). The Faroese, however, managed in 1852 to re-establish the L\u00f8gting as a county council with an advisory role, with many people hoping for eventual independence. The late 19th century saw increasing support for the home rule/independence movement, though not all were in favour. Meanwhile, the Faroese economy was growing with the introduction of large-scale fishing. The Faroese were allowed access to the large Danish waters in the North Atlantic. Living standards subsequently improved and there was a population increase. Though Faroese was standardized as a written language in 1890, it was not allowed to be used in public schools until 1938, or in the church (F\u00f3lkakirkjan) until 1939.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the Second World War, Denmark was invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany. The British subsequently made a pre-emptive invasion and occupation of the Faroes, known as Operation Valentine, to prevent a German invasion. Given their strategic location in the North Atlantic, the Faroes could have proved useful to Germany in the Battle of the Atlantic, possibly as a submarine base. Instead, the British forces built an airbase on V\u00e1gar, which is still in use as V\u00e1gar Airport. Faroese fishing boats also provided a large amount of fish to the UK, which was crucial given food rationing.\nThe L\u00f8gting gained legislative powers, with the Danish prefect Carl Aage Hilbert retaining executive power. The Faroese flag was recognized by British authorities. There were some attempts to declare complete independence in this period, but the UK had given an undertaking not to interfere in the internal affairs of the Faroe Islands nor to act without the permission of a liberated Denmark. The experience of wartime self-government was crucial in paving the way for formal autonomy in 1948.\nThe British presence was broadly popular (particularly given the alternative of a German occupation). Approximately 150 marriages took place between British soldiers and Faroese women, although the scale of the British presence on V\u00e1gar did lead to some local tensions. The British presence also left a lasting popularity for British chocolate and sweets, which are readily available in Faroese shops but uncommon in Denmark.\nPost-World War II: Home Rule.\nFollowing the liberation of Denmark and the end of World War II, the last British troops left in September 1945. Until 1948 the Faroes had the official status of a Danish amt (county). A referendum on full independence was held in 1946, which produced a majority in favour. This was, however, not recognised by the Danish Government or king due to only 2/3 of the population participating in the referendum, so the Danish king abolished the government of the Faroes. The subsequent elections L\u00f8gting were won by an anti-independence majority and instead a high degree of self-governance was attained in 1948 with the passing of the Act of Faroese Home Rule. Faroese was now an official language, though Danish is still taught as a second language in schools. The Faroese flag was also officially recognised by Danish authorities.\nIn 1973 Denmark joined the European Community (now European Union). The Faroes refused to join, mainly over the issue of fishing limits.\nThe 1980s saw an increase in support for Faroese independence. Unemployment was very low, and the Faroese were enjoying one of the world's highest standards of living, but the Faroese economy was almost entirely reliant on fishing. The early 1990s saw a dramatic slump in fish stocks, which were being overfished with new high-tech equipment. During the same period the government was also engaged in massive overspending. National debt was now at 9.4 billion Danish krones (DKK). Finally, in October 1992, the Faroese national bank (Sj\u00f3vinnurbankin) called in receivers and was forced to ask Denmark for a huge financial bailout. The initial sum was 500 million DKK, though this eventually grew to 1.8 billion DKK (this was in addition to the annual grant of 1 billion DKK). Austerity measures were introduced: public spending was cut, there was a tax and VAT increase and public employees were given a 10% wage-cut. Much of the fishing industry was put into receivership, with talk of cutting down the number of fish-farms and ships.\nIt was during this period that many Faroese (6%) decided to emigrate, mainly to Denmark. Unemployment rose to as much as 20% in T\u00f3rshavn, and even higher in the outlying islands.\nIn 1993 the Sj\u00f3vinnurbankin merged with the Faroe Islands' second largest bank, F\u00f8roya Banki. A third was declared bankrupt. Meanwhile, there was a growing international boycott of Faroese produce because of the grindadr\u00e1p (whaling) issue. The independence movement dissolved on the one hand while Denmark found itself left with the Faroe Islands' unpaid bills on the other.\nRecuperative measures were put in place and largely worked. Unemployment peaked in January 1994 at 26%, since which it fell (10% in mid-1996, 5% in April 2000). The fishing industry survived largely intact. Fish stocks also rose, with the annual catch being 100,000 in 1994, rising to 150,000 in 1995. In 1998 it was 375,000. Emigration also fell to 1% in 1995, and there was a small population increase in 1996. In addition, oil was discovered nearby. By the early 21st century weaknesses in the Faroese economy had been eliminated and, accordingly, many minds turned once again to the possibility of independence from Denmark. However, a planned referendum in 2001 on first steps towards independence was called off following Danish Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen saying that Danish money grants would be phased out within four years if there were a 'yes' vote.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10699", "revid": "1124147561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10699", "title": "Geography of the Faroe Islands", "text": "The Faroe Islands are an island group consisting of eighteen islands between the Norwegian Sea and the North Atlantic, about half-way between Iceland and Norway. Its coordinates are . It is 1,393 square kilometres in area, and includes small lakes and rivers, but no major ones. There are 1,117 kilometres of coastline, and no land boundaries with any other country.\nThe Faroe Islands generally have cool summers and mild winters, with a usually overcast sky and frequent fog and strong winds. Although at a high latitude, due to the Gulf Stream their climate is ameliorated. The islands are rugged and rocky with some low peaks; the coasts are mostly bordered by cliffs. The Faroe Islands are notable for having the highest sea cliffs in Europe, and some of the highest in the world otherwise. The lowest point is at sea level, and the highest is at Sl\u00e6ttaratindur, which is 882 metres above sea level. The landscape made roadbuilding difficult, and only recently has this been remedied by building tunnels.\nMany of the Faroese islands tend to be elongated in shape. Natural resources include fish and hydropower.\n* North: Enniberg, 62\u00b029\u2032,2 N\n* South: Sumbiarsteinur, 61\u00b021\u2032,6 N\n* West: G\u00e1adrangur, 7\u00b040\u2032,1 W\n* East: Stapin, 6\u00b021\u2032,5 W\n* Land: 1,393 km\u00b2 \n* Water: 7.19 km\u00b2 (the area includes 10 of the largest lakes. There are a number of smaller lakes and streams.)\n 0 km\n 1,117 km\n* Territorial sea: \n* Continental shelf: or agreed boundaries or median line\n* Exclusive economic zone: or agreed boundaries or median line\n Subarctic oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfc\") moderated by North Atlantic Current; long, mild, windy winters; short, cool summers, damp in the South and West. Arctic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"ET\") in some mountains.\n Rugged, rocky, some low peaks; cliffs along most of coast. The coasts are deeply indented with fjords, and the narrow passages between islands are agitated by strong tidal currents. Multiple sea stacks exist along the coast.\n* Lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m\n* Highest point: Sl\u00e6ttaratindur 880 m\n Fish, whales, hydropower, wind, possible petroleum and natural gas\n* Arable land: 2.14%\n* Permanent crops: 0%\n* Other: 97.86% (2012)\n Marine dumping\nClimate.\nThe climate is classed as subpolar oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfc\"), with areas having a tundra climate, especially in the mountains, although some coastal or low-lying areas may have very mild-winter versions of a tundra climate. The overall character of the climate of the islands is influenced by the strong warming influence of the Atlantic Ocean, which produces the North Atlantic Current. This, together with the remoteness of any source of landmass-induced warm or cold airflows, ensures that winters are mild (mean temperature 3.0 to 4.0\u00a0\u00b0C or 37 to 39\u00a0\u00b0F) while summers are cool (mean temperature 9.5 to 10.5\u00a0\u00b0C or 49 to 51\u00a0\u00b0F).\nThe islands are windy, cloudy and cool throughout the year with an average of 210 rainy or snowy days per year. The islands lie in the path of depressions moving northeast, making strong winds and heavy rain possible at all times of the year. Sunny days are rare and overcast days are common. Hurricane Faith struck the Faroe Islands on 5 September 1966 with sustained winds over 100\u00a0mph (160\u00a0km/h) and only then did the storm cease to be a tropical system.\nDue to the altitude, ocean currents, topography, and winds, the islands exhibit a variety of microclimates. Precipitation varies considerably throughout the archipelago. In some highland areas, snow cover may last for months with snowfalls possible for the greater part of the year (on the highest peaks, summer snowfall is by no means rare), while in some sheltered coastal locations, several years pass without any snowfall whatsoever.\nT\u00f3rshavn receives frosts more often than other areas just a short distance to the south. Snow is also seen at a much higher frequency than outlying islands nearby. The area receives on average 49 frosts a year.\nWhile receiving more frost than most of the Faroe Islands, Mykines is more temperate in the winter than nearby V\u00e1gar. Snow is also less common despite the relatively lower winter temperatures due to the relatively low precipitation in the area. It also has a very mild tundra climate bordering on subpolar oceanic. Frost occurs on 46 days in an average year It is also likely that the lower areas of the island experience less than this, as the weather station is located at 105 meters above sea level.\nAkraberg is milder than much of the Faroe Islands and experiences frost on 38 days in an average year, possibly less in lower areas, as the weather station is located at an elevation of 101 meters above sea level.\nV\u00e1gar has colder and snowier winters than most other places in the archipelago. Lower temperatures combined with higher precipitation are responsible for this, and measurable snow cover can be seen- a rarity in the Faroe Islands, in which snow cover (in areas which regularly experience it) is usually limited to a thin coating. The airport, at which data is recorded, is also located at a higher altitude on the island (84 meters above sea level), which might result in lower temperatures and higher precipitation than lower-lying areas on the island. Frost occurs on average on 62 days of the year, the most out of all stations included in the records of the Danish Meteorological Institute.\nKirkja has a very mild climate, similar to Akraberg. It has the lowest frequency of frosts out of all weather stations included in the records by the Danish Meteorological Institute, with 36 days of frost in an average year. Snowfall is uncommon, due to mild temperatures and relatively low precipitation. The weather station is somewhat high at 53 meters above sea level, which could possibly affect the data, but not as much as the previous stations.\nN\u00f3lsoy experiences a climate that is quite typical of the surrounding area and the Faroe Islands in general, and is similar to nearby T\u00f3rshavn. There are on average 44 days of frost a year. Also, as in the case of previous weather stations, the location is higher on its respective island, and the climate of the lower areas of the island differs slightly.\nThe climate of Sandur is typical for a low-lying coastal location in the south of the Faroe Islands, as the weather station for Sandur is located at 5 meters above sea level. On average, Sandur experiences 41 days of frost a year.\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10700", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10700", "title": "Demographics of the Faroe Islands", "text": "Demographics of region\nThis article is about the demographic features of the population of the Faroe Islands, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population. The vast majority of the population are ethnic Faroese, of North Germanic descent. Ethnic Faroese are, in genetic terms, among the most homogenous groups ever found.\nA 2004 DNA analysis revealed that Y chromosomes, tracing male descent, are 87% Scandinavian. The studies show that mitochondrial DNA, tracing female descent, is 84% Scottish/Irish.\nOf the approximately 48,000 inhabitants of the Faroe Islands (16,921 private households (2004)), 98% are Danish realm citizens, meaning Faroese, Danish, or Greenlandic. By birthplace one can derive the following origins of the inhabitants: born on the Faroes 91.7%, in Denmark 5.8%, and in Greenland 0.3%. The largest group of foreigners are Icelanders comprising 0.4% of the population, followed by Norwegians and Poles, each comprising 0.2%. Altogether, on the Faroe Islands there are people from 77 different nationalities. The Faroe Islands have the highest rate of adoption in the world, despite a relatively high fertility rate of 2.6 children. \nFaroese is spoken in the entire country as a first language. It is not possible to say exactly how many people worldwide speak the Faroese language.\nThe 2011 census, called Manntal, shows that 10% were not born in the Faroe Islands, but of these only 3% were born outside the Kingdom of Denmark. 6.5% of people older than 15 did not speak Faroese as their mother tongue. 33 persons said that they did not understand Faroese at all. According to the 2011 census, 45 361 Faroese people (people living in the Faroes) spoke Faroese as their first language and 1546 spoke Danish as their first language.\nVital statistics since 1900.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021): \nCIA World Factbook demographic statistics.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\n 0\u201314 years: 19.89% (male 5,214/female 4,878)\n 15\u201324 years: 14.34% (male 3,738/female 3,538)\n 25\u201354 years: 37.31% (male 10,252/female 8,676)\n 55\u201364 years: 11.69% (male 3,054/female 2,878)\n 65 years and over: 16.76% (male 4,111/female 4,391) (2017 est.)\n at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female\n 0\u201314 years: 1.07 male(s)/female\n 15\u201324 years: 1.05 male(s)/female\n 25\u201354 years: 1.18 male(s)/female\n 55\u201364 years: 1.06 male(s)/female\n 65 years and over: 0.94 male(s)/female\n total population: 1.08 male(s)/female (2017 est.)\nInfant mortality rate.\n5.4 deaths/1,000 live births (2017 est.)\n \"total population:\" 79.85 years (2012 est.)\n \"male:\" 77.37 years\n \"female:\" 82.50 years\n 2.4 children born/woman (2012 est.)\n \"noun:\" Faroese (singular and plural)\n \"adjective:\" Faroese\nEthnic groups.\n\u2013 Faroese (mixed Scandinavian \u2013 Celtic)\n\u2013 Danes\nLanguages.\nThe official languages are Faroese (derived from Old Norse), and Danish.\nAccording to the Faroese census of 2011, here is the breakdown of people in the Faroe Islands by language:\nThe percentages have been calculated based on the total number of respondents, which was 48,345 residents of the Faroe Islands who were asked to reply to the questions in November 2011.\nLiteracy.\n&lt;br&gt;\"definition:\"\nNA\n&lt;br&gt;\"total population:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"male:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"female:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"note:\"\nsimilar to Denmark proper"}
{"id": "10701", "revid": "41869722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10701", "title": "Politics of the Faroe Islands", "text": "Description of the government of the Faroe Islands\nThe politics of the Faroe Islands, an autonomous country () of the Kingdom of Denmark, function within the framework of a parliamentary, representative democratic dependency, whereby the Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. The Faroe Islands are politically associated with the Kingdom of Denmark but have been self-governing since 1948. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the L\u00f8gting. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature and the responsibility of Denmark. As of October 25, 2007, the Faroe Islands became one electoral district.\nExecutive branch.\nThe high commissioner is appointed by the Monarch of Denmark. The High Commissioner has a seat in the L\u00f8gting, with the ability to speak in the L\u00f8gting regarding common Danish/Faroese affairs, but is unable to vote. Following legislative elections, the leader of the party that wins the most seats is usually given the initiative to establish a new coalition by the Faroese Parliament, unless the current L\u00f8gma\u00f0ur (\"Prime Minister\" in English) is still in power. However, if he or she fails, the Chairman of the parliament asks all chairmen of the parties elected to the parliament, and asks them to point to another chairman who they feel can rightly form a new coalition. The chairman with the most votes is then handed the initiative. After forming the coalition, the L\u00f8gma\u00f0ur leads the landsst\u00fdri. The landsst\u00fdri will often consist of around 7 members. The coalition parties divide the various ministries among themselves and after this, the parties elect their representative to these ministries. Any other member of the cabinet is called a \"landsst\u00fdrisma\u00f0ur\" if the person is a man, or \"landsst\u00fdriskvinna\" if the person is a woman. The word \"r\u00e1\u00f0harri\" is also used for a member of the cabinet, i.e. \"mentam\u00e1lar\u00e1\u00f0harri\" (minister of culture) or \"heilsum\u00e1lar\u00e1\u00f0harri\" (minister of health).\nCurrent government.\nFollowing the 2019 Faroese general election, a new government, consisting of three parties (Union Party, People's Party, and Centre Party) under Prime Minister B\u00e1r\u00f0ur \u00e1 Steig Nielsen was created\nLegislative branch.\nThe Faroese Parliament (\"L\u00f8gtingi\u00f0 in Faroese\") has 33 MPs (members of parliament), elected for a four-year term by proportional representation.\nElection of 2 seats to the Danish Parliament was last held 31 october 2022: Social Democrat 1, Unionist 1.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThe Faroe Islands have a multi-party system (disputing on independence and unionism as well as left and right), with numerous parties in which no one party often has a chance of gaining power alone, and parties must work with each other to form coalition governments. The Faroese Parliament (L\u00f8gting) has 33 seats. Members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms. For the L\u00f8gting elections, there were seven electoral districts, each one comprehending a\"s\u00fdslur\", while Streymoy is divided into northern and southern parts (T\u00f3rshavn region), but since 2008, the Faroes constitute a single district.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe islands are administratively divided into 29 municipalities with about 120 cities and villages.\nTraditionally, there are also the 6 s\u00fdslur (Nor\u00f0oyar, Eysturoy, Streymoy, V\u00e1gar, Sandoy, and Su\u00f0uroy). \"S\u00fdsla\" means district and although it is only a police district today, it is still commonly understood as a geographical region. In earlier times, each s\u00fdsla had its own ting, the so-called \"v\u00e1rting\" (spring ting).\nInternational affairs.\nThe nation continues to be intimately tied with the Nordic countries of Europe and the European Union. \nAlong with diplomatic missions to Iceland, the Court of St. James's (United Kingdom), Russia, and the European Union, the Faroe Islands participate in the Nordic Council, NIB, International Maritime Organization, International Whaling Commission (Complete list of participation of the Faroe Islands in international organisations).\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10702", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10702", "title": "Economy of the Faroe Islands", "text": "The economy of the Faroe Islands was the 166th largest in the world in 2014, having a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of $2.613 billion per annum. GDP increased from DKK 8 billion in 1999, to 21 billion in 2019. The vast majority of Faroese exports, around 90%, consists of fishery products.\nHistory.\nAfter the severe economic troubles of the early 1990s, brought on by a drop in the vital fish catch and poor management of the economy, the Faroe Islands have recently recovered, with unemployment down to 5% in mid-1998, and holding below 3% since 2006, one of the lowest rates in Europe.\nChallenges and opportunities.\nSalaries by industry, 2019\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Service (64%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Fishing &amp; farming (20%)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Construction &amp; manufacturing (16%)\nHigh dependence on fishing (including salmon farming) means the Faroe Islands' economy remains vulnerable. The Faroese hope to broaden their economic base by building new fish-processing plants. The islands allow up to 25% foreign ownership of ocean industry decreasing gradually until 2032 when foreign ownership must end. Petroleum found close to the Faroese area gives hope for deposits in the immediate area, which may lay the basis for sustained economic prosperity. Also important are the annual subsidy from Denmark, which amounted to about 3% of the GDP.\nThe Faroes have one of the lowest unemployment rates in Europe (1% in 2019), but this is not necessarily a sign of a recovering economy, as many young students move to Denmark and other countries once they are finished with high school. This leaves a largely middle-aged and elderly population that may lack the skills and knowledge to take IT positions in business and industry. Since 2000, new information technology and business projects have been fostered in the Faroe Islands to attract new investment. The result from these projects is not yet known but is hoped to bring a better market economy to the Faroe Islands. The population was around 52,000 by 2019.\nGeneral salaries increased from DKK 7 billion in 2013 to DKK 10 billion in 2019. In 2020, salmon exports were DKK 3.3 billion. Fishing industries occupied 1,441 people on land and 1,341 at sea.\nTrade.\nIn 2014 the Faroe Islands had a trade surplus of 401 million DKK, a figure that rose to 1.43 billion DKK in 2016. As of 2016, the Faroe Islands mainly imported goods from Denmark (2,467 million DKK), Germany (877 million DKK), and Norway (610 million DKK). The country's top export destinations were Russia (1,907 million DKK), the United States (898 million DKK), the United Kingdom (851 million DKK), and Denmark (697 million DKK). European Union countries constituted 72.9% of total Faroese imports, while the exports of the Faroe Islands were more equally distributed between European Union (44.4%) and non-European Union countries (55.6%). The vast majority of Faroese exports, around 90%, consists of fishery products. Russian countersanctions on food imports from Norway and the European Union, saw the Faroe Islands increase its fresh salmon exports to Russia. The Faroe Islands has a free trade agreement with Iceland since 2005.\nEnergy.\nOil consumption peaked at over 300,000 tonnes in 2020, of which 30% was for fishing vessels. In 2014 217,547 tonnes of oil products were consumed in the Faroe Islands. Of this 31.58% was consumed by fishing vessels, 14.73% was used by SEV for electricity production, 23.23% was consumed in air, sea or land transport, 9.6% was used in the industry, and the rest was used in public or private buildings.\nThe islands have 6 hydroelectric plants, 4 diesel plants and several wind power plants with a capacity factor above 40%. In 2014, a 12MW wind farm for DKK 180 million became operational near Torshavn and increased wind capacity from 6.6 to 18.6MW. It decreases oil consumption by 8,000 ton (approximately 4M\u20ac) per year. A 2.3MW 700 kWh lithium-ion battery became operational in 2016. Planners also consider converting the existing hydropower to pumped-storage hydroelectricity. Tidal power and Thermal energy storage solutions are also considered. The islands have a goal of 100% green electricity production by 2030.\nIn 2014 and 2017 50.8% of the electricity production of SEV in the Faroe Islands came from green energy like hydro and wind, while 49.2% was produced by the thermal power plants, which was 12.4% less than in 2013.\nTotal annual production: 305.4 GWh (2014) of which the production of thermal, hydropower and wind power was:\nThe Faroe Islands have no electricity connections to other areas, and thus operate in island condition. Some islands are also not connected to the other islands, and must maintain their own electric system.\nOther.\nAgriculture - products:\nmilk, potatoes, vegetables; sheep; salmon, other fish\nCurrency:\n1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 \u00f8rer\nExchange rates:\nDanish kroner (DKr) per US$1 \u2013 5.560 (2008), 7.336 (January 2000), 6.976 (1999), 6.701 (1998), 6.604 (1997), 5.799 (1996), 5.602 (1995)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10703", "revid": "19396651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10703", "title": "Telecommunications in the Faroe Islands", "text": "Telephones - main lines in use:\n22,000 (1995)\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n35,000 (2004) est.\nTelephone system:\ngood international communications; good domestic facilities\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\ndigitalization was to have been completed in 1998\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\nsatellite earth stations - 1 Orion; 2 fiber-optic submarine cable linking the Faroe Islands with Denmark, Iceland and Scotland\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 1, FM 13, shortwave 0 (1998)\nRadios:\n26,000 (1997)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n7 (plus 51 low-power repeaters) (September 1995)\nTelevisions:\n15,000 (1997)\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\nDataNet \nEl &amp; Tele \nF\u00f8roya Tele \nHey \nTeletech \nCountry code (TLD): FO"}
