{"id": "902", "revid": "31026899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=902", "title": "Atom", "text": "Smallest unit of a chemical element\nAn atom is a particle that consists of a nucleus of protons and neutrons surrounded by a cloud of electrons. The atom is the basic particle of the chemical elements, and the chemical elements are distinguished from each other by the number of protons that are in their atoms. For example, any atom that contains 11 protons is sodium, and any atom that contains 29 protons is copper. The number of neutrons defines the isotope of the element.\nAtoms are extremely small, typically around 100\u00a0picometers across. A human hair is about a million carbon atoms wide. This is smaller than the shortest wavelength of visible light, which means humans cannot see atoms with conventional microscopes. Atoms are so small that accurately predicting their behavior using classical physics is not possible due to quantum effects.\nMore than 99.94% of an atom's mass is in the nucleus. The protons have a positive electric charge, the electrons have a negative electric charge, and the neutrons have no electric charge. If the number of protons and electrons are equal, then the atom is electrically neutral. If an atom has more or fewer electrons than protons, then it has an overall negative or positive charge, respectively\u2014such atoms are called ions.\nThe electrons of an atom are attracted to the protons in an atomic nucleus by the electromagnetic force. The protons and neutrons in the nucleus are attracted to each other by the nuclear force. This force is usually stronger than the electromagnetic force that repels the positively charged protons from one another. Under certain circumstances, the repelling electromagnetic force becomes stronger than the nuclear force. In this case, the nucleus splits and leaves behind different elements. This is a form of nuclear decay.\nAtoms can attach to one or more other atoms by chemical bonds to form chemical compounds such as molecules or crystals. The ability of atoms to attach and detach is responsible for most of the physical changes observed in nature. Chemistry is the discipline that studies these changes.\nHistory of atomic theory.\nIn philosophy.\nThe basic idea that matter is made up of tiny indivisible particles is an old idea that appeared in many ancient cultures. The word \"atom\" is derived from the ancient Greek word \"atomos\", which means \"uncuttable\". This ancient idea was based in philosophical reasoning rather than scientific reasoning. Modern atomic theory is not based on these old concepts. In the early 19th century, the scientist John Dalton noticed that chemical elements seemed to combine with each other by discrete units of weight, and he decided to use the word \"atom\" to refer to these units, as he thought these were the fundamental units of matter. About a century later it was discovered that Dalton's atoms are not actually indivisible, but the term stuck.\nDalton's law of multiple proportions.\nIn the early 1800s, the English chemist John Dalton compiled experimental data gathered by himself and other scientists and discovered a pattern now known as the \"law of multiple proportions\". He noticed that in chemical compounds which contain a particular chemical element, the content of that element in these compounds will differ in weight by ratios of small whole numbers. This pattern suggested that each chemical element combines with other elements by a basic unit of weight, and Dalton decided to call these units \"atoms\".\nFor example, there are two types of tin oxide: one is a grey powder that is 88.1% tin and 11.9% oxygen, and the other is a white powder that is 78.7% tin and 21.3% oxygen. Adjusting these figures, in the grey powder there is about 13.5\u00a0g of oxygen for every 100\u00a0g of tin, and in the white powder there is about 27\u00a0g of oxygen for every 100\u00a0g of tin. 13.5 and 27 form a ratio of 1:2. Dalton concluded that in these oxides, for every tin atom there are one or two oxygen atoms respectively (SnO and SnO2).\nDalton also analyzed iron oxides. There is one type of iron oxide that is a black powder which is 78.1% iron and 21.9% oxygen; and there is another iron oxide that is a red powder which is 70.4% iron and 29.6% oxygen. Adjusting these figures, in the black powder there is about 28\u00a0g of oxygen for every 100\u00a0g of iron, and in the red powder there is about 42\u00a0g of oxygen for every 100\u00a0g of iron. 28 and 42 form a ratio of 2:3. Dalton concluded that in these oxides, for every two atoms of iron, there are two or three atoms of oxygen respectively (Fe2O2 and Fe2O3).\nAs a final example: nitrous oxide is 63.3% nitrogen and 36.7% oxygen, nitric oxide is 44.05% nitrogen and 55.95% oxygen, and nitrogen dioxide is 29.5% nitrogen and 70.5% oxygen. Adjusting these figures, in nitrous oxide there is 80\u00a0g of oxygen for every 140\u00a0g of nitrogen, in nitric oxide there is about 160\u00a0g of oxygen for every 140\u00a0g of nitrogen, and in nitrogen dioxide there is 320\u00a0g of oxygen for every 140\u00a0g of nitrogen. 80, 160, and 320 form a ratio of 1:2:4. The respective formulas for these oxides are N2O, NO, and NO2.\nIsomerism.\nScientists discovered some substances have the exact same chemical content but different properties. For instance, in 1827, Friedrich W\u00f6hler discovered that silver fulminate and silver cyanate are both 107 parts silver, 12 parts carbon, 14 parts nitrogen, and 12 parts oxygen (we now know their formulas as both AgCNO). In 1830 J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius introduced the term \"isomerism\" to describe the phenomenon. In 1860, Louis Pasteur hypothesized that the molecules of isomers might have the same composition but different arrangements of their atoms.\nIn 1874, Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff proposed that the carbon atom bonds to other atoms in a tetrahedral arrangement. Working from this, he explained the structures of organic molecules in such a way that he could predict how many isomers a compound could have. Consider, for example, pentane (C5H12). In van 't Hoff's way of modelling molecules, there are three possible configurations for pentane, and scientists did go on to discover three substances that had the same composition as pentane.\nBrownian motion.\nIn 1827, the British botanist Robert Brown observed that dust particles inside pollen grains floating in water constantly jiggled about for no apparent reason. In 1905, Albert Einstein theorized that this Brownian motion was caused by the water molecules continuously knocking the grains about, and developed a mathematical model to describe it. This model was validated experimentally in 1908 by French physicist Jean Perrin, who used Einstein's equation to calculate the number of atoms in a mole and the size of atoms.\nDiscovery of the electron.\nIn 1897, J. J. Thomson discovered that cathode rays are not electromagnetic waves but made of particles because they can be deflected by electrical and magnetic fields. He measured these particles to be 1,800 times lighter than hydrogen (the lightest atom). Thomson concluded that these particles came from the atoms within the cathode\u2014they were \"subatomic\" particles. He called these new particles \"corpuscles\" but they were later renamed \"electrons\". Thomson also showed that electrons were identical to particles given off by photoelectric and radioactive materials. It was quickly recognized that electrons are the particles that carry electric currents in metal wires. Thomson concluded that these electrons emerged from the very atoms of the cathode in his instruments, which meant that atoms are not indivisible as Dalton thought.\nDiscovery of the nucleus.\nJ. J. Thomson thought that the negatively-charged electrons were distributed throughout the atom in a sea of positive charge that was distributed across the whole volume of the atom. This model is sometimes known as the plum pudding model.\nErnest Rutherford and his colleagues Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden came to doubt the Thomson model after they encountered difficulties when they tried to build an instrument to measure the charge-to-mass ratio of alpha particles (these are positively-charged particles emitted by certain radioactive substances such as radium). The alpha particles were being scattered by the air in the detection chamber, which made the measurements unreliable. Thomson had encountered a similar problem in his work on cathode rays, which he solved by creating a near-perfect vacuum in his instruments. Rutherford did not think he'd run into this same problem because alpha particles are much heavier than electrons. According to Thomson's model of the atom, the positive charge in the atom is not concentrated enough to produce an electric field strong enough to deflect an alpha particle, and the electrons are so lightweight they should be pushed aside effortlessly by the much heavier alpha particles. Yet there was scattering, so Rutherford and his colleagues decided to investigate this scattering carefully.\nBetween 1908 and 1913, Rutherford and his colleagues performed a series of experiments in which they bombarded thin foils of metal with alpha particles. They spotted alpha particles being deflected by angles greater than 90\u00b0. To explain this, Rutherford proposed that the positive charge of the atom is not distributed throughout the atom's volume as Thomson believed, but is concentrated in a tiny nucleus at the center. Only such an intense concentration of charge could produce an electric field strong enough to deflect the alpha particles as observed.\nDiscovery of isotopes.\nWhile experimenting with the products of radioactive decay, in 1913 radiochemist Frederick Soddy discovered that there appeared to be more than one type of atom at each position on the periodic table. These atoms had the same properties but different atomic weights. The term isotope was coined by Margaret Todd as a suitable name for atoms of differing weights that belong to the same element. J. J. Thomson created a technique for isotope separation through his work on ionized gases, which subsequently led to the discovery of stable isotopes.\nBohr model.\nIn 1913, the physicist Niels Bohr proposed a model in which the electrons of an atom were assumed to orbit the nucleus but could only do so in a finite set of orbits, and could jump between these orbits only in discrete changes of energy corresponding to absorption or radiation of a photon. This quantization was used to explain why the electrons' orbits are stable (given that normally, charges in acceleration, including circular motion, lose kinetic energy which is emitted as electromagnetic radiation, see \"synchrotron radiation\") and why elements absorb and emit electromagnetic radiation in discrete spectra.\nLater in the same year Henry Moseley provided additional experimental evidence in favor of Niels Bohr's theory. These results refined Ernest Rutherford's and Antonius van den Broek's model, which proposed that the atom contains in its nucleus a number of positive nuclear charges that is equal to its (atomic) number in the periodic table. Until these experiments, atomic number was not known to be a physical and experimental quantity. That it is equal to the atomic nuclear charge remains the accepted atomic model today.\nChemical bonds between atoms were explained by Gilbert Newton Lewis in 1916, as the interactions between their constituent electrons. As the chemical properties of the elements were known to largely repeat themselves according to the periodic law, in 1919 the American chemist Irving Langmuir suggested that this could be explained if the electrons in an atom were connected or clustered in some manner. Groups of electrons were thought to occupy a set of electron shells about the nucleus.\nThe Bohr model of the atom was the first complete physical model of the atom. It described the overall structure of the atom, how atoms bond to each other, and predicted the spectral lines of hydrogen. Bohr's model was not perfect and was soon superseded by the more accurate Schr\u00f6dinger model, but it was sufficient to evaporate any remaining doubts that matter is composed of atoms. For chemists, the idea of the atom had been a useful heuristic tool, but physicists had doubts as to whether matter really is made up of atoms as nobody had yet developed a complete physical model of the atom.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger model.\nIn 1925, Werner Heisenberg published the first consistent mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics (matrix mechanics). One year earlier, Louis de Broglie had proposed that all particles behave like waves to some extent, and in 1926 Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger used this idea to develop the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, a mathematical model of the atom that described the electrons as three-dimensional waveforms rather than points in space.\nA consequence of using waveforms to describe particles is that it is mathematically impossible to obtain precise values for both the position and momentum of a particle at a given point in time. This became known as the uncertainty principle, formulated by Werner Heisenberg in 1927. In this concept, for a given accuracy in measuring a position one could only obtain a range of probable values for momentum, and vice versa.\nThis model was able to explain observations of atomic behavior that previous models could not, such as certain structural and spectral patterns of atoms larger than hydrogen. Thus, the planetary model of the atom was discarded in favor of one that described atomic orbital zones around the nucleus where a given electron is most likely to be observed.\nDiscovery of the neutron.\nThe development of the mass spectrometer allowed the mass of atoms to be measured with increased accuracy. The device uses a magnet to bend the trajectory of a beam of ions, and the amount of deflection is determined by the ratio of an atom's mass to its charge. The chemist Francis William Aston used this instrument to show that isotopes had different masses. The atomic mass of these isotopes varied by integer amounts, called the whole number rule. The explanation for these different isotopes awaited the discovery of the neutron, an uncharged particle with a mass similar to the proton, by the physicist James Chadwick in 1932. Isotopes were then explained as elements with the same number of protons, but different numbers of neutrons within the nucleus.\nFission, high-energy physics and condensed matter.\nIn 1938, the German chemist Otto Hahn, a student of Rutherford, directed neutrons onto uranium atoms expecting to get transuranium elements. Instead, his chemical experiments showed barium as a product. A year later, Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch verified that Hahn's result were the first experimental \"nuclear fission\". In 1944, Hahn received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Despite Hahn's efforts, the contributions of Meitner and Frisch were not recognized.\nIn the 1950s, the development of improved particle accelerators and particle detectors allowed scientists to study the impacts of atoms moving at high energies. Neutrons and protons were found to be hadrons, or composites of smaller particles called quarks. The standard model of particle physics was developed that so far has successfully explained the properties of the nucleus in terms of these sub-atomic particles and the forces that govern their interactions.\nStructure.\nSubatomic particles.\nThough the word \"atom\" originally denoted a particle that cannot be cut into smaller particles, in modern scientific usage the atom is composed of various subatomic particles. The constituent particles of an atom are the electron, the proton and the neutron.\nThe electron is by far the least massive of these particles at , with a negative electrical charge and a size that is too small to be measured using available techniques. It was the lightest particle with a positive rest mass measured, until the discovery of neutrino mass. Under ordinary conditions, electrons are bound to the positively charged nucleus by the attraction created from opposite electric charges. If an atom has more or fewer electrons than its atomic number, then it becomes respectively negatively or positively charged as a whole; a charged atom is called an ion. Electrons have been known since the late 19th century, mostly thanks to J.J. Thomson; see history of subatomic physics for details.\nProtons have a positive charge and a mass 1,836 times that of the electron, at . The number of protons in an atom is called its atomic number. Ernest Rutherford (1919) observed that nitrogen under alpha-particle bombardment ejects what appeared to be hydrogen nuclei. By 1920 he had accepted that the hydrogen nucleus is a distinct particle within the atom and named it proton.\nNeutrons have no electrical charge and have a free mass of 1,839 times the mass of the electron, or . Neutrons are the heaviest of the three constituent particles, but their mass can be reduced by the nuclear binding energy. Neutrons and protons (collectively known as nucleons) have comparable dimensions\u2014on the order of \u2014although the 'surface' of these particles is not sharply defined. The neutron was discovered in 1932 by the English physicist James Chadwick.\nIn the Standard Model of physics, electrons are truly elementary particles with no internal structure, whereas protons and neutrons are composite particles composed of elementary particles called quarks. There are two types of quarks in atoms, each having a fractional electric charge. Protons are composed of two up quarks (each with charge +) and one down quark (with a charge of \u2212). Neutrons consist of one up quark and two down quarks. This distinction accounts for the difference in mass and charge between the two particles.\nThe quarks are held together by the strong interaction (or strong force), which is mediated by gluons. The protons and neutrons, in turn, are held to each other in the nucleus by the nuclear force, which is a residuum of the strong force that has somewhat different range-properties (see the article on the nuclear force for more). The gluon is a member of the family of gauge bosons, which are elementary particles that mediate physical forces.\nNucleus.\nAll the bound protons and neutrons in an atom make up a tiny atomic nucleus, and are collectively called nucleons. The radius of a nucleus is approximately equal to formula_1\u00a0femtometres, where formula_2 is the total number of nucleons. This is much smaller than the radius of the atom, which is on the order of 105\u00a0fm. The nucleons are bound together by a short-ranged attractive potential called the residual strong force. At distances smaller than 2.5 fm this force is much more powerful than the electrostatic force that causes positively charged protons to repel each other.\nAtoms of the same element have the same number of protons, called the atomic number. Within a single element, the number of neutrons may vary, determining the isotope of that element. The total number of protons and neutrons determine the nuclide. The number of neutrons relative to the protons determines the stability of the nucleus, with certain isotopes undergoing radioactive decay.\nThe proton, the electron, and the neutron are classified as fermions. Fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle which prohibits \"identical\" fermions, such as multiple protons, from occupying the same quantum state at the same time. Thus, every proton in the nucleus must occupy a quantum state different from all other protons, and the same applies to all neutrons of the nucleus and to all electrons of the electron cloud.\nA nucleus that has a different number of protons than neutrons can potentially drop to a lower energy state through a radioactive decay that causes the number of protons and neutrons to more closely match. As a result, atoms with matching numbers of protons and neutrons are more stable against decay, but with increasing atomic number, the mutual repulsion of the protons requires an increasing proportion of neutrons to maintain the stability of the nucleus.\nThe number of protons and neutrons in the atomic nucleus can be modified, although this can require very high energies because of the strong force. Nuclear fusion occurs when multiple atomic particles join to form a heavier nucleus, such as through the energetic collision of two nuclei. For example, at the core of the Sun protons require energies of 3 to 10 keV to overcome their mutual repulsion\u2014the coulomb barrier\u2014and fuse together into a single nucleus. Nuclear fission is the opposite process, causing a nucleus to split into two smaller nuclei\u2014usually through radioactive decay. The nucleus can also be modified through bombardment by high energy subatomic particles or photons. If this modifies the number of protons in a nucleus, the atom changes to a different chemical element.\nIf the mass of the nucleus following a fusion reaction is less than the sum of the masses of the separate particles, then the difference between these two values can be emitted as a type of usable energy (such as a gamma ray, or the kinetic energy of a beta particle), as described by Albert Einstein's mass\u2013energy equivalence formula, \"e=mc2\", where \"m\" is the mass loss and \"c\" is the speed of light. This deficit is part of the binding energy of the new nucleus, and it is the non-recoverable loss of the energy that causes the fused particles to remain together in a state that requires this energy to separate.\nThe fusion of two nuclei that create larger nuclei with lower atomic numbers than iron and nickel\u2014a total nucleon number of about 60\u2014is usually an exothermic process that releases more energy than is required to bring them together. It is this energy-releasing process that makes nuclear fusion in stars a self-sustaining reaction. For heavier nuclei, the binding energy per nucleon in the nucleus begins to decrease. That means fusion processes producing nuclei that have atomic numbers higher than about 26, and atomic masses higher than about 60, is an endothermic process. These more massive nuclei can not undergo an energy-producing fusion reaction that can sustain the hydrostatic equilibrium of a star.\nElectron cloud.\nThe electrons in an atom are attracted to the protons in the nucleus by the electromagnetic force. This force binds the electrons inside an electrostatic potential well surrounding the smaller nucleus, which means that an external source of energy is needed for the electron to escape. The closer an electron is to the nucleus, the greater the attractive force. Hence electrons bound near the center of the potential well require more energy to escape than those at greater separations.\nElectrons, like other particles, have properties of both a particle and a wave. The electron cloud is a region inside the potential well where each electron forms a type of three-dimensional standing wave\u2014a wave form that does not move relative to the nucleus. This behavior is defined by an atomic orbital, a mathematical function that characterises the probability that an electron appears to be at a particular location when its position is measured. Only a discrete (or quantized) set of these orbitals exist around the nucleus, as other possible wave patterns rapidly decay into a more stable form. Orbitals can have one or more ring or node structures, and differ from each other in size, shape and orientation.\nEach atomic orbital corresponds to a particular energy level of the electron. The electron can change its state to a higher energy level by absorbing a photon with sufficient energy to boost it into the new quantum state. Likewise, through spontaneous emission, an electron in a higher energy state can drop to a lower energy state while radiating the excess energy as a photon. These characteristic energy values, defined by the differences in the energies of the quantum states, are responsible for atomic spectral lines.\nThe amount of energy needed to remove or add an electron\u2014the electron binding energy\u2014is far less than the binding energy of nucleons. For example, it requires only 13.6\u00a0eV to strip a ground-state electron from a hydrogen atom, compared to 2.23\u00a0\"million\" eV for splitting a deuterium nucleus. Atoms are electrically neutral if they have an equal number of protons and electrons. Atoms that have either a deficit or a surplus of electrons are called ions. Electrons that are farthest from the nucleus may be transferred to other nearby atoms or shared between atoms. By this mechanism, atoms are able to bond into molecules and other types of chemical compounds like ionic and covalent network crystals.\nProperties.\nNuclear properties.\nBy definition, any two atoms with an identical number of \"protons\" in their nuclei belong to the same chemical element. Atoms with equal numbers of protons but a different number of \"neutrons\" are different isotopes of the same element. For example, all hydrogen atoms admit exactly one proton, but isotopes exist with no neutrons (hydrogen-1, by far the most common form, also called protium), one neutron (deuterium), two neutrons (tritium) and more than two neutrons. The known elements form a set of atomic numbers, from the single-proton element hydrogen up to the 118-proton element oganesson. All known isotopes of elements with atomic numbers greater than 82 are radioactive, although the radioactivity of element 83 (bismuth) is so slight as to be practically negligible.\nAbout 339 nuclides occur naturally on Earth, of which 251 (about 74%) have not been observed to decay, and are referred to as \"stable isotopes\". Only 90 nuclides are stable theoretically, while another 161 (bringing the total to 251) have not been observed to decay, even though in theory it is energetically possible. These are also formally classified as \"stable\". An additional 35 radioactive nuclides have half-lives longer than 100 million years, and are long-lived enough to have been present since the birth of the Solar System. This collection of 286 nuclides are known as primordial nuclides. Finally, an additional 53 short-lived nuclides are known to occur naturally, as daughter products of primordial nuclide decay (such as radium from uranium), or as products of natural energetic processes on Earth, such as cosmic ray bombardment (for example, carbon-14).\nFor 80 of the chemical elements, at least one stable isotope exists. As a rule, there is only a handful of stable isotopes for each of these elements, the average being 3.1 stable isotopes per element. Twenty-six \"monoisotopic elements\" have only a single stable isotope, while the largest number of stable isotopes observed for any element is ten, for the element tin. Elements 43, 61, and all elements numbered 83 or higher have no stable isotopes.\nStability of isotopes is affected by the ratio of protons to neutrons, and also by the presence of certain \"magic numbers\" of neutrons or protons that represent closed and filled quantum shells. These quantum shells correspond to a set of energy levels within the shell model of the nucleus; filled shells, such as the filled shell of 50 protons for tin, confers unusual stability on the nuclide. Of the 251 known stable nuclides, only four have both an odd number of protons \"and\" odd number of neutrons: hydrogen-2 (deuterium), lithium-6, boron-10, and nitrogen-14. (Tantalum-180m is odd-odd and observationally stable, but is predicted to decay with a very long half-life.) Also, only four naturally occurring, radioactive odd-odd nuclides have a half-life over a billion years: potassium-40, vanadium-50, lanthanum-138, and lutetium-176. Most odd-odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay, because the decay products are even-even, and are therefore more strongly bound, due to nuclear pairing effects.\nMass.\nThe large majority of an atom's mass comes from the protons and neutrons that make it up. The total number of these particles (called \"nucleons\") in a given atom is called the mass number. It is a positive integer and dimensionless (instead of having dimension of mass), because it expresses a count. An example of use of a mass number is \"carbon-12,\" which has 12 nucleons (six protons and six neutrons).\nThe actual mass of an atom at rest is often expressed in daltons (Da), also called the unified atomic mass unit (u). This unit is defined as a twelfth of the mass of a free neutral atom of carbon-12, which is approximately . Hydrogen-1 (the lightest isotope of hydrogen which is also the nuclide with the lowest mass) has an atomic weight of 1.007825\u00a0Da. The value of this number is called the atomic mass. A given atom has an atomic mass approximately equal (within 1%) to its mass number times the atomic mass unit (for example the mass of a nitrogen-14 is roughly 14\u00a0Da), but this number will not be exactly an integer except (by definition) in the case of carbon-12. The heaviest stable atom is lead-208, with a mass of .\nAs even the most massive atoms are far too light to work with directly, chemists instead use the unit of moles. One mole of atoms of any element always has the same number of atoms (about ). This number was chosen so that if an element has an atomic mass of 1\u00a0u, a mole of atoms of that element has a mass close to one gram. Because of the definition of the unified atomic mass unit, each carbon-12 atom has an atomic mass of exactly 12\u00a0Da, and so a mole of carbon-12 atoms weighs exactly 0.012\u00a0kg.\nShape and size.\nAtoms lack a well-defined outer boundary, so their dimensions are usually described in terms of an atomic radius. This is a measure of the distance out to which the electron cloud extends from the nucleus. This assumes the atom to exhibit a spherical shape, which is only obeyed for atoms in vacuum or free space. Atomic radii may be derived from the distances between two nuclei when the two atoms are joined in a chemical bond. The radius varies with the location of an atom on the atomic chart, the type of chemical bond, the number of neighboring atoms (coordination number) and a quantum mechanical property known as spin. On the periodic table of the elements, atom size tends to increase when moving down columns, but decrease when moving across rows (left to right). Consequently, the smallest atom is helium with a radius of 32\u00a0pm, while one of the largest is caesium at 225\u00a0pm.\nWhen subjected to external forces, like electrical fields, the shape of an atom may deviate from spherical symmetry. The deformation depends on the field magnitude and the orbital type of outer shell electrons, as shown by group-theoretical considerations. Aspherical deviations might be elicited for instance in crystals, where large crystal-electrical fields may occur at low-symmetry lattice sites. Significant ellipsoidal deformations have been shown to occur for sulfur ions and chalcogen ions in pyrite-type compounds.\nAtomic dimensions are thousands of times smaller than the wavelengths of light (400\u2013700\u00a0nm) so they cannot be viewed using an optical microscope, although individual atoms can be observed using a scanning tunneling microscope. To visualize the minuteness of the atom, consider that a typical human hair is about 1\u00a0million carbon atoms in width. A single drop of water contains about 2\u00a0sextillion () atoms of oxygen, and twice the number of hydrogen atoms. A single carat diamond with a mass of contains about 10\u00a0sextillion (1022) atoms of carbon. If an apple were magnified to the size of the Earth, then the atoms in the apple would be approximately the size of the original apple.\nRadioactive decay.\nEvery element has one or more isotopes that have unstable nuclei that are subject to radioactive decay, causing the nucleus to emit particles or electromagnetic radiation. Radioactivity can occur when the radius of a nucleus is large compared with the radius of the strong force, which only acts over distances on the order of 1\u00a0fm.\nThe most common forms of radioactive decay are:\nOther more rare types of radioactive decay include ejection of neutrons or protons or clusters of nucleons from a nucleus, or more than one beta particle. An analog of gamma emission which allows excited nuclei to lose energy in a different way, is internal conversion\u2014a process that produces high-speed electrons that are not beta rays, followed by production of high-energy photons that are not gamma rays. A few large nuclei explode into two or more charged fragments of varying masses plus several neutrons, in a decay called spontaneous nuclear fission.\nEach radioactive isotope has a characteristic decay time period\u2014the half-life\u2014that is determined by the amount of time needed for half of a sample to decay. This is an exponential decay process that steadily decreases the proportion of the remaining isotope by 50% every half-life. Hence after two half-lives have passed only 25% of the isotope is present, and so forth.\nMagnetic moment.\nElementary particles possess an intrinsic quantum mechanical property known as spin. This is analogous to the angular momentum of an object that is spinning around its center of mass, although strictly speaking these particles are believed to be point-like and cannot be said to be rotating. Spin is measured in units of the reduced Planck constant (\u0127), with electrons, protons and neutrons all having spin &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442\u00a0\u0127, or \"spin-&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442\". In an atom, electrons in motion around the nucleus possess orbital angular momentum in addition to their spin, while the nucleus itself possesses angular momentum due to its nuclear spin.\nThe magnetic field produced by an atom\u2014its magnetic moment\u2014is determined by these various forms of angular momentum, just as a rotating charged object classically produces a magnetic field, but the most dominant contribution comes from electron spin. Due to the nature of electrons to obey the Pauli exclusion principle, in which no two electrons may be found in the same quantum state, bound electrons pair up with each other, with one member of each pair in a spin up state and the other in the opposite, spin down state. Thus these spins cancel each other out, reducing the total magnetic dipole moment to zero in some atoms with even number of electrons.\nIn ferromagnetic elements such as iron, cobalt and nickel, an odd number of electrons leads to an unpaired electron and a net overall magnetic moment. The orbitals of neighboring atoms overlap and a lower energy state is achieved when the spins of unpaired electrons are aligned with each other, a spontaneous process known as an exchange interaction. When the magnetic moments of ferromagnetic atoms are lined up, the material can produce a measurable macroscopic field. Paramagnetic materials have atoms with magnetic moments that line up in random directions when no magnetic field is present, but the magnetic moments of the individual atoms line up in the presence of a field.\nThe nucleus of an atom will have no spin when it has even numbers of both neutrons and protons, but for other cases of odd numbers, the nucleus may have a spin. Normally nuclei with spin are aligned in random directions because of thermal equilibrium, but for certain elements (such as xenon-129) it is possible to polarize a significant proportion of the nuclear spin states so that they are aligned in the same direction\u2014a condition called hyperpolarization. This has important applications in magnetic resonance imaging.\nEnergy levels.\nThe potential energy of an electron in an atom is negative relative to when the distance from the nucleus goes to infinity; its dependence on the electron's position reaches the minimum inside the nucleus, roughly in inverse proportion to the distance. In the quantum-mechanical model, a bound electron can occupy only a set of states centered on the nucleus, and each state corresponds to a specific energy level; see time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation for a theoretical explanation. An energy level can be measured by the amount of energy needed to unbind the electron from the atom, and is usually given in units of electronvolts (eV). The lowest energy state of a bound electron is called the ground state, i.e. stationary state, while an electron transition to a higher level results in an excited state. The electron's energy increases along with \"n\" because the (average) distance to the nucleus increases. Dependence of the energy on \u2113 is caused not by the electrostatic potential of the nucleus, but by interaction between electrons.\nFor an electron to transition between two different states, e.g. ground state to first excited state, it must absorb or emit a photon at an energy matching the difference in the potential energy of those levels, according to the Niels Bohr model, what can be precisely calculated by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation.\nElectrons jump between orbitals in a particle-like fashion. For example, if a single photon strikes the electrons, only a single electron changes states in response to the photon; see Electron properties.\nThe energy of an emitted photon is proportional to its frequency, so these specific energy levels appear as distinct bands in the electromagnetic spectrum. Each element has a characteristic spectrum that can depend on the nuclear charge, subshells filled by electrons, the electromagnetic interactions between the electrons and other factors.\nWhen a continuous spectrum of energy is passed through a gas or plasma, some of the photons are absorbed by atoms, causing electrons to change their energy level. Those excited electrons that remain bound to their atom spontaneously emit this energy as a photon, traveling in a random direction, and so drop back to lower energy levels. Thus the atoms behave like a filter that forms a series of dark absorption bands in the energy output. (An observer viewing the atoms from a view that does not include the continuous spectrum in the background, instead sees a series of emission lines from the photons emitted by the atoms.) Spectroscopic measurements of the strength and width of atomic spectral lines allow the composition and physical properties of a substance to be determined.\nClose examination of the spectral lines reveals that some display a fine structure splitting. This occurs because of spin\u2013orbit coupling, which is an interaction between the spin and motion of the outermost electron. When an atom is in an external magnetic field, spectral lines become split into three or more components; a phenomenon called the Zeeman effect. This is caused by the interaction of the magnetic field with the magnetic moment of the atom and its electrons. Some atoms can have multiple electron configurations with the same energy level, which thus appear as a single spectral line. The interaction of the magnetic field with the atom shifts these electron configurations to slightly different energy levels, resulting in multiple spectral lines. The presence of an external electric field can cause a comparable splitting and shifting of spectral lines by modifying the electron energy levels, a phenomenon called the Stark effect.\nIf a bound electron is in an excited state, an interacting photon with the proper energy can cause stimulated emission of a photon with a matching energy level. For this to occur, the electron must drop to a lower energy state that has an energy difference matching the energy of the interacting photon. The emitted photon and the interacting photon then move off in parallel and with matching phases. That is, the wave patterns of the two photons are synchronized. This physical property is used to make lasers, which can emit a coherent beam of light energy in a narrow frequency band.\nValence and bonding behavior.\nValency is the combining power of an element. It is determined by the number of bonds it can form to other atoms or groups. The outermost electron shell of an atom in its uncombined state is known as the valence shell, and the electrons in\nthat shell are called valence electrons. The number of valence electrons determines the bonding\nbehavior with other atoms. Atoms tend to chemically react with each other in a manner that fills (or empties) their outer valence shells. For example, a transfer of a single electron between atoms is a useful approximation for bonds that form between atoms with one-electron more than a filled shell, and others that are one-electron short of a full shell, such as occurs in the compound sodium chloride and other chemical ionic salts. Many elements display multiple valences, or tendencies to share differing numbers of electrons in different compounds. Thus, chemical bonding between these elements takes many forms of electron-sharing that are more than simple electron transfers. Examples include the element carbon and the organic compounds.\nThe chemical elements are often displayed in a periodic table that is laid out to display recurring chemical properties, and elements with the same number of valence electrons form a group that is aligned in the same column of the table. (The horizontal rows correspond to the filling of a quantum shell of electrons.) The elements at the far right of the table have their outer shell completely filled with electrons, which results in chemically inert elements known as the noble gases.\nStates.\nQuantities of atoms are found in different states of matter that depend on the physical conditions, such as temperature and pressure. By varying the conditions, materials can transition between solids, liquids, gases and plasmas. Within a state, a material can also exist in different allotropes. An example of this is solid carbon, which can exist as graphite or diamond. Gaseous allotropes exist as well, such as dioxygen and ozone.\nAt temperatures close to absolute zero, atoms can form a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate, at which point quantum mechanical effects, which are normally only observed at the atomic scale, become apparent on a macroscopic scale. This super-cooled collection of atoms\nthen behaves as a single super atom, which may allow fundamental checks of quantum mechanical behavior.\nIdentification.\nWhile atoms are too small to be seen, devices such as the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) enable their visualization at the surfaces of solids. The microscope uses the quantum tunneling phenomenon, which allows particles to pass through a barrier that would be insurmountable in the classical perspective. Electrons tunnel through the vacuum between two biased electrodes, providing a tunneling current that is exponentially dependent on their separation. One electrode is a sharp tip ideally ending with a single atom. At each point of the scan of the surface the tip's height is adjusted so as to keep the tunneling current at a set value. How much the tip moves to and away from the surface is interpreted as the height profile. For low bias, the microscope images the averaged electron orbitals across closely packed energy levels\u2014the local density of the electronic states near the Fermi level. Because of the distances involved, both electrodes need to be extremely stable; only then periodicities can be observed that correspond to individual atoms. The method alone is not chemically specific, and cannot identify the atomic species present at the surface.\nAtoms can be easily identified by their mass. If an atom is ionized by removing one of its electrons, its trajectory when it passes through a magnetic field will bend. The radius by which the trajectory of a moving ion is turned by the magnetic field is determined by the mass of the atom. The mass spectrometer uses this principle to measure the mass-to-charge ratio of ions. If a sample contains multiple isotopes, the mass spectrometer can determine the proportion of each isotope in the sample by measuring the intensity of the different beams of ions. Techniques to vaporize atoms include inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, both of which use a plasma to vaporize samples for analysis.\nThe atom-probe tomograph has sub-nanometer resolution in 3-D and can chemically identify individual atoms using time-of-flight mass spectrometry.\nElectron emission techniques such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), which measure the binding energies of the core electrons, are used to identify the atomic species present in a sample in a non-destructive way. With proper focusing both can be made area-specific. Another such method is electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), which measures the energy loss of an electron beam within a transmission electron microscope when it interacts with a portion of a sample.\nSpectra of excited states can be used to analyze the atomic composition of distant stars. Specific light wavelengths contained in the observed light from stars can be separated out and related to the quantized transitions in free gas atoms. These colors can be replicated using a gas-discharge lamp containing the same element. Helium was discovered in this way in the spectrum of the Sun 23\u00a0years before it was found on Earth.\nOrigin and current state.\nBaryonic matter forms about 4% of the total energy density of the observable universe, with an average density of about 0.25\u00a0particles/m3 (mostly protons and electrons). Within a galaxy such as the Milky Way, particles have a much higher concentration, with the density of matter in the interstellar medium (ISM) ranging from 105 to 109 atoms/m3. The Sun is believed to be inside the Local Bubble, so the density in the solar neighborhood is only about 103 atoms/m3. Stars form from dense clouds in the ISM, and the evolutionary processes of stars result in the steady enrichment of the ISM with elements more massive than hydrogen and helium.\nUp to 95% of the Milky Way's baryonic matter are concentrated inside stars, where conditions are unfavorable for atomic matter. The total baryonic mass is about 10% of the mass of the galaxy; the remainder of the mass is an unknown dark matter. High temperature inside stars makes most \"atoms\" fully ionized, that is, separates \"all\" electrons from the nuclei. In stellar remnants\u2014with exception of their surface layers\u2014an immense pressure make electron shells impossible.\nFormation.\nElectrons are thought to exist in the Universe since early stages of the Big Bang. Atomic nuclei forms in nucleosynthesis reactions. In about three minutes Big Bang nucleosynthesis produced most of the helium, lithium, and deuterium in the Universe, and perhaps some of the beryllium and boron.\nUbiquitousness and stability of atoms relies on their binding energy, which means that an atom has a lower energy than an unbound system of the nucleus and electrons. Where the temperature is much higher than ionization potential, the matter exists in the form of plasma\u2014a gas of positively charged ions (possibly, bare nuclei) and electrons. When the temperature drops below the ionization potential, atoms become statistically favorable. Atoms (complete with bound electrons) became to dominate over charged particles 380,000\u00a0years after the Big Bang\u2014an epoch called recombination, when the expanding Universe cooled enough to allow electrons to become attached to nuclei.\nSince the Big Bang, which produced no carbon or heavier elements, atomic nuclei have been combined in stars through the process of nuclear fusion to produce more of the element helium, and (via the triple alpha process) the sequence of elements from carbon up to iron; see stellar nucleosynthesis for details.\nIsotopes such as lithium-6, as well as some beryllium and boron are generated in space through cosmic ray spallation. This occurs when a high-energy proton strikes an atomic nucleus, causing large numbers of nucleons to be ejected.\nElements heavier than iron were produced in supernovae and colliding neutron stars through the r-process, and in AGB stars through the s-process, both of which involve the capture of neutrons by atomic nuclei. Elements such as lead formed largely through the radioactive decay of heavier elements.\nEarth.\nMost of the atoms that make up the Earth and its inhabitants were present in their current form in the nebula that collapsed out of a molecular cloud to form the Solar System. The rest are the result of radioactive decay, and their relative proportion can be used to determine the age of the Earth through radiometric dating. Most of the helium in the crust of the Earth (about 99% of the helium from gas wells, as shown by its lower abundance of helium-3) is a product of alpha decay.\nThere are a few trace atoms on Earth that were not present at the beginning (i.e., not \"primordial\"), nor are results of radioactive decay. Carbon-14 is continuously generated by cosmic rays in the atmosphere. Some atoms on Earth have been artificially generated either deliberately or as by-products of nuclear reactors or explosions. Of the transuranic elements\u2014those with atomic numbers greater than 92\u2014only plutonium and neptunium occur naturally on Earth. Transuranic elements have radioactive lifetimes shorter than the current age of the Earth and thus identifiable quantities of these elements have long since decayed, with the exception of traces of plutonium-244 possibly deposited by cosmic dust. Natural deposits of plutonium and neptunium are produced by neutron capture in uranium ore.\nThe Earth contains approximately atoms. Although small numbers of independent atoms of noble gases exist, such as argon, neon, and helium, 99% of the atmosphere is bound in the form of molecules, including carbon dioxide and diatomic oxygen and nitrogen. At the surface of the Earth, an overwhelming majority of atoms combine to form various compounds, including water, salt, silicates and oxides. Atoms can also combine to create materials that do not consist of discrete molecules, including crystals and liquid or solid metals. This atomic matter forms networked arrangements that lack the particular type of small-scale interrupted order associated with molecular matter.\nRare and theoretical forms.\nSuperheavy elements.\nAll nuclides with atomic numbers higher than 82 (lead) are known to be radioactive. No nuclide with an atomic number exceeding 92 (uranium) exists on Earth as a primordial nuclide, and heavier elements generally have shorter half-lives. Nevertheless, an \"island of stability\" encompassing relatively long-lived isotopes of superheavy elements with atomic numbers 110 to 114 might exist. Predictions for the half-life of the most stable nuclide on the island range from a few minutes to millions of years. In any case, superheavy elements (with \"Z\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0104) would not exist due to increasing Coulomb repulsion (which results in spontaneous fission with increasingly short half-lives) in the absence of any stabilizing effects.\nExotic matter.\nEach particle of matter has a corresponding antimatter particle with the opposite electrical charge. Thus, the positron is a positively charged antielectron and the antiproton is a negatively charged equivalent of a proton. When a matter and corresponding antimatter particle meet, they annihilate each other. Because of this, along with an imbalance between the number of matter and antimatter particles, the latter are rare in the universe. The first causes of this imbalance are not yet fully understood, although theories of baryogenesis may offer an explanation. As a result, no antimatter atoms have been discovered in nature. In 1996, the antimatter counterpart of the hydrogen atom (antihydrogen) was synthesized at the CERN laboratory in Geneva.\nOther exotic atoms have been created by replacing one of the protons, neutrons or electrons with other particles that have the same charge. For example, an electron can be replaced by a more massive muon, forming a muonic atom. These types of atoms can be used to test fundamental predictions of physics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "903", "revid": "1152289680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=903", "title": "Arable land", "text": "Land capable of being ploughed and used to grow crops\nArable land (from the , \"able to be ploughed\") is any land capable of being ploughed and used to grow crops. Alternatively, for the purposes of agricultural statistics, the term often has a more precise definition: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Arable land is the land under temporary agricultural crops (multiple-cropped areas are counted only once), temporary meadows for mowing or pasture, land under market and kitchen gardens and land temporarily fallow (less than five years). The abandoned land resulting from shifting cultivation is not included in this category. Data for 'Arable land' are not meant to indicate the amount of land that is potentially cultivable.\nA more concise definition appearing in the Eurostat glossary similarly refers to actual rather than potential uses: \"land worked (ploughed or tilled) regularly, generally under a system of crop rotation\".In Britain, arable land has traditionally been contrasted with pasturable land such as heaths, which could be used for sheep-rearing but not as farmland.\nArable land is vulnerable to land degradation and some types of un-arable land can be enriched to create useful land. Climate change and biodiversity loss, are driving pressure on arable land.\nBy country.\nAccording to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in 2013, the world's arable land amounted to 1.407\u00a0billion hectares, out of a total of 4.924\u00a0billion hectares of land used for agriculture.\nNon-arable land.\nAgricultural land that is not arable according to the FAO definition above includes:\nOther non-arable land includes land that is not suitable for any agricultural use. Land that is not arable, in the sense of lacking capability or suitability for cultivation for crop production, has one or more limitations\u00a0\u2013 a lack of sufficient freshwater for irrigation, stoniness, steepness, adverse climate, excessive wetness with the impracticality of drainage, excessive salts, or a combination of these, among others. Although such limitations may preclude cultivation, and some will in some cases preclude any agricultural use, large areas unsuitable for cultivation may still be agriculturally productive. For example, United States NRCS statistics indicate that about 59 percent of US non-federal pasture and unforested rangeland is unsuitable for cultivation, yet such land has value for grazing of livestock. In British Columbia, Canada, 41 percent of the provincial Agricultural Land Reserve area is unsuitable for the production of cultivated crops, but is suitable for uncultivated production of forage usable by grazing livestock. Similar examples can be found in many rangeland areas elsewhere.\nChanges in arability.\nLand conversion.\nLand is incapable of being cultivated for the production of crops can sometimes be converted to arable land. New arable land makes more food and can reduce starvation. This outcome also makes a country more self-sufficient and politically independent, because food importation is reduced. Making non-arable land arable often involves digging new irrigation canals and new wells, aqueducts, desalination plants, planting trees for shade in the desert, hydroponics, fertilizer, nitrogen fertilizer, pesticides, reverse osmosis water processors, PET film insulation or other insulation against heat and cold, digging ditches and hills for protection against the wind, and installing greenhouses with internal light and heat for protection against the cold outside and to provide light in cloudy areas. Such modifications are often prohibitively expensive. An alternative is the seawater greenhouse, which desalinates water through evaporation and condensation using solar energy as the only energy input. This technology is optimized to grow crops on desert land close to the sea.\nThe use of artifices does not make the land arable. Rock still remains rock, and shallow\u00a0\u2013 less than \u00a0\u2013 turnable soil is still not considered toilable. The use of artifice is an open-air none recycled water hydroponics relationship. The below described circumstances are not in perspective, have limited duration, and have a tendency to accumulate trace materials in soil that either there or elsewhere cause deoxygenation. The use of vast amounts of fertilizer may have unintended consequences for the environment by devastating rivers, waterways, and river endings through the accumulation of non-degradable toxins and nitrogen-bearing molecules that remove oxygen and cause non-aerobic processes to form.\nExamples of infertile non-arable land being turned into fertile arable land include:\nLand degradation.\nExamples.\nExamples of fertile arable land being turned into infertile land include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "904", "revid": "1750837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=904", "title": "Aluminium", "text": "Chemical element, symbol Al and atomic number 13\nAluminium (aluminum in North American English) is a chemical element with the symbol\u00a0Al and atomic number\u00a013. Aluminium has a density lower than those of other common metals; about one-third that of steel. It has a great affinity towards oxygen, forming a protective layer of oxide on the surface when exposed to air. Aluminium visually resembles silver, both in its color and in its great ability to reflect light. It is soft, nonmagnetic and ductile. It has one stable isotope: 27Al, which is highly abundant, making aluminium the twelfth-most common element in the universe. The radioactivity of 26Al is used in radiometric dating.\nChemically, aluminium is a post-transition metal in the boron group; as is common for the group, aluminium forms compounds primarily in the +3 oxidation state. The aluminium cation Al3+ is small and highly charged; as such, it is polarizing, and bonds aluminium forms tend towards covalency. The strong affinity towards oxygen leads to aluminium's common association with oxygen in nature in the form of oxides; for this reason, aluminium is found on Earth primarily in rocks in the crust, where it is the third-most abundant element, after oxygen and silicon, rather than in the mantle, and virtually never as the free metal. It is obtained industrially by mining bauxite, a sedimentary rock rich in aluminium minerals.\nThe discovery of aluminium was announced in 1825 by Danish physicist Hans Christian \u00d8rsted. The first industrial production of aluminium was initiated by French chemist Henri \u00c9tienne Sainte-Claire Deville in 1856. Aluminium became much more available to the public with the Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process developed independently by French engineer Paul H\u00e9roult and American engineer Charles Martin Hall in 1886, and the mass production of aluminium led to its extensive use in industry and everyday life. In World Wars I and II, aluminium was a crucial strategic resource for aviation. In 1954, aluminium became the most produced non-ferrous metal, surpassing copper. In the 21st century, most aluminium was consumed in transportation, engineering, construction, and packaging in the United States, Western Europe, and Japan.\nDespite its prevalence in the environment, no living organism is known to use aluminium salts for metabolism, but aluminium is well tolerated by plants and animals. Because of the abundance of these salts, the potential for a biological role for them is of interest, and studies continue.\nPhysical characteristics.\nIsotopes.\nOf aluminium isotopes, only Al is stable. This situation is common for elements with an odd atomic number. It is the only primordial aluminium isotope, i.e. the only one that has existed on Earth in its current form since the formation of the planet. Nearly all aluminium on Earth is present as this isotope, which makes it a mononuclidic element and means that its standard atomic weight is virtually the same as that of the isotope. This makes aluminium very useful in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), as its single stable isotope has a high NMR sensitivity. The standard atomic weight of aluminium is low in comparison with many other metals.\nAll other isotopes of aluminium are radioactive. The most stable of these is 26Al: while it was present along with stable 27Al in the interstellar medium from which the Solar System formed, having been produced by stellar nucleosynthesis as well, its half-life is only 717,000\u00a0years and therefore a detectable amount has not survived since the formation of the planet. However, minute traces of 26Al are produced from argon in the atmosphere by spallation caused by cosmic ray protons. The ratio of 26Al to 10Be has been used for radiodating of geological processes over 105 to 106\u00a0year time scales, in particular transport, deposition, sediment storage, burial times, and erosion. Most meteorite scientists believe that the energy released by the decay of 26Al was responsible for the melting and differentiation of some asteroids after their formation 4.55\u00a0billion years ago.\nThe remaining isotopes of aluminium, with mass numbers ranging from 22 to 43, all have half-lives well under an hour. Three metastable states are known, all with half-lives under a minute.\nElectron shell.\nAn aluminium atom has 13 electrons, arranged in an electron configuration of [Ne] 3s2 3p1, with three electrons beyond a stable noble gas configuration. Accordingly, the combined first three ionization energies of aluminium are far lower than the fourth ionization energy alone. Such an electron configuration is shared with the other well-characterized members of its group, boron, gallium, indium, and thallium; it is also expected for nihonium. Aluminium can surrender its three outermost electrons in many chemical reactions (see below). The electronegativity of aluminium is 1.61 (Pauling scale).\nA free aluminium atom has a radius of 143\u00a0pm. With the three outermost electrons removed, the radius shrinks to 39\u00a0pm for a 4-coordinated atom or 53.5\u00a0pm for a 6-coordinated atom. At standard temperature and pressure, aluminium atoms (when not affected by atoms of other elements) form a face-centered cubic crystal system bound by metallic bonding provided by atoms' outermost electrons; hence aluminium (at these conditions) is a metal. This crystal system is shared by many other metals, such as lead and copper; the size of a unit cell of aluminium is comparable to that of those other metals. The system, however, is not shared by the other members of its group; boron has ionization energies too high to allow metallization, thallium has a hexagonal close-packed structure, and gallium and indium have unusual structures that are not close-packed like those of aluminium and thallium. The few electrons that are available for metallic bonding in aluminium metal are a probable cause for it being soft with a low melting point and low electrical resistivity.\nBulk.\nAluminium metal has an appearance ranging from silvery white to dull gray, depending on the surface roughness. Aluminium mirrors are the most reflective of all metal mirrors for the near ultraviolet and far infrared light, and one of the most reflective in the visible spectrum, nearly on par with silver, and the two therefore look similar. Aluminium is also good at reflecting solar radiation, although prolonged exposure to sunlight in air adds wear to the surface of the metal; this may be prevented if aluminium is anodized, which adds a protective layer of oxide on the surface.\nThe density of aluminium is 2.70\u00a0g/cm3, about 1/3 that of steel, much lower than other commonly encountered metals, making aluminium parts easily identifiable through their lightness. Aluminium's low density compared to most other metals arises from the fact that its nuclei are much lighter, while difference in the unit cell size does not compensate for this difference. The only lighter metals are the metals of groups 1 and 2, which apart from beryllium and magnesium are too reactive for structural use (and beryllium is very toxic). Aluminium is not as strong or stiff as steel, but the low density makes up for this in the aerospace industry and for many other applications where light weight and relatively high strength are crucial.\nPure aluminium is quite soft and lacking in strength. In most applications various aluminium alloys are used instead because of their higher strength and hardness. The yield strength of pure aluminium is 7\u201311 MPa, while aluminium alloys have yield strengths ranging from 200 MPa to 600 MPa. Aluminium is ductile, with a percent elongation of 50-70%, and malleable allowing it to be easily drawn and extruded. It is also easily machined and cast.\nAluminium is an excellent thermal and electrical conductor, having around 60% the conductivity of copper, both thermal and electrical, while having only 30% of copper's density. Aluminium is capable of superconductivity, with a superconducting critical temperature of 1.2 kelvin and a critical magnetic field of about 100 gauss (10 milliteslas). It is paramagnetic and thus essentially unaffected by static magnetic fields. The high electrical conductivity, however, means that it is strongly affected by alternating magnetic fields through the induction of eddy currents.\nChemistry.\nAluminium combines characteristics of pre- and post-transition metals. Since it has few available electrons for metallic bonding, like its heavier group 13 congeners, it has the characteristic physical properties of a post-transition metal, with longer-than-expected interatomic distances. Furthermore, as Al3+ is a small and highly charged cation, it is strongly polarizing and bonding in aluminium compounds tends towards covalency; this behavior is similar to that of beryllium (Be2+), and the two display an example of a diagonal relationship.\nThe underlying core under aluminium's valence shell is that of the preceding noble gas, whereas those of its heavier congeners gallium, indium, thallium, and nihonium also include a filled d-subshell and in some cases a filled f-subshell. Hence, the inner electrons of aluminium shield the valence electrons almost completely, unlike those of aluminium's heavier congeners. As such, aluminium is the most electropositive metal in its group, and its hydroxide is in fact more basic than that of gallium. Aluminium also bears minor similarities to the metalloid boron in the same group: AlX3 compounds are valence isoelectronic to BX3 compounds (they have the same valence electronic structure), and both behave as Lewis acids and readily form adducts. Additionally, one of the main motifs of boron chemistry is regular icosahedral structures, and aluminium forms an important part of many icosahedral quasicrystal alloys, including the Al\u2013Zn\u2013Mg class.\nAluminium has a high chemical affinity to oxygen, which renders it suitable for use as a reducing agent in the thermite reaction. A fine powder of aluminium metal reacts explosively on contact with liquid oxygen; under normal conditions, however, aluminium forms a thin oxide layer (~5\u00a0nm at room temperature) that protects the metal from further corrosion by oxygen, water, or dilute acid, a process termed passivation. Because of its general resistance to corrosion, aluminium is one of the few metals that retains silvery reflectance in finely powdered form, making it an important component of silver-colored paints. Aluminium is not attacked by oxidizing acids because of its passivation. This allows aluminium to be used to store reagents such as nitric acid, concentrated sulfuric acid, and some organic acids.\nIn hot concentrated hydrochloric acid, aluminium reacts with water with evolution of hydrogen, and in aqueous sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide at room temperature to form aluminates\u2014protective passivation under these conditions is negligible. Aqua regia also dissolves aluminium. Aluminium is corroded by dissolved chlorides, such as common sodium chloride, which is why household plumbing is never made from aluminium. The oxide layer on aluminium is also destroyed by contact with mercury due to amalgamation or with salts of some electropositive metals. As such, the strongest aluminium alloys are less corrosion-resistant due to galvanic reactions with alloyed copper, and aluminium's corrosion resistance is greatly reduced by aqueous salts, particularly in the presence of dissimilar metals.\nAluminium reacts with most nonmetals upon heating, forming compounds such as aluminium nitride (AlN), aluminium sulfide (Al2S3), and the aluminium halides (AlX3). It also forms a wide range of intermetallic compounds involving metals from every group on the periodic table.\nInorganic compounds.\nThe vast majority of compounds, including all aluminium-containing minerals and all commercially significant aluminium compounds, feature aluminium in the oxidation state 3+. The coordination number of such compounds varies, but generally Al3+ is either six- or four-coordinate. Almost all compounds of aluminium(III) are colorless.\nIn aqueous solution, Al3+ exists as the hexaaqua cation [Al(H2O)6]3+, which has an approximate Ka of 10\u22125. Such solutions are acidic as this cation can act as a proton donor and progressively hydrolyze until a precipitate of aluminium hydroxide, Al(OH)3, forms. This is useful for clarification of water, as the precipitate nucleates on suspended particles in the water, hence removing them. Increasing the pH even further leads to the hydroxide dissolving again as aluminate, [Al(H2O)2(OH)4]\u2212, is formed.\nAluminium hydroxide forms both salts and aluminates and dissolves in acid and alkali, as well as on fusion with acidic and basic oxides. This behavior of Al(OH)3 is termed amphoterism and is characteristic of weakly basic cations that form insoluble hydroxides and whose hydrated species can also donate their protons. One effect of this is that aluminium salts with weak acids are hydrolyzed in water to the aquated hydroxide and the corresponding nonmetal hydride: for example, aluminium sulfide yields hydrogen sulfide. However, some salts like aluminium carbonate exist in aqueous solution but are unstable as such; and only incomplete hydrolysis takes place for salts with strong acids, such as the halides, nitrate, and sulfate. For similar reasons, anhydrous aluminium salts cannot be made by heating their \"hydrates\": hydrated aluminium chloride is in fact not AlCl3\u00b76H2O but [Al(H2O)6]Cl3, and the Al\u2013O bonds are so strong that heating is not sufficient to break them and form Al\u2013Cl bonds instead:\n2[Al(H2O)6]Cl3 heat\u2192\u00a0 Al2O3 + 6 HCl + 9 H2O\nAll four trihalides are well known. Unlike the structures of the three heavier trihalides, aluminium fluoride (AlF3) features six-coordinate aluminium, which explains its involatility and insolubility as well as high heat of formation. Each aluminium atom is surrounded by six fluorine atoms in a distorted octahedral arrangement, with each fluorine atom being shared between the corners of two octahedra. Such {AlF6} units also exist in complex fluorides such as cryolite, Na3AlF6. AlF3 melts at and is made by reaction of aluminium oxide with hydrogen fluoride gas at .\nWith heavier halides, the coordination numbers are lower. The other trihalides are dimeric or polymeric with tetrahedral four-coordinate aluminium centers. Aluminium trichloride (AlCl3) has a layered polymeric structure below its melting point of but transforms on melting to Al2Cl6 dimers. At higher temperatures those increasingly dissociate into trigonal planar AlCl3 monomers similar to the structure of BCl3. Aluminium tribromide and aluminium triiodide form Al2X6 dimers in all three phases and hence do not show such significant changes of properties upon phase change. These materials are prepared by treating aluminium metal with the halogen. The aluminium trihalides form many addition compounds or complexes; their Lewis acidic nature makes them useful as catalysts for the Friedel\u2013Crafts reactions. Aluminium trichloride has major industrial uses involving this reaction, such as in the manufacture of anthraquinones and styrene; it is also often used as the precursor for many other aluminium compounds and as a reagent for converting nonmetal fluorides into the corresponding chlorides (a transhalogenation reaction).\nAluminium forms one stable oxide with the chemical formula Al2O3, commonly called alumina. It can be found in nature in the mineral corundum, \u03b1-alumina; there is also a \u03b3-alumina phase. Its crystalline form, corundum, is very hard (Mohs hardness 9), has a high melting point of , has very low volatility, is chemically inert, and a good electrical insulator, it is often used in abrasives (such as toothpaste), as a refractory material, and in ceramics, as well as being the starting material for the electrolytic production of aluminium metal. Sapphire and ruby are impure corundum contaminated with trace amounts of other metals. The two main oxide-hydroxides, AlO(OH), are boehmite and diaspore. There are three main trihydroxides: bayerite, gibbsite, and nordstrandite, which differ in their crystalline structure (polymorphs). Many other intermediate and related structures are also known. Most are produced from ores by a variety of wet processes using acid and base. Heating the hydroxides leads to formation of corundum. These materials are of central importance to the production of aluminium and are themselves extremely useful. Some mixed oxide phases are also very useful, such as spinel (MgAl2O4), Na-\u03b2-alumina (NaAl11O17), and tricalcium aluminate (Ca3Al2O6, an important mineral phase in Portland cement).\nThe only stable chalcogenides under normal conditions are aluminium sulfide (Al2S3), selenide (Al2Se3), and telluride (Al2Te3). All three are prepared by direct reaction of their elements at about and quickly hydrolyze completely in water to yield aluminium hydroxide and the respective hydrogen chalcogenide. As aluminium is a small atom relative to these chalcogens, these have four-coordinate tetrahedral aluminium with various polymorphs having structures related to wurtzite, with two-thirds of the possible metal sites occupied either in an orderly (\u03b1) or random (\u03b2) fashion; the sulfide also has a \u03b3 form related to \u03b3-alumina, and an unusual high-temperature hexagonal form where half the aluminium atoms have tetrahedral four-coordination and the other half have trigonal bipyramidal five-coordination.\nFour pnictides \u2013 aluminium nitride (AlN), aluminium phosphide (AlP), aluminium arsenide (AlAs), and aluminium antimonide (AlSb) \u2013 are known. They are all III-V semiconductors isoelectronic to silicon and germanium, all of which but AlN have the zinc blende structure. All four can be made by high-temperature (and possibly high-pressure) direct reaction of their component elements.\nAluminium alloys well with most other metals (with the exception of most alkali metals and group 13 metals) and over 150 intermetallics with other metals are known. Preparation involves heating fixed metals together in certain proportion, followed by gradual cooling and annealing. Bonding in them is predominantly metallic and the crystal structure primarily depends on efficiency of packing.\nThere are few compounds with lower oxidation states. A few aluminium(I) compounds exist: AlF, AlCl, AlBr, and AlI exist in the gaseous phase when the respective trihalide is heated with aluminium, and at cryogenic temperatures. A stable derivative of aluminium monoiodide is the cyclic adduct formed with triethylamine, Al4I4(NEt3)4. Al2O and Al2S also exist but are very unstable. Very simple aluminium(II) compounds are invoked or observed in the reactions of Al metal with oxidants. For example, aluminium monoxide, AlO, has been detected in the gas phase after explosion and in stellar absorption spectra. More thoroughly investigated are compounds of the formula R4Al2 which contain an Al\u2013Al bond and where R is a large organic ligand.\nOrganoaluminium compounds and related hydrides.\nA variety of compounds of empirical formula AlR3 and AlR1.5Cl1.5 exist. The aluminium trialkyls and triaryls are reactive, volatile, and colorless liquids or low-melting solids. They catch fire spontaneously in air and react with water, thus necessitating precautions when handling them. They often form dimers, unlike their boron analogues, but this tendency diminishes for branched-chain alkyls (e.g. Pr\"i\", Bu\"i\", Me3CCH2); for example, triisobutylaluminium exists as an equilibrium mixture of the monomer and dimer. These dimers, such as trimethylaluminium (Al2Me6), usually feature tetrahedral Al centers formed by dimerization with some alkyl group bridging between both aluminium atoms. They are hard acids and react readily with ligands, forming adducts. In industry, they are mostly used in alkene insertion reactions, as discovered by Karl Ziegler, most importantly in \"growth reactions\" that form long-chain unbranched primary alkenes and alcohols, and in the low-pressure polymerization of ethene and propene. There are also some heterocyclic and cluster organoaluminium compounds involving Al\u2013N bonds.\nThe industrially most important aluminium hydride is lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), which is used in as a reducing agent in organic chemistry. It can be produced from lithium hydride and aluminium trichloride. The simplest hydride, aluminium hydride or alane, is not as important. It is a polymer with the formula (AlH3)\"n\", in contrast to the corresponding boron hydride that is a dimer with the formula (BH3)2.\nNatural occurrence.\nSpace.\nAluminium's per-particle abundance in the Solar System is 3.15 ppm (parts per million). It is the twelfth most abundant of all elements and third most abundant among the elements that have odd atomic numbers, after hydrogen and nitrogen. The only stable isotope of aluminium, 27Al, is the eighteenth most abundant nucleus in the Universe. It is created almost entirely after fusion of carbon in massive stars that will later become Type II supernovas: this fusion creates 26Mg, which, upon capturing free protons and neutrons becomes aluminium. Some smaller quantities of 27Al are created in hydrogen burning shells of evolved stars, where 26Mg can capture free protons. Essentially all aluminium now in existence is 27Al. 26Al was present in the early Solar System with abundance of 0.005% relative to 27Al but its half-life of 728,000 years is too short for any original nuclei to survive; 26Al is therefore extinct. Unlike for 27Al, hydrogen burning is the primary source of 26Al, with the nuclide emerging after a nucleus of 25Mg catches a free proton. However, the trace quantities of 26Al that do exist are the most common gamma ray emitter in the interstellar gas; if the original 26Al were still present, gamma ray maps of the Milky Way would be brighter.\nEarth.\nOverall, the Earth is about 1.59% aluminium by mass (seventh in abundance by mass). Aluminium occurs in greater proportion in the Earth's crust than in the Universe at large, because aluminium easily forms the oxide and becomes bound into rocks and stays in the Earth's crust, while less reactive metals sink to the core. In the Earth's crust, aluminium is the most abundant metallic element (8.23% by mass) and the third most abundant of all elements (after oxygen and silicon). A large number of silicates in the Earth's crust contain aluminium. In contrast, the Earth's mantle is only 2.38% aluminium by mass. Aluminium also occurs in seawater at a concentration of 2 \u03bcg/kg.\nBecause of its strong affinity for oxygen, aluminium is almost never found in the elemental state; instead it is found in oxides or silicates. Feldspars, the most common group of minerals in the Earth's crust, are aluminosilicates. Aluminium also occurs in the minerals beryl, cryolite, garnet, spinel, and turquoise. Impurities in Al2O3, such as chromium and iron, yield the gemstones ruby and sapphire, respectively. Native aluminium metal is extremely rare and can only be found as a minor phase in low oxygen fugacity environments, such as the interiors of certain volcanoes. Native aluminium has been reported in cold seeps in the northeastern continental slope of the South China Sea. It is possible that these deposits resulted from bacterial reduction of tetrahydroxoaluminate Al(OH)4\u2212.\nAlthough aluminium is a common and widespread element, not all aluminium minerals are economically viable sources of the metal. Almost all metallic aluminium is produced from the ore bauxite (AlO\"x\"(OH)3\u20132\"x\"). Bauxite occurs as a weathering product of low iron and silica bedrock in tropical climatic conditions. In 2017, most bauxite was mined in Australia, China, Guinea, and India.\nHistory.\nThe history of aluminium has been shaped by usage of alum. The first written record of alum, made by Greek historian Herodotus, dates back to the 5th century BCE. The ancients are known to have used alum as a dyeing mordant and for city defense. After the Crusades, alum, an indispensable good in the European fabric industry, was a subject of international commerce; it was imported to Europe from the eastern Mediterranean until the mid-15th century.\nThe nature of alum remained unknown. Around 1530, Swiss physician Paracelsus suggested alum was a salt of an earth of alum. In 1595, German doctor and chemist Andreas Libavius experimentally confirmed this. In 1722, German chemist Friedrich Hoffmann announced his belief that the base of alum was a distinct earth. In 1754, German chemist Andreas Sigismund Marggraf synthesized alumina by boiling clay in sulfuric acid and subsequently adding potash.\nAttempts to produce aluminium metal date back to 1760. The first successful attempt, however, was completed in 1824 by Danish physicist and chemist Hans Christian \u00d8rsted. He reacted anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium amalgam, yielding a lump of metal looking similar to tin. He presented his results and demonstrated a sample of the new metal in 1825. In 1827, German chemist Friedrich W\u00f6hler repeated \u00d8rsted's experiments but did not identify any aluminium. (The reason for this inconsistency was only discovered in 1921.) He conducted a similar experiment in the same year by mixing anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium and produced a powder of aluminium. In 1845, he was able to produce small pieces of the metal and described some physical properties of this metal. For many years thereafter, W\u00f6hler was credited as the discoverer of aluminium.\nAs W\u00f6hler's method could not yield great quantities of aluminium, the metal remained rare; its cost exceeded that of gold. The first industrial production of aluminium was established in 1856 by French chemist Henri Etienne Sainte-Claire Deville and companions. Deville had discovered that aluminium trichloride could be reduced by sodium, which was more convenient and less expensive than potassium, which W\u00f6hler had used. Even then, aluminium was still not of great purity and produced aluminium differed in properties by sample. Because of its electricity-conducting capacity, aluminium was used as the cap of the Washington Monument, completed in 1885. The tallest building in the world at the time, the non-corroding metal cap was intended to serve as a lightning rod peak.\nThe first industrial large-scale production method was independently developed in 1886 by French engineer Paul H\u00e9roult and American engineer Charles Martin Hall; it is now known as the Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process. The Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process converts alumina into metal. Austrian chemist Carl Joseph Bayer discovered a way of purifying bauxite to yield alumina, now known as the Bayer process, in 1889. Modern production of the aluminium metal is based on the Bayer and Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult processes.\nPrices of aluminium dropped and aluminium became widely used in jewelry, everyday items, eyeglass frames, optical instruments, tableware, and foil in the 1890s and early 20th century. Aluminium's ability to form hard yet light alloys with other metals provided the metal with many uses at the time. During World War I, major governments demanded large shipments of aluminium for light strong airframes; during World War II, demand by major governments for aviation was even higher.\nBy the mid-20th century, aluminium had become a part of everyday life and an essential component of housewares. In 1954, production of aluminium surpassed that of copper, historically second in production only to iron, making it the most produced non-ferrous metal. During the mid-20th century, aluminium emerged as a civil engineering material, with building applications in both basic construction and interior finish work, and increasingly being used in military engineering, for both airplanes and land armor vehicle engines. Earth's first artificial satellite, launched in 1957, consisted of two separate aluminium semi-spheres joined and all subsequent space vehicles have used aluminium to some extent. The aluminium can was invented in 1956 and employed as a storage for drinks in 1958.\nThroughout the 20th century, the production of aluminium rose rapidly: while the world production of aluminium in 1900 was 6,800 metric tons, the annual production first exceeded 100,000 metric tons in 1916; 1,000,000 tons in 1941; 10,000,000 tons in 1971. In the 1970s, the increased demand for aluminium made it an exchange commodity; it entered the London Metal Exchange, the oldest industrial metal exchange in the world, in 1978. The output continued to grow: the annual production of aluminium exceeded 50,000,000 metric tons in 2013.\nThe real price for aluminium declined from $14,000 per metric ton in 1900 to $2,340 in 1948 (in 1998 United States dollars). Extraction and processing costs were lowered over technological progress and the scale of the economies. However, the need to exploit lower-grade poorer quality deposits and the use of fast increasing input costs (above all, energy) increased the net cost of aluminium; the real price began to grow in the 1970s with the rise of energy cost. Production moved from the industrialized countries to countries where production was cheaper. Production costs in the late 20th century changed because of advances in technology, lower energy prices, exchange rates of the United States dollar, and alumina prices. The BRIC countries' combined share in primary production and primary consumption grew substantially in the first decade of the 21st century. China is accumulating an especially large share of the world's production thanks to an abundance of resources, cheap energy, and governmental stimuli; it also increased its consumption share from 2% in 1972 to 40% in 2010. In the United States, Western Europe, and Japan, most aluminium was consumed in transportation, engineering, construction, and packaging. In 2021, prices for industrial metals such as aluminium have soared to near-record levels as energy shortages in China drive up costs for electricity.\nEtymology.\nThe names \"aluminium\" and \"aluminum\" are derived from the word \"alumine\", an obsolete term for \"alumina\", a naturally occurring oxide of aluminium. \"Alumine\" was borrowed from French, which in turn derived it from \"alumen\", the classical Latin name for alum, the mineral from which it was collected. The Latin word \"alumen\" stems from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*alu-\" meaning \"bitter\" or \"beer\".\nOrigins.\nBritish chemist Humphry Davy, who performed a number of experiments aimed to isolate the metal, is credited as the person who named the element. The first name proposed for the metal to be isolated from alum was \"alumium\", which Davy suggested in an 1808 article on his electrochemical research, published in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. It appeared that the name was created from the English word \"alum\" and the Latin suffix \"-ium\"; but it was customary then to give elements names originating in Latin, so this name was not adopted universally. This name was criticized by contemporary chemists from France, Germany, and Sweden, who insisted the metal should be named for the oxide, alumina, from which it would be isolated. The English name \"alum\" does not come directly from Latin, whereas \"alumine\"/\"alumina\" obviously comes from the Latin word \"alumen\" (upon declension, \"alumen\" changes to \"alumin-\").\nOne example was \"Essai sur la Nomenclature chimique\" (July 1811), written in French by a Swedish chemist, J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius, in which the name \"aluminium\" is given to the element that would be synthesized from alum. (Another article in the same journal issue also gives the name \"aluminium\" to the metal whose oxide is the basis of sapphire.) A January 1811 summary of one of Davy's lectures at the Royal Society mentioned the name \"aluminium\" as a possibility. The next year, Davy published a chemistry textbook in which he used the spelling \"aluminum\". Both spellings have coexisted since. Their usage is regional: \"aluminum\" dominates in the United States and Canada; \"aluminium\", in the rest of the English-speaking world.\nSpelling.\nIn 1812, a British scientist, Thomas Young, wrote an anonymous review of Davy's book, in which he proposed the name \"aluminium\" instead of \"aluminum\", which he thought had a \"less classical sound\". This name did catch on: although the \"-um\" spelling was occasionally used in Britain, the American scientific language used \"-ium\" from the start. Most scientists throughout the world used \"-ium\" in the 19th century; and it was entrenched in many other European languages, such as French, German, and Dutch. In 1828, an American lexicographer, Noah Webster, entered only the \"aluminum\" spelling in his \"American Dictionary of the English Language\". In the 1830s, the \"-um\" spelling gained usage in the United States; by the 1860s, it had become the more common spelling there outside science. In 1892, Hall used the \"-um\" spelling in his advertising handbill for his new electrolytic method of producing the metal, despite his constant use of the \"-ium\" spelling in all the patents he filed between 1886 and 1903: it is unknown whether this spelling was introduced by mistake or intentionally; but Hall preferred \"aluminum\" since its introduction because it resembled \"platinum\", the name of a prestigious metal. By 1890, both spellings had been common in the United States, the \"-ium\" spelling being slightly more common; by 1895, the situation had reversed; by 1900, \"aluminum\" had become twice as common as \"aluminium\"; in the next decade, the \"-um\" spelling dominated American usage. In 1925, the American Chemical Society adopted this spelling.\nThe International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) adopted \"aluminium\" as the standard international name for the element in 1990. In 1993, they recognized \"aluminum\" as an acceptable variant; the most recent 2005 edition of the IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry also acknowledges this spelling. IUPAC official publications use the \"-ium\" spelling as primary, and they list both where it is appropriate.\nProduction and refinement.\nThe production of aluminium starts with the extraction of bauxite rock from the ground. The bauxite is processed and transformed using the Bayer process into alumina, which is then processed using the Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process, resulting in the final aluminium metal.\nAluminium production is highly energy-consuming, and so the producers tend to locate smelters in places where electric power is both plentiful and inexpensive. As of 2019, the world's largest smelters of aluminium are located in China, India, Russia, Canada, and the United Arab Emirates, while China is by far the top producer of aluminium with a world share of fifty-five percent.\nAccording to the International Resource Panel's Metal Stocks in Society report, the global per capita stock of aluminium in use in society (i.e. in cars, buildings, electronics, etc.) is . Much of this is in more-developed countries ( per capita) rather than less-developed countries ( per capita).\nBayer process.\nBauxite is converted to alumina by the Bayer process. Bauxite is blended for uniform composition and then is ground. The resulting slurry is mixed with a hot solution of sodium hydroxide; the mixture is then treated in a digester vessel at a pressure well above atmospheric, dissolving the aluminium hydroxide in bauxite while converting impurities into relatively insoluble compounds:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Al(OH)3 + Na+ + OH\u2212 \u2192 Na+ + [Al(OH)4]\u2212\nAfter this reaction, the slurry is at a temperature above its atmospheric boiling point. It is cooled by removing steam as pressure is reduced. The bauxite residue is separated from the solution and discarded. The solution, free of solids, is seeded with small crystals of aluminium hydroxide; this causes decomposition of the [Al(OH)4]\u2212 ions to aluminium hydroxide. After about half of aluminium has precipitated, the mixture is sent to classifiers. Small crystals of aluminium hydroxide are collected to serve as seeding agents; coarse particles are converted to alumina by heating; the excess solution is removed by evaporation, (if needed) purified, and recycled.\nHall\u2013H\u00e9roult process.\nThe conversion of alumina to aluminium metal is achieved by the Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process. In this energy-intensive process, a solution of alumina in a molten () mixture of cryolite (Na3AlF6) with calcium fluoride is electrolyzed to produce metallic aluminium. The liquid aluminium metal sinks to the bottom of the solution and is tapped off, and usually cast into large blocks called aluminium billets for further processing.\nAnodes of the electrolysis cell are made of carbon\u2014the most resistant material against fluoride corrosion\u2014and either bake at the process or are prebaked. The former, also called S\u00f6derberg anodes, are less power-efficient and fumes released during baking are costly to collect, which is why they are being replaced by prebaked anodes even though they save the power, energy, and labor to prebake the cathodes. Carbon for anodes should be preferably pure so that neither aluminium nor the electrolyte is contaminated with ash. Despite carbon's resistivity against corrosion, it is still consumed at a rate of 0.4\u20130.5\u00a0kg per each kilogram of produced aluminium. Cathodes are made of anthracite; high purity for them is not required because impurities leach only very slowly. The cathode is consumed at a rate of 0.02\u20130.04\u00a0kg per each kilogram of produced aluminium. A cell is usually terminated after 2\u20136 years following a failure of the cathode.\nThe Hall\u2013Heroult process produces aluminium with a purity of above 99%. Further purification can be done by the Hoopes process. This process involves the electrolysis of molten aluminium with a sodium, barium, and aluminium fluoride electrolyte. The resulting aluminium has a purity of 99.99%.\nElectric power represents about 20 to 40% of the cost of producing aluminium, depending on the location of the smelter. Aluminium production consumes roughly 5% of electricity generated in the United States. Because of this, alternatives to the Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process have been researched, but none has turned out to be economically feasible.\nRecycling.\nRecovery of the metal through recycling has become an important task of the aluminium industry. Recycling was a low-profile activity until the late 1960s, when the growing use of aluminium beverage cans brought it to public awareness. Recycling involves melting the scrap, a process that requires only 5% of the energy used to produce aluminium from ore, though a significant part (up to 15% of the input material) is lost as dross (ash-like oxide). An aluminium stack melter produces significantly less dross, with values reported below 1%.\nWhite dross from primary aluminium production and from secondary recycling operations still contains useful quantities of aluminium that can be extracted industrially. The process produces aluminium billets, together with a highly complex waste material. This waste is difficult to manage. It reacts with water, releasing a mixture of gases (including, among others, hydrogen, acetylene, and ammonia), which spontaneously ignites on contact with air; contact with damp air results in the release of copious quantities of ammonia gas. Despite these difficulties, the waste is used as a filler in asphalt and concrete.\nApplications.\nMetal.\nThe global production of aluminium in 2016 was 58.8\u00a0million metric tons. It exceeded that of any other metal except iron (1,231\u00a0million metric tons).\nAluminium is almost always alloyed, which markedly improves its mechanical properties, especially when tempered. For example, the common aluminium foils and beverage cans are alloys of 92% to 99% aluminium. The main alloying agents are copper, zinc, magnesium, manganese, and silicon (e.g., duralumin) with the levels of other metals in a few percent by weight. Aluminium, both wrought and cast, has been alloyed with: manganese, silicon, magnesium, copper and zinc among others. For example, the Kynal family of alloys was developed by the British chemical manufacturer Imperial Chemical Industries.\nThe major uses for aluminium metal are in:\nCompounds.\nThe great majority (about 90%) of aluminium oxide is converted to metallic aluminium. Being a very hard material (Mohs hardness 9), alumina is widely used as an abrasive; being extraordinarily chemically inert, it is useful in highly reactive environments such as high pressure sodium lamps. Aluminium oxide is commonly used as a catalyst for industrial processes; e.g. the Claus process to convert hydrogen sulfide to sulfur in refineries and to alkylate amines. Many industrial catalysts are supported by alumina, meaning that the expensive catalyst material is dispersed over a surface of the inert alumina. Another principal use is as a drying agent or absorbent.\nSeveral sulfates of aluminium have industrial and commercial application. Aluminium sulfate (in its hydrate form) is produced on the annual scale of several millions of metric tons. About two-thirds is consumed in water treatment. The next major application is in the manufacture of paper. It is also used as a mordant in dyeing, in pickling seeds, deodorizing of mineral oils, in leather tanning, and in production of other aluminium compounds. Two kinds of alum, ammonium alum and potassium alum, were formerly used as mordants and in leather tanning, but their use has significantly declined following availability of high-purity aluminium sulfate. Anhydrous aluminium chloride is used as a catalyst in chemical and petrochemical industries, the dyeing industry, and in synthesis of various inorganic and organic compounds. Aluminium hydroxychlorides are used in purifying water, in the paper industry, and as antiperspirants. Sodium aluminate is used in treating water and as an accelerator of solidification of cement.\nMany aluminium compounds have niche applications, for example:\nAluminized substrates.\nAluminizing is the process of coating a structure or material with a thin layer of aluminium. It is done to impart specific traits that the underlying substrate lacks, such as a certain chemical or physical property. \"Aluminized\" materials include:\nBiology.\nDespite its widespread occurrence in the Earth's crust, aluminium has no known function in biology. At pH 6\u20139 (relevant for most natural waters), aluminium precipitates out of water as the hydroxide and is hence not available; most elements behaving this way have no biological role or are toxic. Aluminium sulfate has an LD50 of 6207\u00a0mg/kg (oral, mouse), which corresponds to 435 grams (about one pound) for a person.\nToxicity.\nAluminium is classified as a non-carcinogen by the United States Department of Health and Human Services. A review published in 1988 said that there was little evidence that normal exposure to aluminium presents a risk to healthy adult, and a 2014 multi-element toxicology review was unable to find deleterious effects of aluminium consumed in amounts not greater than 40\u00a0mg/day per kg of body mass. Most aluminium consumed will leave the body in feces; most of the small part of it that enters the bloodstream, will be excreted via urine; nevertheless some aluminium does pass the blood-brain barrier and is lodged preferentially in the brains of Alzheimer's patients. Evidence published in 1989 indicates that, for Alzheimer's patients, aluminium may act by electrostatically crosslinking proteins, thus down-regulating genes in the superior temporal gyrus.\nEffects.\nAluminium, although rarely, can cause vitamin D-resistant osteomalacia, erythropoietin-resistant microcytic anemia, and central nervous system alterations. People with kidney insufficiency are especially at a risk. Chronic ingestion of hydrated aluminium silicates (for excess gastric acidity control) may result in aluminium binding to intestinal contents and increased elimination of other metals, such as iron or zinc; sufficiently high doses (&gt;50 g/day) can cause anemia.\nDuring the 1988 Camelford water pollution incident people in Camelford had their drinking water contaminated with aluminium sulfate for several weeks. A final report into the incident in 2013 concluded it was unlikely that this had caused long-term health problems.\nAluminium has been suspected of being a possible cause of Alzheimer's disease, but research into this for over 40 years has found, , no good evidence of causal effect.\nAluminium increases estrogen-related gene expression in human breast cancer cells cultured in the laboratory. In very high doses, aluminium is associated with altered function of the blood\u2013brain barrier. A small percentage of people have contact allergies to aluminium and experience itchy red rashes, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, poor memory, insomnia, depression, asthma, irritable bowel syndrome, or other symptoms upon contact with products containing aluminium.\nExposure to powdered aluminium or aluminium welding fumes can cause pulmonary fibrosis. Fine aluminium powder can ignite or explode, posing another workplace hazard.\nExposure routes.\nFood is the main source of aluminium. Drinking water contains more aluminium than solid food; however, aluminium in food may be absorbed more than aluminium from water. Major sources of human oral exposure to aluminium include food (due to its use in food additives, food and beverage packaging, and cooking utensils), drinking water (due to its use in municipal water treatment), and aluminium-containing medications (particularly antacid/antiulcer and buffered aspirin formulations). Dietary exposure in Europeans averages to 0.2\u20131.5\u00a0mg/kg/week but can be as high as 2.3\u00a0mg/kg/week. Higher exposure levels of aluminium are mostly limited to miners, aluminium production workers, and dialysis patients.\nConsumption of antacids, antiperspirants, vaccines, and cosmetics provide possible routes of exposure. Consumption of acidic foods or liquids with aluminium enhances aluminium absorption, and maltol has been shown to increase the accumulation of aluminium in nerve and bone tissues.\nTreatment.\nIn case of suspected sudden intake of a large amount of aluminium, the only treatment is deferoxamine mesylate which may be given to help eliminate aluminium from the body by chelation. However, this should be applied with caution as this reduces not only aluminium body levels, but also those of other metals such as copper or iron.\nEnvironmental effects.\nHigh levels of aluminium occur near mining sites; small amounts of aluminium are released to the environment at the coal-fired power plants or incinerators. Aluminium in the air is washed out by the rain or normally settles down but small particles of aluminium remain in the air for a long time.\nAcidic precipitation is the main natural factor to mobilize aluminium from natural sources and the main reason for the environmental effects of aluminium; however, the main factor of presence of aluminium in salt and freshwater are the industrial processes that also release aluminium into air.\nIn water, aluminium acts as a toxi\u0441 agent on gill-breathing animals such as fish when the water is acidic, in which aluminium may precipitate on gills, which causes loss of plasma- and hemolymph ions leading to osmoregulatory failure. Organic complexes of aluminium may be easily absorbed and interfere with metabolism in mammals and birds, even though this rarely happens in practice.\nAluminium is primary among the factors that reduce plant growth on acidic soils. Although it is generally harmless to plant growth in pH-neutral soils, in acid soils the concentration of toxic Al3+ cations increases and disturbs root growth and function. Wheat has developed a tolerance to aluminium, releasing organic compounds that bind to harmful aluminium cations. Sorghum is believed to have the same tolerance mechanism.\nAluminium production possesses its own challenges to the environment on each step of the production process. The major challenge is the greenhouse gas emissions. These gases result from electrical consumption of the smelters and the byproducts of processing. The most potent of these gases are perfluorocarbons from the smelting process. Released sulfur dioxide is one of the primary precursors of acid rain.\nBiodegradation of metallic aluminium is extremely rare; most aluminium-corroding organisms do not directly attack or consume the aluminium, but instead produce corrosive wastes. The fungus \"Geotrichum candidum\" can consume the aluminium in compact discs. The bacterium \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" and the fungus \"Cladosporium resinae\" are commonly detected in aircraft fuel tanks that use kerosene-based fuels (not avgas), and laboratory cultures can degrade aluminium.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "905", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=905", "title": "Advanced Chemistry", "text": "German hip hop band\nAdvanced Chemistry is a German hip hop group from Heidelberg, a scenic city in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, South Germany. Advanced Chemistry was founded in 1987 by Toni L, Linguist, Gee-One, DJ Mike MD (Mike Dippon) and MC Torch. Each member of the group holds German citizenship, and Toni L, Linguist, and Torch are of Italian, Ghanaian, and Haitian backgrounds, respectively.\nInfluenced by North American socially conscious rap and the Native tongues movement, Advanced Chemistry is regarded as one of the main pioneers in German hip hop. They were one of the first groups to rap in German (although their name is in English). Furthermore, their songs tackled controversial social and political issues, distinguishing them from early German hip hop group \"Die Fantastischen Vier\" (The Fantastic Four), which had a more light-hearted, playful, party image.\nCareer.\nAdvanced Chemistry frequently rapped about their lives and experiences as children of immigrants, exposing the marginalization experienced by most ethnic minorities in Germany, and the feelings of frustration and resentment that being denied a German identity can cause. The song \"Fremd im eigenen Land\" (Foreign in your own nation) was released by Advanced Chemistry in November 1992. The single became a staple in the German hip hop scene. It made a strong statement about the status of immigrants throughout Germany, as the group was composed of multi-national and multi-racial members. The video shows several members brandishing their German passports as a demonstration of their German citizenship to skeptical and unaccepting 'ethnic' Germans.\nThis idea of national identity is important, as many rap artists in Germany have been of foreign origin. These so-called \"Gastarbeiter\" (guest workers) children saw breakdance, graffiti, rap music, and hip hop culture as a means of expressing themselves. Since the release of \"Fremd im eigenen Land\", many other German-language rappers have also tried to confront anti-immigrant ideas and develop themes of citizenship. However, though many ethnic minority youth in Germany find these German identity themes appealing, others view the desire of immigrants to be seen as German negatively, and they have actively sought to revive and recreate concepts of identity in connection to traditional ethnic origins.\nAdvanced Chemistry helped to found the German chapter of the Zulu nation.\nThe rivalry between Advanced Chemistry and Die Fantastischen Vier has served to highlight a dichotomy in the routes that hip hop has taken in becoming a part of the German soundscape. While Die Fantastischen Vier may be said to view hip hop primarily as an aesthetic art form, Advanced Chemistry understand hip hop as being inextricably linked to the social and political circumstances under which it is created. For Advanced Chemistry, hip hop is a \u201cvehicle of general human emancipation,\u201d. In their undertaking of social and political issues, the band introduced the term \"Afro-German\" into the context of German hip hop, and the theme of race is highlighted in much of their music.\nWith the release of the single \u201cFremd im eigenen Land\u201d, Advanced Chemistry separated itself from the rest of the rap being produced in Germany. This single was the first of its kind to go beyond simply imitating US rap and addressed the current issues of the time. Fremd im eigenen Land which translates to \u201cforeign in my own country\u201d dealt with the widespread racism that non-white German citizens faced. This change from simple imitation to political commentary was the start of German identification with rap. The sound of \u201cFremd im eigenen Land\u201d was influenced by the 'wall of noise' created by Public Enemy's producers, The Bomb Squad.\nAfter the reunification of Germany, an abundance of anti-immigrant sentiment emerged, as well as attacks on the homes of refugees in the early 1990s. Advanced Chemistry came to prominence in the wake of these actions because of their pro-multicultural society stance in their music. Advanced Chemistry's attitudes revolve around their attempts to create a distinct \"Germanness\" in hip hop, as opposed to imitating American hip hop as other groups had done. Torch has said, \"What the Americans do is exotic for us because we don't live like they do. What they do seems to be more interesting and newer. But not for me. For me it's more exciting to experience my fellow Germans in new contexts...For me, it's interesting to see what the kids try to do that's different from what I know.\" Advanced Chemistry were the first to use the term \"Afro-German\" in a hip hop context. This was part of the pro-immigrant political message they sent via their music.\nWhile Advanced Chemistry's use of the German language in their rap allows them to make claims to authenticity and true German heritage, bolstering pro-immigration sentiment, their style can also be problematic for immigrant notions of any real ethnic roots. Indeed, part of the Turkish ethnic minority of Frankfurt views Advanced Chemistry's appeal to the German image as a \"symbolic betrayal of the right of ethnic minorities to 'roots' or to any expression of cultural heritage.\" In this sense, their rap represents a complex social discourse internal to the German soundscape in which they attempt to negotiate immigrant assimilation into a xenophobic German culture with the maintenance of their own separate cultural traditions. It is quite possibly the feelings of alienation from the pure-blooded German demographic that drive Advanced Chemistry to attack nationalistic ideologies by asserting their \"Germanness\" as a group composed primarily of ethnic others. The response to this pseudo-German authenticity can be seen in what Andy Bennett refers to as \"alternative forms of local hip hop culture which actively seek to rediscover and, in many cases, reconstruct notions of identity tied to cultural roots.\" These alternative local hip hop cultures include oriental hip hop, the members of which cling to their Turkish heritage and are confused by Advanced Chemistry's elicitation of a German identity politics to which they technically do not belong. This cultural binary illustrates that rap has taken different routes in Germany and that, even among an already isolated immigrant population, there is still disunity and, especially, disagreement on the relative importance of assimilation versus cultural defiance. According to German hip hop enthusiast 9@home, Advanced Chemistry is part of a \"hip-hop movement [which] took a clear stance for the minorities and against the [marginalization] of immigrants who...might be German on paper, but not in real life,\" which speaks to the group's hope of actually being recognized as German citizens and not foreigners, despite their various other ethnic and cultural ties.\nInfluences.\nAdvanced Chemistry's work was rooted in German history and the country's specific political realities. However, they also drew inspiration from African-American hip-hop acts like A Tribe Called Quest and Public Enemy, who had helped bring a soulful sound and political consciousness to American hip-hop. One member, Torch, later explicitly listed his references on his solo song \"Als (When I Was in School):\" \"My favorite subject, which was quickly discovered poetry in load Poets, awakens the intellect or policy at Chuck D I'll never forget the lyrics by Public Enemy.\" Torch goes on to list other American rappers like Biz Markie, Big Daddy Kane and Dr. Dre as influences.\nBibliography.\nEl-Tayeb, Fatima \u201c\u2018If You Cannot Pronounce My Name, You Can Just Call Me \nPride.\u2019 Afro-German Activism, Gender, and Hip Hop,\u201d \"Gender &amp; History\"15/3(2003):459-485.\nFelbert, Oliver von. \u201cDie Unbestechlichen.\u201d \"Spex\" (March 1993): 50\u201353.\nWeheliye, Alexander G. \"Phonographies:Grooves in Sonic Afro-Modernity\", Duke University Press, 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "907", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=907", "title": "Awk", "text": ""}
{"id": "908", "revid": "52", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=908", "title": "AgoraNomic", "text": ""}
{"id": "909", "revid": "31184071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=909", "title": "Anglican Communion", "text": "International Christian communion\nThe Anglican Communion is the third largest Christian communion after the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches. Founded in 1867 in London, the communion has more than 85\u00a0million members within the Church of England and other autocephalous national and regional churches in full communion. The traditional origins of Anglican doctrine are summarised in the Thirty-nine Articles (1571). The archbishop of Canterbury (as of 2023[ [update]], Justin Welby) in England acts as a focus of unity, recognised as \"\" (\"first among equals\"), but does not exercise authority in Anglican provinces outside of the Church of England. Most, but not all, member churches of the communion are the historic national or regional Anglican churches.\nThe Anglican Communion was officially and formally organised and recognised as such at the Lambeth Conference in 1867 in London under the leadership of Charles Longley, Archbishop of Canterbury. The churches of the Anglican Communion consider themselves to be part of the one, holy, catholic and apostolic church, and to be both catholic and Reformed. As in the Church of England itself, the Anglican Communion includes the broad spectrum of beliefs and liturgical practises found in the Evangelical, Central and Anglo-Catholic traditions of Anglicanism. Each national or regional church is fully independent, retaining its own legislative process and episcopal polity under the leadership of local primates. For some adherents, Anglicanism represents a non-papal Catholicism, for others a form of Protestantism though without a guiding figure such as Martin Luther, John Knox, John Calvin, Huldrych Zwingli, John Wesley or Jan Hus, or, for yet others, a combination of the two.\nMost of its members live in the Anglosphere of former British territories. Full participation in the sacramental life of each church is available to all communicant members. Because of their historical link to England (\"ecclesia anglicana\" means \"English church\"), some of the member churches are known as \"Anglican\", such as the Anglican Church of Canada. Others, for example the Church of Ireland and the Scottish and American Episcopal churches, have official names that do not include \"Anglican\". Additionally, some churches that do use the name \"Anglican\" are not part of the communion. These have generally disaffiliated over disagreement with the direction of the communion. On February 20, 2023, ten communion provinces and Anglican realignment churches within Global South Fellowship of Anglican Churches released a statement stating that they had declared \"impaired communion\" with the Church of England and no longer recognised Justin Welby as \"first among equals\" among the bishops of the communion, \"de facto\" marking a schism within the Anglican Communion.\nHistory.\nThe Anglican Communion traces much of its growth to the older mission organisations of the Church of England such as the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (founded 1698), the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (founded 1701) and the Church Missionary Society (founded 1799). The Church of England (which until the 20th century included the Church in Wales) initially separated from the Roman Catholic Church in 1534 in the reign of Henry VIII, reunited in 1555 under Mary I and then separated again in 1570 under Elizabeth I (the Roman Catholic Church excommunicated Elizabeth I in 1570 in response to the Act of Supremacy 1559).\nThe Church of England has always thought of itself not as a new foundation but rather as a reformed continuation of the ancient \"English Church\" (\"Ecclesia Anglicana\") and a reassertion of that church's rights. As such it was a distinctly national phenomenon. The Church of Scotland was formed as a separate church from the Roman Catholic Church as a result of the Scottish Reformation in 1560 and the later formation of the Scottish Episcopal Church began in 1582 in the reign of James VI over disagreements about the role of bishops.\nThe oldest-surviving Anglican church building outside the British Isles (Britain and Ireland) is St Peter's Church in St. George's, Bermuda, established in 1612 (though the actual building had to be rebuilt several times over the following century). This is also the oldest surviving non-Roman Catholic church in the New World. It remained part of the Church of England until 1978 when the Anglican Church of Bermuda separated. The Church of England was the established church not only in England, but in its trans-Oceanic colonies.\nThus the only member churches of the present Anglican Communion existing by the mid-18th century were the Church of England, its closely linked sister church the Church of Ireland (which also separated from Roman Catholicism under Henry VIII) and the Scottish Episcopal Church which for parts of the 17th and 18th centuries was partially underground (it was suspected of Jacobite sympathies).\nGlobal spread of Anglicanism.\nThe enormous expansion in the 18th and 19th centuries of the British Empire brought Anglicanism along with it. At first all these colonial churches were under the jurisdiction of the bishop of London. After the American Revolution, the parishes in the newly independent country found it necessary to break formally from a church whose supreme governor was (and remains) the British monarch. Thus they formed their own dioceses and national church, the Episcopal Church in the United States of America, in a mostly amicable separation.\nAt about the same time, in the colonies which remained linked to the crown, the Church of England began to appoint colonial bishops. In 1787, Charles Inglis (Bishop of Nova Scotia) was appointed with a jurisdiction over all of British North America; in time several more colleagues were appointed to other cities in present-day Canada. In 1814, a bishop of Calcutta was made; in 1824 the first bishop was sent to the West Indies and in 1836 to Australia. By 1840 there were still only ten colonial bishops for the Church of England; but even this small beginning greatly facilitated the growth of Anglicanism around the world. In 1841, a \"Colonial Bishoprics Council\" was set up and soon many more dioceses were created.\nIn time, it became natural to group these into provinces and a metropolitan bishop was appointed for each province. Although it had at first been somewhat established in many colonies, in 1861 it was ruled that, except where specifically established, the Church of England had just the same legal position as any other church. Thus a colonial bishop and colonial diocese was by nature quite a different thing from their counterparts back home. In time bishops came to be appointed locally rather than from England and eventually national synods began to pass ecclesiastical legislation independent of England.\nA crucial step in the development of the modern communion was the idea of the Lambeth Conferences (discussed above). These conferences demonstrated that the bishops of disparate churches could manifest the unity of the church in their episcopal collegiality despite the absence of universal legal ties. Some bishops were initially reluctant to attend, fearing that the meeting would declare itself a council with power to legislate for the church; but it agreed to pass only advisory resolutions. These Lambeth Conferences have been held roughly every ten years since 1878 (the second such conference) and remain the most visible coming-together of the whole communion.\nThe Lambeth Conference of 1998 included what has been seen by Philip Jenkins and others as a \"watershed in global Christianity\". The 1998 Lambeth Conference considered the issue of the theology of same-sex attraction in relation to human sexuality. At this 1998 conference for the first time in centuries the Christians of developing regions, especially, Africa, Asia, and Latin America, prevailed over the bishops of more prosperous countries (many from the US, Canada, and the UK) who supported a redefinition of Anglican doctrine. Seen in this light 1998 is a date that marked the shift from a West-dominated Christianity to one wherein the growing churches of the two-thirds world are predominant.\nControversies.\nOne effect of the Anglican Communion's dispersed authority has been the conflicts arising over divergent practices and doctrines in parts of the communion. Disputes that had been confined to the Church of England could be dealt with legislatively in that realm, but as the Communion spread out into new nations and disparate cultures, such controversies multiplied and intensified. These controversies have generally been of two types: liturgical and social.\nAnglo-Catholicism.\nThe first such controversy of note concerned that of the growing influence of the Catholic Revival manifested in the Tractarian and so-called Ritualist controversies of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This controversy produced the Free Church of England and, in the United States and Canada, the Reformed Episcopal Church.\nSocial changes.\nLater, rapid social change and the dissipation of British cultural hegemony over its former colonies contributed to disputes over the role of women, the parameters of marriage and divorce, and the practices of contraception and abortion. In the late 1970s, the Continuing Anglican movement produced a number of new church bodies in opposition to women's ordination, prayer book changes, and the new understandings concerning marriage.\nSame-sex unions and LGBT clergy.\nMore recently, disagreements over homosexuality have strained the unity of the communion as well as its relationships with other Christian denominations, leading to another round of withdrawals from the Anglican Communion. Some churches were founded outside the Anglican Communion in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, largely in opposition to the ordination of openly homosexual bishops and other clergy and are usually referred to as belonging to the Anglican realignment movement, or else as \"orthodox\" Anglicans. These disagreements were especially noted when the Episcopal Church (US) consecrated an openly gay bishop in a same-sex relationship, Gene Robinson, in 2003, which led some Episcopalians to defect and found the Anglican Church in North America (ACNA); then, the debate reignited when the Church of England agreed to allow clergy to enter into same-sex civil partnerships, as long as they remained celibate, in 2005. The Church of Nigeria opposed the Episcopal Church's decision as well as the Church of England's approval for celibate civil partnerships.\n\"The more liberal provinces that are open to changing Church doctrine on marriage in order to allow for same-sex unions include Brazil, Canada, New Zealand, Scotland, South India, South Africa, the US and Wales\". In 2023, the Church of England announced that it will authorise \"prayers of thanksgiving, dedication and for God's blessing for same-sex couples\". The Church of England also permits clergy to enter into same-sex civil partnerships. The Church of Ireland has no official position on civil unions, and one senior cleric has entered into a same-sex civil partnership. The Church of Ireland recognised that it will \"treat civil partners the same as spouses\". The Anglican Church of Australia does not have an official position on homosexuality.\nThe conservative Anglican churches encouraging the realignment movement are more concentrated in the Global South. For example, the Anglican Church of Kenya, the Church of Nigeria and the Church of Uganda have opposed homosexuality. GAFCON, a fellowship of conservative Anglican churches, has appointed \"missionary bishops\" in response to the disagreements with the perceived liberalisation in the Anglican churches in North America and Europe. In 2023, ten archbishops within the Anglican Communion and two breakaway churches in North America and Brazil from the Global South Fellowship of Anglican Churches (GSFA) declared a state of impaired communion with the Church of England and announced that they would no longer recognise the archbishop of Canterbury as the \"first among equals\" among the bishops in the Anglican Communion. However, in the same statement, the ten archbishops said that they would not leave the Anglican Communion.\nDebates about social theology and ethics have occurred at the same time as debates on prayer book revision and the acceptable grounds for achieving full communion with non-Anglican churches.\nEcclesiology, polity and ethos.\nThe Anglican Communion has no official legal existence nor any governing structure that might exercise authority over the member churches. There is an Anglican Communion Office in London, under the aegis of the archbishop of Canterbury, but it serves only in a supporting and organisational role. The communion is held together by a shared history, expressed in its ecclesiology, polity and ethos, and also by participation in international consultative bodies.\nThree elements have been important in holding the communion together: first, the shared ecclesial structure of the component churches, manifested in an episcopal polity maintained through the apostolic succession of bishops and synodical government; second, the principle of belief expressed in worship, investing importance in approved prayer books and their rubrics; and third, the historical documents and the writings of early Anglican divines that have influenced the ethos of the communion.\nOriginally, the Church of England was self-contained and relied for its unity and identity on its own history, its traditional legal and episcopal structure, and its status as an established church of the state. As such, Anglicanism was from the outset a movement with an explicitly episcopal polity, a characteristic that has been vital in maintaining the unity of the communion by conveying the episcopate's role in manifesting visible catholicity and ecumenism.\nEarly in its development following the English Reformation, Anglicanism developed a vernacular prayer book, called the \"Book of Common Prayer\". Unlike other traditions, Anglicanism has never been governed by a magisterium nor by appeal to one founding theologian, nor by an extra-credal summary of doctrine (such as the Westminster Confession of the Presbyterian churches). Instead, Anglicans have typically appealed to the \"Book of Common Prayer\" (1662) and its offshoots as a guide to Anglican theology and practise. This has had the effect of inculcating in Anglican identity and confession the principle of (\"the law of praying [is] the law of believing\").\nProtracted conflict through the 17th century, with radical Protestants on the one hand and Roman Catholics who recognised the primacy of the Pope on the other, resulted in an association of churches that was both deliberately vague about doctrinal principles, yet bold in developing parameters of acceptable deviation. These parameters were most clearly articulated in the various rubrics of the successive prayer books, as well as the Thirty-nine Articles of Religion (1563). These articles have historically shaped and continue to direct the ethos of the communion, an ethos reinforced by its interpretation and expansion by such influential early theologians such as Richard Hooker, Lancelot Andrewes and John Cosin.\nWith the expansion of the British Empire and the growth of Anglicanism outside Great Britain and Ireland, the communion sought to establish new vehicles of unity. The first major expressions of this were the Lambeth Conferences of the communion's bishops, first convened in 1867 by Charles Longley, the archbishop of Canterbury. From the beginning, these were not intended to displace the autonomy of the emerging provinces of the communion, but to \"discuss matters of practical interest, and pronounce what we deem expedient in resolutions which may serve as safe guides to future action\".\nChicago Lambeth Quadrilateral.\nOne of the enduringly influential early resolutions of the conference was the so-called Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral of 1888. Its intent was to provide the basis for discussions of reunion with the Roman Catholic and Orthodox churches, but it had the ancillary effect of establishing parameters of Anglican identity. It establishes four principles with these words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThat, in the opinion of this Conference, the following Articles supply a basis on which approach may be by God's blessing made towards Home Reunion:\n(a) The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, as \"containing all things necessary to salvation,\" and as being the rule and ultimate standard of faith.\n(b) The Apostles' Creed, as the Baptismal Symbol; and the Nicene Creed, as the sufficient statement of the Christian faith.\n(c) The two Sacraments ordained by Christ Himself \u2013 Baptism and the Supper of the Lord \u2013 ministered with unfailing use of Christ's Words of Institution, and of the elements ordained by Him.\n(d) The Historic Episcopate, locally adapted in the methods of its administration to the varying needs of the nations and peoples called of God into the Unity of His Church.\nInstruments of communion.\nAs mentioned above, the Anglican Communion has no international juridical organisation. The archbishop of Canterbury's role is strictly symbolic and unifying and the communion's three international bodies are consultative and collaborative, their resolutions having no legal effect on the autonomous provinces of the communion. Taken together, however, the four do function as \"instruments of communion\", since all churches of the communion participate in them. In order of antiquity, they are:\nSince there is no binding authority in the Anglican Communion, these international bodies are a vehicle for consultation and persuasion. In recent times, persuasion has tipped over into debates over conformity in certain areas of doctrine, discipline, worship and ethics. The most notable example has been the objection of many provinces of the communion (particularly in Africa and Asia) to the changing acceptance of LGBTQ+ individuals in the North American churches (e.g., by blessing same-sex unions and ordaining and consecrating same-sex relationships) and to the process by which changes were undertaken. (See Anglican realignment)\nThose who objected condemned these actions as unscriptural, unilateral, and without the agreement of the communion prior to these steps being taken. In response, the American Episcopal Church and the Anglican Church of Canada answered that the actions had been undertaken after lengthy scriptural and theological reflection, legally in accordance with their own canons and constitutions and after extensive consultation with the provinces of the communion.\nThe Primates' Meeting voted to request the two churches to withdraw their delegates from the 2005 meeting of the Anglican Consultative Council. Canada and the United States decided to attend the meeting but without exercising their right to vote. They have not been expelled or suspended, since there is no mechanism in this voluntary association to suspend or expel an independent province of the communion. Since membership is based on a province's communion with Canterbury, expulsion would require the archbishop of Canterbury's refusal to be in communion with the affected jurisdictions. In line with the suggestion of the Windsor Report, Rowan Williams (the then archbishop of Canterbury) established a working group to examine the feasibility of an Anglican covenant which would articulate the conditions for communion in some fashion.\nOrganisation.\nProvinces.\nThe Anglican Communion consists of forty-two autonomous provinces each with its own primate and governing structure. These provinces may take the form of national churches (such as in Canada, Uganda, or Japan) or a collection of nations (such as the West Indies, Central Africa, or Southeast Asia).\nExtraprovincial churches.\nIn addition to the forty-two provinces, there are five extraprovincial churches under the metropolitical authority of the archbishop of Canterbury.\nNew provinces in formation.\nAt its Autumn 2020 meeting, the provincial standing committee of the Church of Southern Africa approved a plan to form the dioceses in Mozambique and Angola into a separate autonomous province of the Anglican Communion, to be named the Anglican Church of Mozambique and Angola (IAMA). The plans were also outlined to the Mozambique and Angola Anglican Association (MANNA) at its September 2020 annual general meeting. The new province is Portuguese-speaking, and consists of twelve dioceses (four in Angola, and eight in Mozambique). The twelve proposed new dioceses have been defined and named, and each has a \"Task Force Committee\" working towards its establishment as a diocese. The plan received the consent of the bishops and diocesan synods of all four existing dioceses in the two nations, and was submitted to the Anglican Consultative Council.\nIn September 2020, the Archbishop of Canterbury announced that he had asked the bishops of the Church of Ceylon to begin planning for the formation of an autonomous province of Ceylon, so as to end his current position as metropolitan of the two dioceses in that country.\nChurches in full communion.\nIn addition to other member churches, the churches of the Anglican Communion are in full communion with the Old Catholic churches of the Union of Utrecht and the Scandinavian Lutheran churches of the Porvoo Communion in Europe, the India-based Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian and Malabar Independent Syrian churches and the Philippine Independent Church, also known as the Aglipayan Church.\nHistoric episcopate.\nThe churches of the Anglican Communion have traditionally held that ordination in the historic episcopate is a core element in the validity of clerical ordinations. The Roman Catholic Church, however, does not recognise Anglican orders (see \"Apostolicae curae\"). Some Eastern Orthodox churches have issued statements to the effect that Anglican orders could be accepted, yet have still reordained former Anglican clergy; other Eastern Orthodox churches have rejected Anglican orders altogether. Orthodox bishop Kallistos Ware explains this apparent discrepancy as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anglican clergy who join the Orthodox Church are reordained; but [some Orthodox churches hold that] if Anglicanism and Orthodoxy were to reach full unity in the faith, perhaps such reordination might not be found necessary. It should be added, however, that a number of individual Orthodox theologians hold that under no circumstances would it be possible to recognise the validity of Anglican Orders.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "910", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=910", "title": "Arne Kaijser", "text": "Swedish academic (born 1950)\nArne Kaijser (born 1950) is a professor emeritus of history of technology at the KTH Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, and a former president of the Society for the History of Technology.\nKaijser has published two books in Swedish: \"Stadens ljus. Etableringen av de f\u00f6rsta svenska gasverken\" and \"I f\u00e4drens sp\u00e5r. Den svenska infrastrukturens historiska utveckling och framtida utmaningar\", and has co-edited several anthologies. Kaijser is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences since 2007 and also a member of the editorial board of two scientific journals: \"Journal of Urban Technology\" and \"Centaurus\". Lately, he has been occupied with the history of Large Technical Systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "911", "revid": "41700882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=911", "title": "Archipelago", "text": "Collection of islands\nAn archipelago ( ), sometimes called an island group or island chain, is a chain, cluster, or collection of islands, or sometimes a sea containing a small number of scattered islands.\nExamples of archipelagos include: the Indonesian Archipelago, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Lakshadweep Islands, the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands, the Japanese archipelago, the Philippine Archipelago, the Maldives, the Balearic Islands, the \u00c5land Islands, The Bahamas, the Aegean Islands, the Hawaiian Islands, the Canary Islands, Malta, the Azores, the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, the British Isles, the islands of the Archipelago Sea, and Shetland. Archipelagos are sometimes defined by political boundaries. For example, while they are geopolitically divided, the San Juan Islands and Gulf Islands geologically form part of a larger Gulf Archipelago.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"archipelago\" is derived from the Ancient Greek \u1f04\u03c1\u03c7\u03b9-(\"arkhi-\", \"chief\") and \u03c0\u03ad\u03bb\u03b1\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2 (\"p\u00e9lagos\", \"sea\") through the Italian \"arcipelago\". In antiquity, \"Archipelago\" (from Medieval Greek *\u1f00\u03c1\u03c7\u03b9\u03c0\u03ad\u03bb\u03b1\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2 and Latin ) was the proper name for the Aegean Sea. Later, usage shifted to refer to the Aegean Islands (since the sea has a large number of islands).\nGeographic types.\nArchipelagos may be found isolated in large amounts of water or neighbouring a large land mass. For example, Scotland has more than 700\u00a0islands surrounding its mainland, which form an archipelago.\nArchipelagos are often volcanic, forming along island arcs generated by subduction zones or hotspots, but may also be the result of erosion, deposition, and land elevation. Depending on their geological origin, islands forming archipelagos can be referred to as \"oceanic islands\", \"continental fragments\", or \"continental islands\".\nOceanic islands.\nOceanic islands are mainly of volcanic origin, and widely separated from any adjacent continent. The Hawaiian Islands and Galapagos Islands in the Pacific, and Mascarene Islands in the south Indian Ocean are examples.\nContinental fragments.\nContinental fragments correspond to land masses that have separated from a continental mass due to tectonic displacement. The Farallon Islands off the coast of California are an example.\nContinental archipelagos.\nSets of islands formed close to the coast of a continent are considered continental archipelagos when they form part of the same continental shelf, when those islands are above-water extensions of the shelf. The islands of the Inside Passage off the coast of British Columbia and the Canadian Arctic Archipelago are examples.\nArtificial archipelagos.\nArtificial archipelagos have been created in various countries for different purposes. Palm Islands and The World Islands off Dubai were or are being created for leisure and tourism purposes. Marker Wadden in the Netherlands is being built as a conservation area for birds and other wildlife.\nSuperlatives.\nThe largest archipelago in the world is the Archipelago Sea which is part of Finland. There are approximately 40,000, mostly uninhabited, islands \nThe largest archipelagic state in the world by area, and by population, is Indonesia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "914", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=914", "title": "Author", "text": "Creator of an original work\nIn legal discourse, an author is the creator of an original work, whether that work is in written, graphic, or recorded medium. In common parlance, an author is often thought of as the writer of a book, article, play, or other written work. In the case of a work for hire, \"the employer or commissioning party is considered the author of the work\", even if they did not write or otherwise create the work, but merely instructed another individual to do so.\nTypically, the first owner of a copyright is the person who created the work, i.e. the author. If more than one person created the work, then a case of joint authorship takes place. Copyright laws differ around the world. The United States Copyright Office, for example, defines copyright as \"a form of protection provided by the laws of the United States (title 17, U.S. Code) to authors of 'original works of authorship.'\"\nLegal significance of authorship.\nHolding the title of \"author\" over any \"literary, dramatic, musical, artistic, [or] certain other intellectual works\" gives rights to this person, the owner of the copyright, especially the exclusive right to engage in or authorize any production or distribution of their work. Any person or entity wishing to use intellectual property held under copyright must receive permission from the copyright holder to use this work, and often will be asked to pay for the use of copyrighted material.\nThe copyrights on intellectual work expire after a certain time. It enters the public domain, where it can be used without limit. Copyright laws in many jurisdictions \u2013 mostly following the lead of the United States, in which the entertainment and publishing industries have very strong lobbying power \u2013 have been amended repeatedly since their inception, to extend the length of this fixed period where the work is exclusively controlled by the copyright holder. Technically, someone owns their work from the time it's created. A notable aspect of authorship emerges with copyright in that, in many jurisdictions, it can be passed down to another upon one's death. The person who inherits the copyright is not the author, but has access to the same legal benefits.\nIntellectual property laws are complex. Fiction work involves trademark law, likeness rights, fair use rights held by the public (including the right to parody or satirize), and many other interacting complications.\nAuthors may portion out different rights they hold to different parties, at different times, and for different purposes or uses, such as the right to adapt a plot into a film, but only with different character names, because the characters have already been optioned by another company for a television series or a video game. An author may also not have rights when working under contract that they would otherwise have, such as when creating a work for hire (e.g., hired to write a city tour guide by a municipal government that totally owns the copyright to the finished work), or when writing material using intellectual property owned by others (such as when writing a novel or screenplay that is a new installment in an already established media franchise).\nPhilosophical views of the nature of authorship.\nIn literary theory, critics find complications in the term \"author\" beyond what constitutes authorship in a legal setting. In the wake of postmodern literature, critics such as Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault have examined the role and relevance of authorship to the meaning or interpretation of a text.\nBarthes challenges the idea that a text can be attributed to any single author. He writes, in his essay \"Death of the Author\" (1968), that \"it is language which speaks, not the author.\" The words and language of a text itself determine and expose meaning for Barthes, and not someone possessing legal responsibility for the process of its production. Every line of written text is a mere reflection of references from any of a multitude of traditions, or, as Barthes puts it, \"the text is a tissue of quotations drawn from the innumerable centers of culture\"; it is never original. With this, the perspective of the author is removed from the text, and the limits formerly imposed by the idea of one authorial voice, one ultimate and universal meaning, are destroyed. The explanation and meaning of a work does not have to be sought in the one who produced it, \"as if it were always in the end, through the more or less transparent allegory of the fiction, the voice of a single person, the author 'confiding' in us.\" The psyche, culture, fanaticism of an author can be disregarded when interpreting a text, because the words are rich enough themselves with all of the traditions of language. To expose meanings in a written work without appealing to the celebrity of an author, their tastes, passions, vices, is, to Barthes, to allow language to speak, rather than author.\nMichel Foucault argues in his essay \"What is an author?\" (1969) that all authors are writers, but not all writers are authors. He states that \"a private letter may have a signatory\u2014it does not have an author.\" For a reader to assign the title of author upon any written work is to attribute certain standards upon the text which, for Foucault, are working in conjunction with the idea of \"the author function.\" Foucault's author function is the idea that an author exists only as a function of a written work, a part of its structure, but not necessarily part of the interpretive process. The author's name \"indicates the status of the discourse within a society and culture,\" and at one time was used as an anchor for interpreting a text, a practice which Barthes would argue is not a particularly relevant or valid endeavour.\nExpanding upon Foucault's position, Alexander Nehamas writes that Foucault suggests \"an author [...] is whoever can be understood to have produced a particular text as we interpret it,\" not necessarily who penned the text. It is this distinction between producing a written work and producing the interpretation or meaning in a written work that both Barthes and Foucault are interested in. Foucault warns of the risks of keeping the author's name in mind during interpretation, because it could affect the value and meaning with which one handles an interpretation.\nLiterary critics Barthes and Foucault suggest that readers should not rely on or look for the notion of one overarching voice when interpreting a written work, because of the complications inherent with a writer's title of \"author.\" They warn of the dangers interpretations could suffer from when associating the subject of inherently meaningful words and language with the personality of one authorial voice. Instead, readers should allow a text to be interpreted in terms of the language as \"author.\"\nRelationship with publisher.\nSelf-publishing.\nSelf-publishing is a model where the author takes full responsibility and control of arranging financing, editing, printing, and distribution of their own work. In other words, the author also acts as the publisher of their work.\nTraditional publishing.\nWith commissioned publishing, the publisher makes all the publication arrangements and the author covers all expenses.\nThe author of a work may receive a percentage calculated on a wholesale or a specific price or a fixed amount on each book sold. Publishers, at times, reduced the risk of this type of arrangement, by agreeing only to pay this after a certain number of copies had sold. In Canada, this practice occurred during the 1890s, but was not commonplace until the 1920s. Established and successful authors may receive advance payments, set against future royalties, but this is no longer common practice. Most independent publishers pay royalties as a percentage of net receipts \u2013 how net receipts are calculated varies from publisher to publisher. Under this arrangement, the author does not pay anything towards the expense of publication. The costs and financial risk are all carried by the publisher, who will then take the greatest percentage of the receipts. See Compensation for more.\nVanity publishing.\nVanity publishers normally charge a flat fee for arranging publication, offer a platform for selling, and then take a percentage of the sale of every copy of a book. The author receives the rest of the money made. Most materials published this way are for niche groups and not for large audiences.\nVanity publishing, or subsidy publishing, is stigmatized in the professional world. In 1983, Bill Henderson defined vanity publishers as people who would \u201cpublish anything for which an author will pay, usually at a loss for the author and a nice profit for the publisher.\u201d In subsidy publishing, the book sales are not the publishers' main source of income, but instead the fees that the authors are charged to initially produce the book are. Because of this, the vanity publishers need not invest into making books marketable as much as other publishers need to. This leads to low quality books being introduced to the market.\nRelationship with editor.\nThe relationship between the author and the editor, often the author's only liaison to the publishing company, is often characterized as the site of tension. For the author to reach their audience, often through publication, the work usually must attract the attention of the editor. The idea of the author as the sole meaning-maker of necessity changes to include the influences of the editor and the publisher to engage the audience in writing as a social act. There are three principal kinds of editing \u2013 proofing (checking the grammar and spelling, looking for typographical errors), story (potentially an area of deep angst for both author and publisher), and layout (the typesetting needed to ready a work for publishing often requires minor text changes, so a layout editor is employed to ensure that these do not alter the sense of the text).\nPierre Bourdieu's essay \"The Field of Cultural Production\" depicts the publishing industry as a \"space of literary or artistic position-takings,\" also called the \"field of struggles,\" which is defined by the tension and movement inherent among the various positions in the field. Bourdieu claims that the \"field of position-takings [...] is not the product of coherence-seeking intention or objective consensus,\" meaning that an industry characterized by position-takings is not one of harmony and neutrality. In particular for the writer, their authorship in their work makes their work part of their identity, and there is much at stake personally over the negotiation of authority over that identity. However, it is the editor who has \"the power to impose the dominant definition of the writer and therefore to delimit the population of those entitled to take part in the struggle to define the writer\". As \"cultural investors,\" publishers rely on the editor position to identify a good investment in \"cultural capital\" which may grow to yield economic capital across all positions.\nAccording to the studies of James Curran, the system of shared values among editors in Britain has generated a pressure among authors to write to fit the editors' expectations, removing the focus from the reader-audience and putting a strain on the relationship between authors and editors and on writing as a social act. Even the book review by the editors has more significance than the readership's reception.\nCompensation.\nAuthors rely on advance fees, royalty payments, adaptation of work to a screenplay, and fees collected from giving speeches.\nA standard contract for an author will usually include provision for payment in the form of an advance and royalties. An advance is a lump sum paid in advance of publication. An advance must be earned out before royalties are payable. An advance may be paid in two lump sums: the first payment on contract signing, and the second on delivery of the completed manuscript or on publication.\nRoyalty payment is the sum paid to authors for each copy of a book sold and is traditionally around 10\u201312%, but self-published authors can earn about 40% \u2013 60% royalties per each book sale. An author's contract may specify, for example, that they will earn 10% of the retail price of each book sold. Some contracts specify a scale of royalties payable (for example, where royalties start at 10% for the first 10,000 sales, but then increase to a higher percentage rate at higher sale thresholds).\nAn author's book must earn the advance before any further royalties are paid. For example, if an author is paid a modest advance of $2000, and their royalty rate is 10% of a book priced at $20 \u2013 that is, $2 per book \u2013 the book will need to sell 1000 copies before any further payment will be made. Publishers typically withhold payment of a percentage of royalties earned against returns.\nIn some countries, authors also earn income from a government scheme such as the ELR (educational lending right) and PLR (public lending right) schemes in Australia. Under these schemes, authors are paid a fee for the number of copies of their books in educational and/or public libraries.\nThese days, many authors supplement their income from book sales with public speaking engagements, school visits, residencies, grants, and teaching positions.\nGhostwriters, technical writers, and textbooks writers are typically paid in a different way: usually a set fee or a per word rate rather than on a percentage of sales.\nIn the year 2016, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, nearly 130,000 people worked in the U.S. as authors, making an average of $61,240 per year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "915", "revid": "42788136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=915", "title": "Andrey Markov", "text": "Russian mathematician\nAndrey Andreyevich Markov (14 June 1856 \u2013 20 July 1922) was a Russian mathematician best known for his work on stochastic processes. A primary subject of his research later became known as the Markov chain.\nMarkov and his younger brother Vladimir Andreevich Markov (1871\u20131897) proved the Markov brothers' inequality.\nHis son, another Andrey Andreyevich Markov (1903\u20131979), was also a notable mathematician, making contributions to constructive mathematics and recursive function theory.\nBiography.\nAndrey Markov was born on 14 June 1856 in Russia. He attended the St. Petersburg Grammar School, where some teachers saw him as a rebellious student. In his academics he performed poorly in most subjects other than mathematics. Later in life he attended Saint Petersburg Imperial University (now Saint Petersburg State University). Among his teachers were Yulian Sokhotski (differential calculus, higher algebra), Konstantin Posse (analytic geometry), Yegor Zolotarev (integral calculus), Pafnuty Chebyshev (number theory and probability theory), Aleksandr Korkin (ordinary and partial differential equations), Mikhail Okatov (mechanism theory), Osip Somov (mechanics), and Nikolai Budajev (descriptive and higher geometry). He completed his studies at the university and was later asked if he would like to stay and have a career as a Mathematician. He later taught at high schools and continued his own mathematical studies. In this time he found a practical use for his mathematical skills. He figured out that he could use chains to model the alliteration of vowels and consonants in Russian literature. He also contributed to many other mathematical aspects in his time. He died at age 66 on 20 July 1922.\nTimeline.\nIn 1877, Markov was awarded a gold medal for his outstanding solution of the problem\n\"About Integration of Differential Equations by Continued Fractions with an Application to the Equation\" formula_1.\nDuring the following year, he passed the candidate's examinations, and he remained at the university to prepare for a lecturer's position.\nIn April 1880, Markov defended his master's thesis \"On the Binary Square Forms with Positive Determinant\", which was directed by Aleksandr Korkin and Yegor Zolotarev. Four years later in 1884, he defended his doctoral thesis titled \"On Certain Applications of the Algebraic Continuous Fractions\".\nHis pedagogical work began after the defense of his master's thesis in autumn 1880. As a privatdozent he lectured on differential and integral calculus. Later he lectured alternately on \"introduction to analysis\", probability theory (succeeding Chebyshev, who had left the university in 1882) and the calculus of differences. From 1895 through 1905 he also lectured in differential calculus.\nOne year after the defense of his doctoral thesis, Markov was appointed extraordinary professor (1886) and in the same year he was elected adjunct to the Academy of Sciences. In 1890, after the death of Viktor Bunyakovsky, Markov became an extraordinary member of the academy. His promotion to an ordinary professor of St. Petersburg University followed in the fall of 1894.\nIn 1896, Markov was elected an ordinary member of the academy as the successor of Chebyshev. In 1905, he was appointed merited professor and was granted the right to retire, which he did immediately. Until 1910, however, he continued to lecture in the calculus of differences.\nIn connection with student riots in 1908, professors and lecturers of St. Petersburg University were ordered to monitor their students. Markov refused to accept this decree, and he wrote an explanation in which he declined to be an \"agent of the governance\". Markov was removed from further teaching duties at St. Petersburg University, and hence he decided to retire from the university.\nMarkov was an atheist. In 1912, he responded to Leo Tolstoy's excommunication from the Russian Orthodox Church by requesting his own excommunication. The Church complied with his request.\nIn 1913, the council of St. Petersburg elected nine scientists honorary members of the university. Markov was among them, but his election was not affirmed by the minister of education. The affirmation only occurred four years later, after the February Revolution in 1917. Markov then resumed his teaching activities and lectured on probability theory and the calculus of differences until his death in 1922.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "918", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=918", "title": "Anti-semitism", "text": ""}
{"id": "919", "revid": "988682006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=919", "title": "Anti-semitic", "text": ""}
{"id": "921", "revid": "34211139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=921", "title": "Angst", "text": "Intense feeling of apprehension, anxiety, or inner turmoil\nAngst is fear or anxiety (\"anguish\" is its Latinate equivalent, and the words \"anxious\" and \"anxiety\" are of similar origin). The dictionary definition for angst is a feeling of anxiety, apprehension, or insecurity.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"angst\" was introduced into English from the Danish, Norwegian, and Dutch word and the German word . It is attested since the 19th century in English translations of the works of S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard and Sigmund Freud. It is used in English to describe an intense feeling of apprehension, anxiety, or inner turmoil.\nIn other languages (with words from the Latin for \"fear\" or \"panic\"), the derived words differ in meaning; for example, as in the French and . The word \"angst\" has existed in German since the 8th century, from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*anghu-\", \"restraint\" from which Old High German developed. It is pre-cognate with the Latin , \"tensity, tightness\" and , \"choking, clogging\"; compare to the Ancient Greek () \"strangle\". It entered English in the 19th century as a technical term used in Psychiatry, though earlier cognates existed, such as \"ange\".\nExistentialism.\nIn existentialist philosophy, the term \"angst\" carries a specific conceptual meaning. The use of the term was first attributed to Danish philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard (1813\u20131855). In \"The Concept of Anxiety\" (also known as \"The Concept of Dread\"), Kierkegaard used the word \"Angest\" (in common Danish, \"angst\", meaning \"dread\" or \"anxiety\") to describe a profound and deep-seated condition. Where non-human animals are guided solely by instinct, said Kierkegaard, human beings enjoy a freedom of choice that we find both appealing and terrifying. It is the anxiety of understanding of being free when considering undefined possibilities of one's life and the immense responsibility of having the power of choice over them. Kierkegaard's concept of angst reappeared in the works of existentialist philosophers who followed, such as Friedrich Nietzsche, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Martin Heidegger, each of whom developed the idea further in individual ways. While Kierkegaard's angst referred mainly to ambiguous feelings about moral freedom within a religious personal belief system, later existentialists discussed conflicts of personal principles, cultural norms, and existential despair.\nMusic.\nExistential angst makes its appearance in classical musical composition in the early twentieth century as a result of both philosophical developments and as a reflection of the war-torn times. Notable composers whose works are often linked with the concept include Gustav Mahler, Richard Strauss (operas ' and '), Claude Debussy (opera \"\", ballet \"Jeux\"), Jean Sibelius (especially the Fourth Symphony), Arnold Schoenberg (\"A Survivor from Warsaw\"), Alban Berg, Francis Poulenc (opera \"Dialogues of the Carmelites\"), Dmitri Shostakovich (opera \"Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk\", symphonies and chamber music), B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k (opera \"Bluebeard's Castle\"), and Krzysztof Penderecki (especially \"Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima\").\nAngst began to be discussed in reference to popular music in the mid- to late 1950s, amid widespread concerns over international tensions and nuclear proliferation. Jeff Nuttall's book \"Bomb Culture\" (1968) traced angst in popular culture to Hiroshima. Dread was expressed in works of folk rock such as Bob Dylan's \"Masters of War\" (1963) and \"A Hard Rain's a-Gonna Fall\". The term often makes an appearance in reference to punk rock, grunge, nu metal, and works of emo where expressions of melancholy, existential despair, or nihilism predominate.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "922", "revid": "40712792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=922", "title": "Anxiety", "text": "Unpleasant complex combination of emotions\nAnxiety is an emotion which is characterized by an unpleasant state of inner turmoil and includes feelings of dread over anticipated events. Anxiety is different from fear in that fear is defined as the emotional response to a real threat, whereas anxiety is the anticipation of a future threat. It is often accompanied by nervous behavior such as pacing back and forth, somatic complaints, and rumination.\nAnxiety is a feeling of uneasiness and worry, usually generalized and unfocused as an overreaction to a situation that is only subjectively seen as menacing. It is often accompanied by muscular tension, restlessness, fatigue, inability to catch one's breath, tightness in the abdominal region, nausea, and problems in concentration. Anxiety is closely related to fear, which is a response to a real or perceived immediate threat (fight or flight response); anxiety involves the expectation of future threat including dread. People facing anxiety may withdraw from situations which have provoked anxiety in the past.\nThe emotion of anxiety can persist beyond the developmentally appropriate time-periods in response to specific events, and thus turning into one of the multiple anxiety disorders (e.g. generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder). The difference between \"anxiety disorder\" (as mental disorder) and \"anxiety\" (as normal emotion), is that people with an anxiety disorder experience anxiety most of the days during approximately 6 months, or even during shorter time-periods in children. Anxiety disorders are among the most persistent mental problems and often last decades. Besides, strong percepts of anxiety exist within other mental disorders, e.g. obsessive-compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder.\nAnxiety vs. fear.\nAnxiety is distinguished from fear, which is an appropriate cognitive and emotional response to a perceived threat. Anxiety is related to the specific behaviors of fight-or-flight responses, defensive behavior or escape. There is a false presumption that often circulates that anxiety only occurs in situations perceived as uncontrollable or unavoidable, but this is not always so. David Barlow defines anxiety as \"a future-oriented mood state in which one is not ready or prepared to attempt to cope with upcoming negative events,\" and that it is a distinction between future and present dangers which divides anxiety and fear. Another description of anxiety is agony, dread, terror, or even apprehension. In positive psychology, anxiety is described as the mental state that results from a difficult challenge for which the subject has insufficient coping skills.\nFear and anxiety can be differentiated into four domains: (1) duration of emotional experience, (2) temporal focus, (3) specificity of the threat, and (4) motivated direction. Fear is short-lived, present-focused, geared towards a specific threat, and facilitating escape from threat. On the other hand, anxiety is long-acting, future-focused, broadly focused towards a diffuse threat, and promoting excessive caution while approaching a potential threat and interferes with constructive coping.\nJoseph E. LeDoux and Lisa Feldman Barrett have both sought to separate automatic threat responses from additional associated cognitive activity within anxiety.\nSymptoms.\nAnxiety can be experienced with long, drawn-out daily symptoms that reduce quality of life, known as chronic (or generalized) anxiety, or it can be experienced in short spurts with sporadic, stressful panic attacks, known as acute anxiety. Symptoms of anxiety can range in number, intensity, and frequency, depending on the person. However, most people do not suffer from chronic anxiety.\nAnxiety can induce several psychological pains (e.g. depression) or mental disorders, and may lead to self-harm or suicide (for which dedicated hotlines exist).\nThe behavioral effects of anxiety may include withdrawal from situations which have provoked anxiety or negative feelings in the past. Other effects may include changes in sleeping patterns, changes in habits, increase or decrease in food intake, and increased motor tension (such as foot tapping).\nThe emotional effects of anxiety may include \"feelings of apprehension or dread, trouble concentrating, feeling tense or jumpy, anticipating the worst, irritability, restlessness, watching (and waiting) for signs (and occurrences) of danger, and, feeling like your mind's gone blank\" as well as \"nightmares/bad dreams, obsessions about sensations, d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu, a trapped-in-your-mind feeling, and feeling like everything is scary.\" It may include a vague experience and feeling of helplessness.\nThe cognitive effects of anxiety may include thoughts about suspected dangers, such as fear of dying: \"You may\u00a0... fear that the chest pains are a deadly heart attack or that the shooting pains in your head are the result of a tumor or an aneurysm. You feel an intense fear when you think of dying, or you may think of it more often than normal, or can't get it out of your mind.\"\nThe physiological symptoms of anxiety may include:\nTypes.\nThere are various types of anxiety. Existential anxiety can occur when a person faces angst, an existential crisis, or nihilistic feelings. People can also face mathematical anxiety, somatic anxiety, stage fright, or test anxiety. Social anxiety refers to a fear of rejection and negative evaluation (being judged) by other people.\nExistential.\nThe philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, in \"The Concept of Anxiety\" (1844), described anxiety or dread associated with the \"dizziness of freedom\" and suggested the possibility for positive resolution of anxiety through the self-conscious exercise of responsibility and choosing. In \"Art and Artist\" (1932), the psychologist Otto Rank wrote that the psychological trauma of birth was the pre-eminent human symbol of existential anxiety and encompasses the creative person's simultaneous fear of \u2013 and desire for \u2013 separation, individuation, and differentiation.\nThe theologian Paul Tillich characterized existential anxiety as \"the state in which a being is aware of its possible nonbeing\" and he listed three categories for the nonbeing and resulting anxiety: ontic (fate and death), moral (guilt and condemnation), and spiritual (emptiness and meaninglessness). According to Tillich, the last of these three types of existential anxiety, i.e. spiritual anxiety, is predominant in modern times while the others were predominant in earlier periods. Tillich argues that this anxiety can be accepted as part of the human condition or it can be resisted but with negative consequences. In its pathological form, spiritual anxiety may tend to \"drive the person toward the creation of certitude in systems of meaning which are supported by tradition and authority\" even though such \"undoubted certitude is not built on the rock of reality\".\nAccording to Viktor Frankl, the author of \"Man's Search for Meaning\", when a person is faced with extreme mortal dangers, the most basic of all human wishes is to find a meaning of life to combat the \"trauma of nonbeing\" as death is near.\nDepending on the source of the threat, psychoanalytic theory distinguishes the following types of anxiety:\nTest, performance, and competitive.\nTest.\nAccording to Yerkes-Dodson law, an optimal level of arousal is necessary to best complete a task such as an exam, performance, or competitive event. However, when the anxiety or level of arousal exceeds that optimum, the result is a decline in performance.\nTest anxiety is the uneasiness, apprehension, or nervousness felt by students who have a fear of failing an exam. Students who have test anxiety may experience any of the following: the association of grades with personal worth; fear of embarrassment by a teacher; fear of alienation from parents or friends; time pressures; or feeling a loss of control. Sweating, dizziness, headaches, racing heartbeats, nausea, fidgeting, uncontrollable crying or laughing and drumming on a desk are all common. Because test anxiety hinges on fear of negative evaluation, debate exists as to whether test anxiety is itself a unique anxiety disorder or whether it is a specific type of social phobia. The DSM-IV classifies test anxiety as a type of social phobia.\nTest anxiety remains a challenge for students, regardless of age, and has considerable physiological and psychological impacts. Management of test anxiety focuses on achieving relaxation and developing mechanisms to manage anxiety. The routine practice of slow, Device-Guided Breathing (DGB) is a\nmajor component of behavioral treatments for anxiety conditions.\nPerformance and competitive.\nPerformance anxiety and competitive anxiety () happen when an individual's performance is measured against others. An important distinction between competitive and non-competitive anxiety is that competitive anxiety makes people view their performance as a threat. As a result, they experience a drop in their ordinary ability, whether physical or mental, due to that perceived stress.\nCompetitive anxiety is caused by a range of internal factors including high expectations, outside pressure, lack of experience, and external factors like the location of a competition. It commonly occurs in those participating in high pressure activities like sports and debates. Some common symptoms of competitive anxiety include muscle tension, fatigue, weakness, sense of panic, apprehensiveness, and panic attacks.\nThere are 4 major theories of how anxiety affects performance: Drive theory, Inverted U theory, Reversal theory, and The Zone of Optimal Functioning theory.\n\"Drive theory\" believes that anxiety is positive and performance improves proportionally to the level of anxiety. This theory is not well accepted.\nThe \"Inverted U theory\" is based on the idea that performance peaks at a moderate stress level. It is called Inverted U theory because the graph that plots performance against anxiety looks like an inverted \"U\".\n\"Reversal theory\" suggests that performance increases in relation to the individual's interpretation of their arousal levels. If they believed their physical arousal level would help them, their performance would increase, if they didn't, their performance would decrease. For example: Athletes were shown to worry more when focusing on results and perfection rather than the effort and growth involved.\nThe \"Zone of Optimal Functioning theory\" proposes that there is a zone where positive and negative emotions are in a balance which lead to feelings of dissociation and intense concentration, optimizing the individual's performance levels.\nStranger, social, and intergroup anxiety.\nHumans generally require social acceptance and thus sometimes dread the disapproval of others. Apprehension of being judged by others may cause anxiety in social environments.\nAnxiety during social interactions, particularly between strangers, is common among young people. It may persist into adulthood and become social anxiety or social phobia. \"Stranger anxiety\" in small children is not considered a phobia. In adults, an excessive fear of other people is not a developmentally common stage; it is called social anxiety. According to Cutting, social phobics do not fear the crowd but the fact that they may be judged negatively.\nSocial anxiety varies in degree and severity. For some people, it is characterized by experiencing discomfort or awkwardness during physical social contact (e.g. embracing, shaking hands, etc.), while in other cases it can lead to a fear of interacting with unfamiliar people altogether. Those with this condition may restrict their lifestyles to accommodate the anxiety, minimizing social interaction whenever possible. Social anxiety also forms a core aspect of certain personality disorders, including avoidant personality disorder.\nTo the extent that a person is fearful of social encounters with unfamiliar others, some people may experience anxiety particularly during interactions with outgroup members, or people who share different group memberships (i.e., by race, ethnicity, class, gender, etc.). Depending on the nature of the antecedent relations, cognitions, and situational factors, intergroup contact may be stressful and lead to feelings of anxiety. This apprehension or fear of contact with outgroup members is often called interracial or intergroup anxiety.\nAs is the case with the more generalized forms of social anxiety, intergroup anxiety has behavioral, cognitive, and affective effects. For instance, increases in schematic processing and simplified information processing can occur when anxiety is high. Indeed, such is consistent with related work on attentional bias in implicit memory. Additionally recent research has found that implicit racial evaluations (i.e. automatic prejudiced attitudes) can be amplified during intergroup interaction. Negative experiences have been illustrated in producing not only negative expectations, but also avoidant, or antagonistic, behavior such as hostility. Furthermore, when compared to anxiety levels and cognitive effort (e.g., impression management and self-presentation) in intragroup contexts, levels and depletion of resources may be exacerbated in the intergroup situation.\nTrait.\nAnxiety can be either a short-term \"state\" or a long-term personality \"trait.\" Trait anxiety reflects a stable tendency across the lifespan of responding with acute, state anxiety in the anticipation of threatening situations (whether they are actually deemed threatening or not). A meta-analysis showed that a high level of neuroticism is a risk factor for development of anxiety symptoms and disorders. Such anxiety may be conscious or unconscious.\nPersonality can also be a trait leading to anxiety and depression and their persistence. Through experience, many find it difficult to collect themselves due to their own personal nature.\nChoice or decision.\nAnxiety induced by the need to choose between similar options is increasingly being recognized as a problem for individuals and for organizations. In 2004, Capgemini wrote: \"Today we're all faced with greater choice, more competition and less time to consider our options or seek out the right advice.\"\nIn a decision context, unpredictability or uncertainty may trigger emotional responses in anxious individuals that systematically alter decision-making. There are primarily two forms of this anxiety type. The first form refers to a choice in which there are multiple potential outcomes with known or calculable probabilities. The second form refers to the uncertainty and ambiguity related to a decision context in which there are multiple possible outcomes with unknown probabilities.\nPanic disorder.\nPanic disorder may share symptoms of stress and anxiety, but it is actually very different. Panic disorder is an anxiety disorder that occurs without any triggers. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, this disorder can be distinguished by unexpected and repeated episodes of intense fear. Someone with panic disorder will eventually develop constant fear of another attack and as this progresses it will begin to affect daily functioning and an individual's general quality of life. It is reported by the Cleveland Clinic that panic disorder affects 2 to 3 percent of adult Americans and can begin around the time of the teenage and early adult years. Some symptoms include: difficulty breathing, chest pain, dizziness, trembling or shaking, feeling faint, nausea, fear that you are losing control or are about to die. Even though they have these symptoms during an attack, the main symptom is the persistent fear of having future panic attacks.\nAnxiety disorders.\nAnxiety disorders are a group of mental disorders characterized by exaggerated feelings of anxiety and fear responses. Anxiety is a worry about future events and fear is a reaction to current events. These feelings may cause physical symptoms, such as a fast heart rate and shakiness. There are a number of anxiety disorders: including generalized anxiety disorder, specific phobia, social anxiety disorder, separation anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, panic disorder, and selective mutism. The disorder differs by what results in the symptoms. People often have more than one anxiety disorder.\nAnxiety disorders are caused by a complex combination of genetic and environmental factors. To be diagnosed, symptoms typically need to be present for at least six months, be more than would be expected for the situation, and decrease a person's ability to function in their daily lives. Other problems that may result in similar symptoms include hyperthyroidism, heart disease, caffeine, alcohol, or cannabis use, and withdrawal from certain drugs, among others.\nWithout treatment, anxiety disorders tend to remain. Treatment may include lifestyle changes, counselling, and medications. Counselling is typically with a type of cognitive behavioural therapy. Medications, such as antidepressants or beta blockers, may improve symptoms.\nAbout 12% of people are affected by an anxiety disorder in a given year and between 12\u201330% are affected at some point in their life. They occur about twice as often in women than they do in men, and generally begin before the age of 25. The most common are specific phobia which affects nearly 12% and social anxiety disorder which affects 10% at some point in their life. They affect those between the ages of 15 and 35 the most and become less common after the age of 55. Rates appear to be higher in the United States and Europe.\nShort- and long-term anxiety.\nAnxiety can be either a short-term \"state\" or a long-term \"trait.\" Whereas trait anxiety represents worrying about future events, anxiety disorders are a group of mental disorders characterized by feelings of anxiety and fears.\nFour ways to be anxious.\nIn his book \"Anxious: The Modern Mind in the Age of Anxiety\" Joseph LeDoux examines four experiences of anxiety through a brain-based lens:\nCo-morbidity.\nAnxiety disorders often occur with other mental health disorders, particularly major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, eating disorders, or certain personality disorders. It also commonly occurs with personality traits such as neuroticism. This observed co-occurrence is partly due to genetic and environmental influences shared between these traits and anxiety.\nIt is common for those with obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder to experience anxiety. Anxiety is also commonly found in those who experience panic disorders, phobic anxiety disorders, severe stress, dissociative disorders, somatoform disorders, and some neurotic disorders.\nAnxiety has also been linked to the experience of intrusive thoughts. Studies have revealed that individuals who experience high levels of anxiety (also known as clinical anxiety) are highly vulnerable to the experience of intense intrusive thoughts or psychological disorders that are characterised by intrusive thoughts.\nRisk factors.\nAnxiety disorders are partly genetic, with twin studies suggesting 30-40% genetic influence on individual differences in anxiety. Environmental factors are also important. Twin studies show that individual-specific environments have a large influence on anxiety, whereas shared environmental influences (environments that affect twins in the same way) operate during childhood but decline through adolescence. Specific measured 'environments' that have been associated with anxiety include child abuse, family history of mental health disorders, and poverty. Anxiety is also associated with drug use, including alcohol, caffeine, and benzodiazepines (which are often prescribed to treat anxiety). Environmental factors and innovative technology, such as artificial intelligence systems, also induce situation-specific and technology-related anxiety. \nNeuroanatomy.\nNeural circuitry involving the amygdala (which regulates emotions like anxiety and fear, stimulating the HPA axis and sympathetic nervous system) and hippocampus (which is implicated in emotional memory along with the amygdala) is thought to underlie anxiety. People who have anxiety tend to show high activity in response to emotional stimuli in the amygdala. Some writers believe that excessive anxiety can lead to an overpotentiation of the limbic system (which includes the amygdala and nucleus accumbens), giving increased future anxiety, but this does not appear to have been proven.\nResearch upon adolescents who as infants had been highly apprehensive, vigilant, and fearful finds that their nucleus accumbens is more sensitive than that in other people when deciding to make an action that determined whether they received a reward. This suggests a link between circuits responsible for fear and also reward in anxious people. As researchers note, \"a sense of 'responsibility', or self-agency, in a context of uncertainty (probabilistic outcomes) drives the neural system underlying appetitive motivation (i.e., nucleus accumbens) more strongly in temperamentally inhibited than noninhibited adolescents\".\nThe gut-brain axis.\nThe microbes of the gut can connect with the brain to affect anxiety. There are various pathways along which this communication can take place. One is through the major neurotransmitters. The gut microbes such as \"Bifidobacterium\" and \"Bacillus\" produce the neurotransmitters GABA and dopamine, respectively. The neurotransmitters signal to the nervous system of the gastrointestinal tract, and those signals will be carried to the brain through the vagus nerve or the spinal system. This is demonstrated by the fact that altering the microbiome has shown anxiety- and depression-reducing effects in mice, but not in subjects without vagus nerves.\nAnother key pathway is the HPA axis, as mentioned above. The microbes can control the levels of cytokines in the body, and altering cytokine levels creates direct effects on areas of the brain such as the hypothalamus, the area that triggers HPA axis activity. The HPA axis regulates production of cortisol, a hormone that takes part in the body's stress response. When HPA activity spikes, cortisol levels increase, processing and reducing anxiety in stressful situations. These pathways, as well as the specific effects of individual taxa of microbes, are not yet completely clear, but the communication between the gut microbiome and the brain is undeniable, as is the ability of these pathways to alter anxiety levels.\nWith this communication comes the potential to treat anxiety. Prebiotics and probiotics have been shown to reduce anxiety. For example, experiments in which mice were given fructo- and galacto-oligosaccharide prebiotics and \"Lactobacillus\" probiotics have both demonstrated a capability to reduce anxiety. In humans, results are not as concrete, but promising.\nGenetics.\nGenetics and family history (e.g. parental anxiety) may put an individual at increased risk of an anxiety disorder, but generally external stimuli will trigger its onset or exacerbation. Estimates of genetic influence on anxiety, based on studies of twins, range from 25 to 40% depending on the specific type and age-group under study. For example, genetic differences account for about 43% of variance in panic disorder and 28% in generalized anxiety disorder. Longitudinal twin studies have shown the moderate stability of anxiety from childhood through to adulthood is mainly influenced by stability in genetic influence. When investigating how anxiety is passed on from parents to children, it is important to account for sharing of genes as well as environments, for example using the intergenerational children-of-twins design.\nMany studies in the past used a candidate gene approach to test whether single genes were associated with anxiety. These investigations were based on hypotheses about how certain known genes influence neurotransmitters (such as serotonin and norepinephrine) and hormones (such as cortisol) that are implicated in anxiety. None of these findings are well replicated, with the possible exception of TMEM132D, COMT and MAO-A. The epigenetic signature of \"BDNF\", a gene that codes for a protein called \"brain derived neurotrophic factor\" that is found in the brain, has also been associated with anxiety and specific patterns of neural activity. and a receptor gene for \"BDNF\" called \"NTRK2\" was associated with anxiety in a large genome-wide investigation. The reason that most candidate gene findings have not replicated is that anxiety is a complex trait that is influenced by many genomic variants, each of which has a small effect on its own. Increasingly, studies of anxiety are using a hypothesis-free approach to look for parts of the genome that are implicated in anxiety using big enough samples to find associations with variants that have small effects. The largest explorations of the common genetic architecture of anxiety have been facilitated by the UK Biobank, the ANGST consortium and the CRC Fear, Anxiety and Anxiety Disorders.\nMedical conditions.\nMany medical conditions can cause anxiety. This includes conditions that affect the ability to breathe, like COPD and asthma, and the difficulty in breathing that often occurs near death. Conditions that cause abdominal pain or chest pain can cause anxiety and may in some cases be a somatization of anxiety; the same is true for some sexual dysfunctions. Conditions that affect the face or the skin can cause social anxiety especially among adolescents, and developmental disabilities often lead to social anxiety for children as well. Life-threatening conditions like cancer also cause anxiety.\nFurthermore, certain organic diseases may present with anxiety or symptoms that mimic anxiety. These disorders include certain endocrine diseases (hypo- and hyperthyroidism, hyperprolactinemia), metabolic disorders (diabetes), deficiency states (low levels of vitamin D, B2, B12, folic acid), gastrointestinal diseases (celiac disease, non-celiac gluten sensitivity, inflammatory bowel disease), heart diseases, blood diseases (anemia), cerebral vascular accidents (transient ischemic attack, stroke), and brain degenerative diseases (Parkinson's disease, dementia, multiple sclerosis, Huntington's disease), among others.\nSubstance-induced.\nSeveral drugs can cause or worsen anxiety, whether in intoxication, withdrawal or as side effect. These include alcohol, tobacco, sedatives (including prescription benzodiazepines), opioids (including prescription pain killers and illicit drugs like heroin), stimulants (such as caffeine, cocaine and amphetamines), hallucinogens, and inhalants.\nWhile many often report self-medicating anxiety with these substances, improvements in anxiety from drugs are usually short-lived (with worsening of anxiety in the long term, sometimes with acute anxiety as soon as the drug effects wear off) and tend to be exaggerated. Acute exposure to toxic levels of benzene may cause euphoria, anxiety, and irritability lasting up to 2 weeks after the exposure.\nPsychological.\nPoor coping skills (e.g., rigidity/inflexible problem solving, denial, avoidance, impulsivity, extreme self-expectation, negative thoughts, affective instability, and inability to focus on problems) are associated with anxiety. Anxiety is also linked and perpetuated by the person's own pessimistic outcome expectancy and how they cope with feedback negativity. Temperament (e.g., neuroticism) and attitudes (e.g. pessimism) have been found to be risk factors for anxiety.\nCognitive distortions such as overgeneralizing, catastrophizing, mind reading, emotional reasoning, binocular trick, and mental filter can result in anxiety. For example, an overgeneralized belief that something bad \"always\" happens may lead someone to have excessive fears of even minimally risky situations and to avoid benign social situations due to anticipatory anxiety of embarrassment. In addition, those who have high anxiety can also create future stressful life events. Together, these findings suggest that anxious thoughts can lead to anticipatory anxiety as well as stressful events, which in turn cause more anxiety. Such unhealthy thoughts can be targets for successful treatment with cognitive therapy.\nPsychodynamic theory posits that anxiety is often the result of opposing unconscious wishes or fears that manifest via maladaptive defense mechanisms (such as suppression, repression, anticipation, regression, somatization, passive aggression, dissociation) that develop to adapt to problems with early objects (e.g., caregivers) and empathic failures in childhood. For example, persistent parental discouragement of anger may result in repression/suppression of angry feelings which manifests as gastrointestinal distress (somatization) when provoked by another while the anger remains unconscious and outside the individual's awareness. Such conflicts can be targets for successful treatment with psychodynamic therapy. While psychodynamic therapy tends to explore the underlying roots of anxiety, cognitive behavioral therapy has also been shown to be a successful treatment for anxiety by altering irrational thoughts and unwanted behaviors.\nEvolutionary psychology.\nAn evolutionary psychology explanation is that increased anxiety serves the purpose of increased vigilance regarding potential threats in the environment as well as increased tendency to take proactive actions regarding such possible threats. This may cause false positive reactions but an individual with anxiety may also avoid real threats. This may explain why anxious people are less likely to die due to accidents. There is ample empirical evidence that anxiety can have adaptive value. Within a school, timid fish are more likely than bold fish to survive a predator.\nWhen people are confronted with unpleasant and potentially harmful stimuli such as foul odors or tastes, PET-scans show increased blood flow in the amygdala. In these studies, the participants also reported moderate anxiety. This might indicate that anxiety is a protective mechanism designed to prevent the organism from engaging in potentially harmful behaviors.\nSocial.\nSocial risk factors for anxiety include a history of trauma (e.g., physical, sexual or emotional abuse or assault), bullying, early life experiences and parenting factors (e.g., rejection, lack of warmth, high hostility, harsh discipline, high parental negative affect, anxious childrearing, modelling of dysfunctional and drug-abusing behaviour, discouragement of emotions, poor socialization, poor attachment, and child abuse and neglect), cultural factors (e.g., stoic families/cultures, persecuted minorities including those with disabilities), and socioeconomics (e.g., uneducated, unemployed, impoverished although developed countries have higher rates of anxiety disorders than developing countries). \nA 2019 comprehensive systematic review of over 50 studies showed that food insecurity in the United States is strongly associated with depression, anxiety, and sleep disorders. Food-insecure individuals had an almost 3 fold risk increase of testing positive for anxiety when compared to food-secure individuals.\nGender socialization.\nContextual factors that are thought to contribute to anxiety include gender socialization and learning experiences. In particular, learning mastery (the degree to which people perceive their lives to be under their own control) and instrumentality, which includes such traits as self-confidence, self-efficacy, independence, and competitiveness fully mediate the relation between gender and anxiety. That is, though gender differences in anxiety exist, with higher levels of anxiety in women compared to men, gender socialization and learning mastery explain these gender differences.\nTreatment.\nThe first step in the management of a person with anxiety symptoms involves evaluating the possible presence of an underlying medical cause, the recognition of which is essential in order to decide the correct treatment. Anxiety symptoms may mask an organic disease, or appear associated with or as a result of a medical disorder.\nCognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is effective for anxiety disorders and is a first line treatment. CBT appears to be equally effective when carried out via the internet. While evidence for mental health apps is promising, it is preliminary.\nPsychopharmacological treatment can be used in parallel to CBT or can be used alone. As a general rule, most anxiety disorders respond well to first-line agents. Such drugs, also used as anti-depressants, are the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, that work by blocking the reuptake of specific neurotransmitters and resulting in the increase in availability of these neurotransmitters. Additionally, benzodiazepines are often prescribed to individuals with anxiety disorder. Benzodiazepines produce an anxiolytic response by modulating GABA and increasing its receptor binding. A third common treatment involves a category of drug known as serotonin agonists. This category of drug works by initiating a physiological response at 5-HT1A receptor by increasing the action of serotonin at this receptor. Other treatment options include pregabalin, tricyclic antidepressants, and moclobemide, among others.\nAnxiety is considered to be a serious psychiatric illness that has an unknown true pervasiveness due to affected individuals not asking for proper treatment or aid, and due to professionals missing the diagnosis.\nPrevention.\nThe above risk factors give natural avenues for prevention. A 2017 review found that psychological or educational interventions have a small yet statistically significant benefit for the prevention of anxiety in varied population types.\nPathophysiology.\nAnxiety disorder appears to be a genetically inherited neurochemical dysfunction that may involve autonomic imbalance; decreased GABA-ergic tone; allelic polymorphism of the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene; increased adenosine receptor function; increased cortisol.\nIn the central nervous system (CNS), the major mediators of the symptoms of anxiety disorders appear to be norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Other neurotransmitters and peptides, such as corticotropin-releasing factor, may be involved. Peripherally, the autonomic nervous system, especially the sympathetic nervous system, mediates many of the symptoms. Increased flow in the right parahippocampal region and reduced serotonin type 1A receptor binding in the anterior and posterior cingulate and raphe of patients are the diagnostic factors for prevalence of anxiety disorder.\nThe amygdala is central to the processing of fear and anxiety, and its function may be disrupted in anxiety disorders. Anxiety processing in the basolateral amygdala has been implicated with expansion of dendritic arborization of the amygdaloid neurons. SK2 potassium channels mediate inhibitory influence on action potentials and reduce arborization.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "923", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=923", "title": "A.A. Milne", "text": ""}
{"id": "924", "revid": "18916437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=924", "title": "A. A. Milne", "text": "English writer (1882\u20131956)\nAlan Alexander Milne (; 18 January 1882 \u2013 31 January 1956) was an English writer best known for his books about the teddy bear Winnie-the-Pooh, as well as for children's poetry. Milne was primarily a playwright before the huge success of Winnie-the-Pooh overshadowed all his previous work. Milne served in both World Wars, as a lieutenant in the Royal Warwickshire Regiment in the First World War and as a captain in the Home Guard in the Second World War.\nMilne was the father of bookseller Christopher Robin Milne, upon whom the character Christopher Robin is based. It was during a visit to London Zoo, where Christopher became enamoured with the tame and amiable bear Winnipeg, that Milne was inspired to write the story of Winnie-the-Pooh for his son. Milne bequeathed the original manuscripts of the Winnie-the-Pooh stories to the Wren Library at Trinity College, Cambridge, his alma mater.\nEarly life and military career.\nAlan Alexander Milne was born in Kilburn, London, to John Vine Milne, who was born in Jamaica, and Sarah Marie Milne (n\u00e9e Heginbotham), on 18 January 1882. He grew up at Henley House School, 6/7 Mortimer Road (now Crescent), Kilburn, a small independent school run by his father. One of his teachers was H. G. Wells, who taught there in 1889\u201390. Milne attended Westminster School and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he studied on a mathematics scholarship, graduating with a B.A. in Mathematics in 1903. He edited and wrote for \"Granta\", a student magazine. He collaborated with his brother Kenneth and their articles appeared over the initials AKM. Milne's work came to the attention of the leading British humour magazine \"Punch\", where Milne was to become a contributor and later an assistant editor. Considered a talented cricket fielder, Milne played for two amateur teams that were largely composed of British writers: the Allahakbarries and the Authors XI. His teammates included fellow writers J. M. Barrie, Arthur Conan Doyle and P. G. Wodehouse.\nMilne joined the British Army in World War I and served as an officer in the Royal Warwickshire Regiment. He was commissioned into the 4th Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment, on 1 February 1915 as a second lieutenant (on probation). His commission was confirmed on 20 December 1915. He served on the Somme as a signals officer from July-November 1916, but caught trench fever and was invalided back to England. Having recuperated, he worked as a signals instructor, before being recruited into Military Intelligence to write propaganda articles for MI7 (b) between 1917 and 1918. He was discharged on 14 February 1919, and settled in Mallord Street, Chelsea. He relinquished his commission on 19 February 1920, retaining the rank of lieutenant.\nAfter the war, he wrote a denunciation of war titled \"Peace with Honour\" (1934), which he retracted somewhat with 1940's \"War with Honour\". During World War II, Milne was one of the most prominent critics of fellow English writer (and Authors XI cricket teammate) P. G. Wodehouse, who was captured at his country home in France by the Nazis and imprisoned for a year. Wodehouse made radio broadcasts about his internment, which were broadcast from Berlin. Although the light-hearted broadcasts made fun of the Germans, Milne accused Wodehouse of committing an act of near treason by cooperating with his country's enemy. Wodehouse got some revenge on his former friend (e.g. in \"The Mating Season\") by creating fatuous parodies of the Christopher Robin poems in some of his later stories, and claiming that Milne \"was probably jealous of all other writers... But I loved his stuff.\"\nMilne married Dorothy \"Daphne\" de S\u00e9lincourt (1890\u20131971) in 1913 and their son Christopher Robin Milne was born in 1920. In 1925, Milne bought a country home, Cotchford Farm, in Hartfield, East Sussex.\nDuring World War II, Milne was a captain in the British Home Guard in Hartfield &amp; Forest Row, insisting on being plain \"Mr. Milne\" to the members of his platoon. He retired to the farm after a stroke and brain surgery in 1952 left him an invalid, and by August 1953, \"he seemed very old and disenchanted.\" Milne died in January 1956, aged 74.\nLiterary career.\n1903 to 1925.\nAfter graduating from Cambridge University in 1903, A. A. Milne contributed humorous verse and whimsical essays to \"Punch\", joining the staff in 1906 and becoming an assistant editor.\nDuring this period he published 18 plays and three novels, including the murder mystery \"The Red House Mystery\" (1922). His son was born in August 1920 and in 1924 Milne produced a collection of children's poems, \"When We Were Very Young\", which were illustrated by \"Punch\" staff cartoonist E. H. Shepard. A collection of short stories for children \"A Gallery of Children\", and other stories that became part of the Winnie-the-Pooh books, were first published in 1925.\nMilne was an early screenwriter for the nascent British film industry, writing four stories filmed in 1920 for the company Minerva Films (founded in 1920 by the actor Leslie Howard and his friend and story editor Adrian Brunel). These were \"The Bump\", starring Aubrey Smith; \"Twice Two\"; \"Five Pound Reward\"; and \"Bookworms\". Some of these films survive in the archives of the British Film Institute. Milne had met Howard when the actor starred in Milne's play \"Mr Pim Passes By\" in London.\nLooking back on this period (in 1926), Milne observed that when he told his agent that he was going to write a detective story, he was told that what the country wanted from a \"\"Punch\" humorist\" was a humorous story; when two years later he said he was writing nursery rhymes, his agent and publisher were convinced he should write another detective story; and after another two years, he was being told that writing a detective story would be in the worst of taste given the demand for children's books. He concluded that \"the only excuse which I have yet discovered for writing anything is that I want to write it; and I should be as proud to be delivered of a Telephone Directory \"con amore\" as I should be ashamed to create a Blank Verse Tragedy at the bidding of others.\"\n1926 to 1928.\nMilne is most famous for his two \"Pooh\" books about a boy named Christopher Robin after his son, Christopher Robin Milne (1920\u20131996), and various characters inspired by his son's stuffed animals, most notably the bear named Winnie-the-Pooh. Christopher Robin Milne's stuffed bear, originally named Edward, was renamed Winnie after a Canadian black bear named Winnie (after Winnipeg), which was used as a military mascot in World War I, and left to London Zoo during the war. \"The Pooh\" comes from a swan the young Milne named \"Pooh\". E. H. Shepard illustrated the original Pooh books, using his own son's teddy Growler (\"a magnificent bear\") as the model. The rest of Christopher Robin Milne's toys, Piglet, Eeyore, Kanga, Roo and Tigger, were incorporated into A. A. Milne's stories, and two more characters\u00a0\u2013 Rabbit and Owl\u00a0\u2013 were created by Milne's imagination. Christopher Robin Milne's own toys are now on display in New York where 750,000 people visit them every year.\nThe fictional Hundred Acre Wood of the Pooh stories derives from Five Hundred Acre Wood in Ashdown Forest in East Sussex, South East England, where the Pooh stories were set. Milne lived on the northern edge of the forest at Cotchford Farm, , and took his son walking there. E. H. Shepard drew on the landscapes of Ashdown Forest as inspiration for many of the illustrations he provided for the Pooh books. The adult Christopher Robin commented: \"Pooh's Forest and Ashdown Forest are identical.\" Popular tourist locations at Ashdown Forest include: \"Galleon's Lap\", \"The Enchanted Place\", the \"Heffalump Trap\" and \"Lone Pine\", \"Eeyore\u2019s Sad and Gloomy Place\", and the wooden \"Pooh Bridge\" where Pooh and Piglet invented Poohsticks.\nNot yet known as Pooh, he made his first appearance in a poem, \"Teddy Bear\", published in \"Punch\" magazine in February 1924 and republished that year in \"When We Were Very Young\". Pooh first appeared in the \"London Evening News\" on Christmas Eve, 1925, in a story called \"The Wrong Sort of Bees\". \"Winnie-the-Pooh\" was published in 1926, followed by \"The House at Pooh Corner\" in 1928. A second collection of nursery rhymes, \"Now We Are Six\", was published in 1927. All four books were illustrated by E. H. Shepard. Milne also published four plays in this period. He also \"gallantly stepped forward\" to contribute a quarter of the costs of dramatising P. G. Wodehouse's \"A Damsel in Distress\". \"The World of Pooh\" won the Lewis Carroll Shelf Award in 1958.\n1929 onward.\nThe success of his children's books was to become a source of considerable annoyance to Milne, whose self-avowed aim was to write whatever he pleased and who had, until then, found a ready audience for each change of direction: he had freed pre-war \"Punch\" from its ponderous facetiousness; he had made a considerable reputation as a playwright (like his idol J. M. Barrie) on both sides of the Atlantic; he had produced a witty piece of detective writing in \"The Red House Mystery\" (although this was severely criticised by Raymond Chandler for the implausibility of its plot in his essay \"The Simple Art of Murder\" in the eponymous collection that appeared in 1950). But once Milne had, in his own words, \"said goodbye to all that in 70,000 words\" (the approximate length of his four principal children's books), he had no intention of producing any reworkings lacking in originality, given that one of the sources of inspiration, his son, was growing older.\nAnother reason Milne stopped writing children's books, and especially about Winnie-the-Pooh, was that he felt \"amazement and disgust\" over the immense fame his son was exposed to, and said that \"I feel that the legal Christopher Robin has already had more publicity than I want for him. I do not want CR Milne to ever wish that his name were Charles Robert.\"\nIn his literary home, \"Punch\", where the \"When We Were Very Young\" verses had first appeared, Methuen continued to publish whatever Milne wrote, including the long poem \"The Norman Church\" and an assembly of articles entitled \"Year In, Year Out\" (which Milne likened to a benefit night for the author).\nIn 1930, Milne adapted Kenneth Grahame's novel \"The Wind in the Willows\" for the stage as \"Toad of Toad Hall\". The title was an implicit admission that such chapters as Chapter 7, \"The Piper at the Gates of Dawn,\" could not survive translation to the theatre. A special introduction written by Milne is included in some editions of Grahame's novel.\nMilne and his wife became estranged from their son, who came to resent what he saw as his father's exploitation of his childhood and came to hate the books that had thrust him into the public eye. Christopher's marriage to his first cousin, Lesley de S\u00e9lincourt, distanced him still further from his parents \u2013 Lesley's father and Christopher's mother had not spoken to each other for 30 years.\nDeath and legacy.\nCommemoration.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I suppose that every one of us hopes secretly for immortality; to leave, I mean, a name behind him which will live forever in this world, whatever he may be doing, himself, in the next.\"\n\u2014A. A. Milne.\nA. A. Milne died at his home in Hartfield, Sussex, on 31 January 1956, nearly two weeks after his 74th birthday. A memorial service took place on 10 February at All Hallows-by-the-Tower church in London.\nThe rights to A. A. Milne's Pooh books were left to four beneficiaries: his family, the Royal Literary Fund, Westminster School and the Garrick Club. After Milne's death in 1956, thirteen days after his 74th birthday, his widow sold her rights to the Pooh characters to Stephen Slesinger, whose widow sold the rights after Slesinger's death to the Walt Disney Company, which has made many Pooh cartoon movies, a Disney Channel television show, as well as Pooh-related merchandise. In 2001, the other beneficiaries sold their interest in the estate to the Disney Corporation for $350m. Previously Disney had been paying twice-yearly royalties to these beneficiaries. The estate of E. H. Shepard also received a sum in the deal. The UK copyright on the text of the original Winnie the Pooh books expires on 1 January 2027; at the beginning of the year after the 70th anniversary of the author's death (PMA-70), and has already expired in those countries with a PMA-50 rule. This applies to all of Milne's works except those first published posthumously. The illustrations in the Pooh books will remain under copyright until the same amount of time has passed, after the illustrator's death; in the UK, this will be on 1 January 2047. In the US, copyright will not expire until 95 years after publication for each of Milne's books first published before 1978, but this includes the illustrations.\nIn 2008, a collection of original illustrations featuring Winnie-the-Pooh and his animal friends sold for more than \u00a31.2 million at auction in Sotheby's, London. \"Forbes\" magazine ranked Winnie the Pooh the most valuable fictional character in 2002; Winnie the Pooh merchandising products alone had annual sales of more than $5.9 billion. In 2005, Winnie the Pooh generated $6 billion, a figure surpassed only by Mickey Mouse.\nA memorial plaque in Ashdown Forest, unveiled by Christopher Robin in 1979, commemorates the work of A. A. Milne and Shepard in creating the world of Pooh. The inscription states they \"captured the magic of Ashdown Forest, and gave it to the world\". Milne once wrote of Ashdown Forest: \"In that enchanted place on the top of the forest a little boy and his bear will always be playing.\"\nIn 2003, \"Winnie-the-Pooh\" was ranked number 7 on the BBC's The Big Read poll which determined the UK's \"best-loved novels\". In 2006, Winnie-the-Pooh received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, marking the 80th birthday of Milne's creation.\nMarking the 90th anniversary of Milne's creation of the character, and the 90th birthday of Queen Elizabeth II, \"Winnie-the-Pooh Meets the Queen\" (2016) sees Pooh meet the Queen at Buckingham Palace. The illustrated and audio adventure is narrated by the actor Jim Broadbent. Also in 2016, a new character, a Penguin, was unveiled in \"The Best Bear in All the World\", which was inspired by a long-lost photograph of Milne and his son Christopher with a toy penguin.\nAn exhibition entitled \"\" appeared at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London from 9 December 2017 to 8 April 2018.\nSeveral of Milne's children's poems were set to music by the composer Harold Fraser-Simson. His poems have been parodied many times, including with the books \"When We Were Rather Older\" and \"Now We Are Sixty\". The 1963 film \"The King's Breakfast\" was based on Milne's poem of the same name.\nMilne has been portrayed in television and film. Domhnall Gleeson plays him in \"Goodbye Christopher Robin\", a 2017 biographical drama film. In the 2018 fantasy film \"Christopher Robin\", an extension of the Disney Winnie the Pooh franchise, Tristan Sturrock plays Milne, and filming took place at Ashdown Forest.\nAn elementary school in Houston, Texas, operated by the Houston Independent School District (HISD), is named after Milne. The school, A. A. Milne Elementary School in Brays Oaks, opened in 1991.\nArchive.\nThe original manuscripts for \"Winnie-the-Pooh\" and \"The House at Pooh Corner\" are archived at Trinity College Library, Cambridge.\nThe bulk of A. A. Milne's papers are housed at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin. The collection, established at the center in 1964, consists of manuscript drafts and fragments for over 150 of Milne's works, as well as correspondence, legal documents, genealogical records, and some personal effects. The library division holds several books formerly belonging to Milne and his wife Dorothy. The center also has small collections of correspondence from Christopher Robin Milne and Milne's frequent illustrator E. H. Shepard.\nReligious views.\nMilne did not speak out much on the subject of religion, although he used religious terms to explain his decision, while remaining a pacifist, to join the British Home Guard. He wrote: \"In fighting Hitler we are truly fighting the Devil, the Anti-Christ ... Hitler was a crusader against God.\"\nHis best known comment on the subject was recalled on his death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Old Testament is responsible for more atheism, agnosticism, disbelief\u00a0\u2013 call it what you will\u00a0\u2013 than any book ever written; it has emptied more churches than all the counter-attractions of cinema, motor bicycle and golf course.\nHe wrote in the poem \"Explained\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Elizabeth Ann\nSaid to her Nan:\n\"Please will you tell me how God began?\nSomebody must have made Him. So\nWho could it be, 'cos I want to know?\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nHe also wrote in the poem \"Vespers\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "925", "revid": "1057393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=925", "title": "Asociaci\u00f3n Alumni", "text": "Asociaci\u00f3n Alumni, usually just Alumni, is an Argentine rugby union club located in Tortuguitas, Greater Buenos Aires. The senior squad currently competes at Top 12, the first division of the Uni\u00f3n de Rugby de Buenos Aires league system.\nThe club has ties with former football club Alumni because both were established by Buenos Aires English High School students.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe first club with the name \"Alumni\" played association football, having been found in 1898 by students of Buenos Aires English High School (BAEHS) along with director Alexander Watson Hutton. Originally under the name \"English High School A.C.\", the team would be later obliged by the Association to change its name, therefore \"Alumni\" was chosen, following a proposal by Carlos Bowers, a former student of the school.\nAlumni was the most successful team during the first years of Argentine football, winning 10 of 14 league championships contested. Alumni is still considered the first great football team in the country. Alumni was reorganised in 1908, \"in order to encourage people to practise all kind of sports, specially football\". This was the last try to develop itself as a sports club rather than just a football team, such as Lomas, Belgrano and Quilmes had successfully done in the past, but the efforts were not enough. Alumni played its last game in 1911 and was definitely dissolved on April 24, 1913.\nRebirth through rugby.\nIn 1951, two guards of the BAEHS, Daniel Ginhson (also a former player of Buenos Aires F.C.) and Guillermo Cubelli, supported by the school's alumni and fathers of the students, they decided to establish a club focused on rugby union exclusively. Former players still alive of Alumni football club and descendants of other players already dead gave their permission to use the name \"Alumni\".\nOn December 13, in a meeting presided by Carlos Bowers himself (who had proposed the name \"Alumni\" to the original football team 50 years before), the club was officially established under the name \"Asociaci\u00f3n Juvenil Alumni\", also adopting the same colors as its predecessor.\nThe team achieved good results and in 1960 the club presented a team that won the third division of the Buenos Aires league, reaching the second division. Since then, Alumni has played at the highest level of Argentine rugby and its rivalry with Belgrano Athletic Club is one of the fiercest local derbies in Buenos Aires. Alumni would later climb up to first division winning 5 titles: 4 consecutive between 1989 and 1992, and the other in 2001.\nIn 2002, Alumni won its first Nacional de Clubes title, defeating Jockey Club de Rosario 23\u201321 in the final.\nPlayers.\nCurrent roster.\nAs of January 2018:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "926", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=926", "title": "Alumna", "text": ""}
{"id": "928", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=928", "title": "Axiom", "text": "Statement that is taken to be true\nAn axiom, postulate, or assumption is a statement that is taken to be true, to serve as a premise or starting point for further reasoning and arguments. The word comes from the Ancient Greek word (), meaning 'that which is thought worthy or fit' or 'that which commends itself as evident'.\nThe precise definition varies across fields of study. In classic philosophy, an axiom is a statement that is so evident or well-established, that it is accepted without controversy or question. In modern logic, an axiom is a premise or starting point for reasoning.\nIn mathematics, an \"axiom\" may be a \"logical axiom\" or a \"non-logical axiom\". Logical axioms are taken to be true within the system of logic they define and are often shown in symbolic form (e.g., (\"A\" and \"B\") implies \"A\"), while non-logical axioms (e.g., \"a\" + \"b\" = \"b\" + \"a\") are substantive assertions about the elements of the domain of a specific mathematical theory, such as arithmetic.\nNon-logical axioms may also be called \"postulates\" or \"assumptions\". In most cases, a non-logical axiom is simply a formal logical expression used in deduction to build a mathematical theory, and might or might not be self-evident in nature (e.g., the parallel postulate in Euclidean geometry). To axiomatize a system of knowledge is to show that its claims can be derived from a small, well-understood set of sentences (the axioms), and there are typically many ways to axiomatize a given mathematical domain.\nAny axiom is a statement that serves as a starting point from which other statements are logically derived. Whether it is meaningful (and, if so, what it means) for an axiom to be \"true\" is a subject of debate in the philosophy of mathematics.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"axiom\" comes from the Greek word (\"ax\u00ed\u014dma\"), a verbal noun from the verb (\"axioein\"), meaning \"to deem worthy\", but also \"to require\", which in turn comes from (\"\u00e1xios\"), meaning \"being in balance\", and hence \"having (the same) value (as)\", \"worthy\", \"proper\". Among the ancient Greek philosophers an axiom was a claim which could be seen to be self-evidently true without any need for proof.\nThe root meaning of the word \"postulate\" is to \"demand\"; for instance, Euclid demands that one agree that some things can be done (e.g., any two points can be joined by a straight line).\nAncient geometers maintained some distinction between axioms and postulates. While commenting on Euclid's books, Proclus remarks that \"Geminus held that this [4th] Postulate should not be classed as a postulate but as an axiom, since it does not, like the first three Postulates, assert the possibility of some construction but expresses an essential property.\" Boethius translated 'postulate' as \"petitio\" and called the axioms \"notiones communes\" but in later manuscripts this usage was not always strictly kept.\nHistorical development.\nEarly Greeks.\nThe logico-deductive method whereby conclusions (new knowledge) follow from premises (old knowledge) through the application of sound arguments (syllogisms, rules of inference) was developed by the ancient Greeks, and has become the core principle of modern mathematics. Tautologies excluded, nothing can be deduced if nothing is assumed. Axioms and postulates are thus the basic assumptions underlying a given body of deductive knowledge. They are accepted without demonstration. All other assertions (theorems, in the case of mathematics) must be proven with the aid of these basic assumptions. However, the interpretation of mathematical knowledge has changed from ancient times to the modern, and consequently the terms \"axiom\" and \"postulate\" hold a slightly different meaning for the present day mathematician, than they did for Aristotle and Euclid.\nThe ancient Greeks considered geometry as just one of several sciences, and held the theorems of geometry on par with scientific facts. As such, they developed and used the logico-deductive method as a means of avoiding error, and for structuring and communicating knowledge. Aristotle's posterior analytics is a definitive exposition of the classical view.\nAn \"axiom\", in classical terminology, referred to a self-evident assumption common to many branches of science. A good example would be the assertion that \"When an equal amount is taken from equals, an equal amount results.\"\nAt the foundation of the various sciences lay certain additional hypotheses that were accepted without proof. Such a hypothesis was termed a \"postulate\". While the axioms were common to many sciences, the postulates of each particular science were different. Their validity had to be established by means of real-world experience. Aristotle warns that the content of a science cannot be successfully communicated if the learner is in doubt about the truth of the postulates.\nThe classical approach is well-illustrated by Euclid's Elements, where a list of postulates is given (common-sensical geometric facts drawn from our experience), followed by a list of \"common notions\" (very basic, self-evident assertions).\n;Postulates\n# It is possible to draw a straight line from any point to any other point.\n# It is possible to extend a line segment continuously in both directions.\n# It is possible to describe a circle with any center and any radius.\n# It is true that all right angles are equal to one another.\n# (\"Parallel postulate\") It is true that, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, intersect on that side on which are the angles less than the two right angles.\n;Common notions:\n# Things which are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another.\n# If equals are added to equals, the wholes are equal.\n# If equals are subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal.\n# Things which coincide with one another are equal to one another.\n# The whole is greater than the part.\nModern development.\nA lesson learned by mathematics in the last 150 years is that it is useful to strip the meaning away from the mathematical assertions (axioms, postulates, propositions, theorems) and definitions. One must concede the need for primitive notions, or undefined terms or concepts, in any study. Such abstraction or formalization makes mathematical knowledge more general, capable of multiple different meanings, and therefore useful in multiple contexts. Alessandro Padoa, Mario Pieri, and Giuseppe Peano were pioneers in this movement.\nStructuralist mathematics goes further, and develops theories and axioms (e.g. field theory, group theory, topology, vector spaces) without \"any\" particular application in mind. The distinction between an \"axiom\" and a \"postulate\" disappears. The postulates of Euclid are profitably motivated by saying that they lead to a great wealth of geometric facts. The truth of these complicated facts rests on the acceptance of the basic hypotheses. However, by throwing out Euclid's fifth postulate, one can get theories that have meaning in wider contexts (e.g., hyperbolic geometry). As such, one must simply be prepared to use labels such as \"line\" and \"parallel\" with greater flexibility. The development of hyperbolic geometry taught mathematicians that it is useful to regard postulates as purely formal statements, and not as facts based on experience.\nWhen mathematicians employ the field axioms, the intentions are even more abstract. The propositions of field theory do not concern any one particular application; the mathematician now works in complete abstraction. There are many examples of fields; field theory gives correct knowledge about them all.\nIt is not correct to say that the axioms of field theory are \"propositions that are regarded as true without proof.\" Rather, the field axioms are a set of constraints. If any given system of addition and multiplication satisfies these constraints, then one is in a position to instantly know a great deal of extra information about this system.\nModern mathematics formalizes its foundations to such an extent that mathematical theories can be regarded as mathematical objects, and mathematics itself can be regarded as a branch of logic. Frege, Russell, Poincar\u00e9, Hilbert, and G\u00f6del are some of the key figures in this development.\nAnother lesson learned in modern mathematics is to examine purported proofs carefully for hidden assumptions.\nIn the modern understanding, a set of axioms is any collection of formally stated assertions from which other formally stated assertions follow \u2013 by the application of certain well-defined rules. In this view, logic becomes just another formal system. A set of axioms should be consistent; it should be impossible to derive a contradiction from the axioms. A set of axioms should also be non-redundant; an assertion that can be deduced from other axioms need not be regarded as an axiom.\nIt was the early hope of modern logicians that various branches of mathematics, perhaps all of mathematics, could be derived from a consistent collection of basic axioms. An early success of the formalist program was Hilbert's formalization of Euclidean geometry, and the related demonstration of the consistency of those axioms.\nIn a wider context, there was an attempt to base all of mathematics on Cantor's set theory. Here, the emergence of Russell's paradox and similar antinomies of na\u00efve set theory raised the possibility that any such system could turn out to be inconsistent.\nThe formalist project suffered a decisive setback, when in 1931 G\u00f6del showed that it is possible, for any sufficiently large set of axioms (Peano's axioms, for example) to construct a statement whose truth is independent of that set of axioms. As a corollary, G\u00f6del proved that the consistency of a theory like Peano arithmetic is an unprovable assertion within the scope of that theory.\nIt is reasonable to believe in the consistency of Peano arithmetic because it is satisfied by the system of natural numbers, an infinite but intuitively accessible formal system. However, at present, there is no known way of demonstrating the consistency of the modern Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms for set theory. Furthermore, using techniques of forcing (Cohen) one can show that the continuum hypothesis (Cantor) is independent of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms. Thus, even this very general set of axioms cannot be regarded as the definitive foundation for mathematics.\nOther sciences.\nExperimental sciences - as opposed to mathematics and logic - also have general founding assertions from which a deductive reasoning can be built so as to express propositions that predict properties - either still general or much more specialized to a specific experimental context. For instance, Newton's laws in classical mechanics, Maxwell's equations in classical electromagnetism, Einstein's equation in general relativity, Mendel's laws of genetics, Darwin's Natural selection law, etc. These founding assertions are usually called \"principles\" or \"postulates\" so as to distinguish from mathematical \"axioms\".\nAs a matter of facts, the role of axioms in mathematics and postulates in experimental sciences is different. In mathematics one neither \"proves\" nor \"disproves\" an axiom. A set of mathematical axioms gives a set of rules that fix a conceptual realm, in which the theorems logically follow. In contrast, in experimental sciences, a set of postulates shall allow deducing results that match or do not match experimental results. If postulates do not allow deducing experimental predictions, they do not set a scientific conceptual framework and have to be completed or made more accurate. If the postulates allow deducing predictions of experimental results, the comparison with experiments allows falsifying (falsified) the theory that the postulates install. A theory is considered valid as long as it has not been falsified.\nNow, the transition between the mathematical axioms and scientific postulates is always slightly blurred, especially in physics. This is due to the heavy use of mathematical tools to support the physical theories. For instance, the introduction of Newton's laws rarely establishes as a prerequisite neither Euclidian geometry or differential calculus that they imply. It became more apparent when Albert Einstein first introduced special relativity where the invariant quantity is no more the Euclidian length formula_1 (defined as formula_2) &gt; but the Minkowski spacetime interval formula_3 (defined as formula_4), and then general relativity where flat Minkowskian geometry is replaced with pseudo-Riemannian geometry on curved manifolds.\nIn quantum physics, two sets of postulates have coexisted for some time, which provide a very nice example of falsification. The 'Copenhagen school' (Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Max Born) developed an operational approach with a complete mathematical formalism that involves the description of quantum system by vectors ('states') in a separable Hilbert space, and physical quantities as linear operators that act in this Hilbert space. This approach is fully falsifiable and has so far produced the most accurate predictions in physics. But it has the unsatisfactory aspect of not allowing answers to questions one would naturally ask. For this reason, another 'hidden variables' approach was developed for some time by Albert Einstein, Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, David Bohm. It was created so as to try to give deterministic explanation to phenomena such as entanglement. This approach assumed that the Copenhagen school description was not complete, and postulated that some yet unknown variable was to be added to the theory so as to allow answering some of the questions it does not answer (the founding elements of which were discussed as the EPR paradox in 1935). Taking this ideas seriously, John Bell derived in 1964 a prediction that would lead to different experimental results (Bell's inequalities) in the Copenhagen and the Hidden variable case. The experiment was conducted first by Alain Aspect in the early 1980's, and the result excluded the simple hidden variable approach (sophisticated hidden variables could still exist but their properties would still be more disturbing than the problems they try to solve). This does not mean that the conceptual framework of quantum physics can be considered as complete now, since some open questions still exist (the limit between the quantum and classical realms, what happens during a quantum measurement, what happens in a completely closed quantum system such as the universe itself, etc).\nMathematical logic.\nIn the field of mathematical logic, a clear distinction is made between two notions of axioms: \"logical\" and \"non-logical\" (somewhat similar to the ancient distinction between \"axioms\" and \"postulates\" respectively).\nLogical axioms.\nThese are certain formulas in a formal language that are universally valid, that is, formulas that are satisfied by every assignment of values. Usually one takes as logical axioms \"at least\" some minimal set of tautologies that is sufficient for proving all tautologies in the language; in the case of predicate logic more logical axioms than that are required, in order to prove logical truths that are not tautologies in the strict sense.\nExamples.\nPropositional logic.\nIn propositional logic it is common to take as logical axioms all formulae of the following forms, where formula_5, formula_6, and formula_7 can be any formulae of the language and where the included primitive connectives are only \"formula_8\" for negation of the immediately following proposition and \"formula_9\" for implication from antecedent to consequent propositions:\nEach of these patterns is an \"axiom schema\", a rule for generating an infinite number of axioms. For example, if formula_13, formula_14, and formula_15 are propositional variables, then formula_16 and formula_17 are both instances of axiom schema 1, and hence are axioms. It can be shown that with only these three axiom schemata and \"modus ponens\", one can prove all tautologies of the propositional calculus. It can also be shown that no pair of these schemata is sufficient for proving all tautologies with \"modus ponens\".\nOther axiom schemata involving the same or different sets of primitive connectives can be alternatively constructed.\nThese axiom schemata are also used in the predicate calculus, but additional logical axioms are needed to include a quantifier in the calculus.\nFirst-order logic.\nAxiom of Equality.&lt;br&gt;Let formula_18 be a first-order language. For each variable formula_19, the below formula is universally valid.\nformula_20\nThis means that, for any variable symbol formula_21 the formula formula_20 can be regarded as an axiom. Also, in this example, for this not to fall into vagueness and a never-ending series of \"primitive notions\", either a precise notion of what we mean by formula_20 (or, for that matter, \"to be equal\") has to be well established first, or a purely formal and syntactical usage of the symbol formula_24 has to be enforced, only regarding it as a string and only a string of symbols, and mathematical logic does indeed do that.\nAnother, more interesting example axiom scheme, is that which provides us with what is known as Universal Instantiation:\nAxiom scheme for Universal Instantiation.&lt;br&gt;Given a formula formula_5 in a first-order language formula_18, a variable formula_19 and a term formula_28 that is substitutable for formula_19 in formula_5, the below formula is universally valid.\nformula_31\nWhere the symbol formula_32 stands for the formula formula_5 with the term formula_28 substituted for formula_19. (See Substitution of variables.) In informal terms, this example allows us to state that, if we know that a certain property formula_36 holds for every formula_19 and that formula_28 stands for a particular object in our structure, then we should be able to claim formula_39. Again, \"we are claiming that the formula\" formula_40 \"is valid\", that is, we must be able to give a \"proof\" of this fact, or more properly speaking, a \"metaproof\". These examples are \"metatheorems\" of our theory of mathematical logic since we are dealing with the very concept of \"proof\" itself. Aside from this, we can also have Existential Generalization:\nAxiom scheme for Existential Generalization. Given a formula formula_5 in a first-order language formula_18, a variable formula_19 and a term formula_28 that is substitutable for formula_19 in formula_5, the below formula is universally valid.\nformula_47\nNon-logical axioms.\nNon-logical axioms are formulas that play the role of theory-specific assumptions. Reasoning about two different structures, for example, the natural numbers and the integers, may involve the same logical axioms; the non-logical axioms aim to capture what is special about a particular structure (or set of structures, such as groups). Thus non-logical axioms, unlike logical axioms, are not \"tautologies\". Another name for a non-logical axiom is \"postulate\".\nAlmost every modern mathematical theory starts from a given set of non-logical axioms, and it was thought that, in principle, every theory could be axiomatized in this way and formalized down to the bare language of logical formulas.\nNon-logical axioms are often simply referred to as \"axioms\" in mathematical discourse. This does not mean that it is claimed that they are true in some absolute sense. For example, in some groups, the group operation is commutative, and this can be asserted with the introduction of an additional axiom, but without this axiom, we can do quite well developing (the more general) group theory, and we can even take its negation as an axiom for the study of non-commutative groups.\nThus, an \"axiom\" is an elementary basis for a formal logic system that together with the rules of inference define a deductive system.\nExamples.\nThis section gives examples of mathematical theories that are developed entirely from a set of non-logical axioms (axioms, henceforth). A rigorous treatment of any of these topics begins with a specification of these axioms.\nBasic theories, such as arithmetic, real analysis and complex analysis are often introduced non-axiomatically, but implicitly or explicitly there is generally an assumption that the axioms being used are the axioms of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory with choice, abbreviated ZFC, or some very similar system of axiomatic set theory like Von Neumann\u2013Bernays\u2013G\u00f6del set theory, a conservative extension of ZFC. Sometimes slightly stronger theories such as Morse\u2013Kelley set theory or set theory with a strongly inaccessible cardinal allowing the use of a Grothendieck universe is used, but in fact, most mathematicians can actually prove all they need in systems weaker than ZFC, such as second-order arithmetic.\nThe study of topology in mathematics extends all over through point set topology, algebraic topology, differential topology, and all the related paraphernalia, such as homology theory, homotopy theory. The development of \"abstract algebra\" brought with itself group theory, rings, fields, and Galois theory.\nThis list could be expanded to include most fields of mathematics, including measure theory, ergodic theory, probability, representation theory, and differential geometry.\nArithmetic.\nThe Peano axioms are the most widely used \"axiomatization\" of first-order arithmetic. They are a set of axioms strong enough to prove many important facts about number theory and they allowed G\u00f6del to establish his famous second incompleteness theorem.\nWe have a language formula_48 where formula_49 is a constant symbol and formula_50 is a unary function and the following axioms:\nThe standard structure is formula_56 where formula_57 is the set of natural numbers, formula_50 is the successor function and formula_49 is naturally interpreted as the number 0.\nEuclidean geometry.\nProbably the oldest, and most famous, list of axioms are the 4 + 1 Euclid's postulates of plane geometry. The axioms are referred to as \"4 + 1\" because for nearly two millennia the fifth (parallel) postulate (\"through a point outside a line there is exactly one parallel\") was suspected of being derivable from the first four. Ultimately, the fifth postulate was found to be independent of the first four. One can assume that exactly one parallel through a point outside a line exists, or that infinitely many exist. This choice gives us two alternative forms of geometry in which the interior angles of a triangle add up to exactly 180 degrees or less, respectively, and are known as Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries. If one also removes the second postulate (\"a line can be extended indefinitely\") then elliptic geometry arises, where there is no parallel through a point outside a line, and in which the interior angles of a triangle add up to more than 180 degrees.\nReal analysis.\nThe objectives of the study are within the domain of real numbers. The real numbers are uniquely picked out (up to isomorphism) by the properties of a \"Dedekind complete ordered field\", meaning that any nonempty set of real numbers with an upper bound has a least upper bound. However, expressing these properties as axioms requires the use of second-order logic. The L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorems tell us that if we restrict ourselves to first-order logic, any axiom system for the reals admits other models, including both models that are smaller than the reals and models that are larger. Some of the latter are studied in non-standard analysis.\nRole in mathematical logic.\nDeductive systems and completeness.\nA deductive system consists of a set formula_60 of logical axioms, a set formula_61 of non-logical axioms, and a set formula_62 of \"rules of inference\". A desirable property of a deductive system is that it be complete. A system is said to be complete if, for all formulas formula_5,\nformula_64\nthat is, for any statement that is a \"logical consequence\" of formula_61 there actually exists a \"deduction\" of the statement from formula_61. This is sometimes expressed as \"everything that is true is provable\", but it must be understood that \"true\" here means \"made true by the set of axioms\", and not, for example, \"true in the intended interpretation\". G\u00f6del's completeness theorem establishes the completeness of a certain commonly used type of deductive system.\nNote that \"completeness\" has a different meaning here than it does in the context of G\u00f6del's first incompleteness theorem, which states that no \"recursive\", \"consistent\" set of non-logical axioms formula_61 of the Theory of Arithmetic is \"complete\", in the sense that there will always exist an arithmetic statement formula_5 such that neither formula_5 nor formula_70 can be proved from the given set of axioms.\nThere is thus, on the one hand, the notion of \"completeness of a deductive system\" and on the other hand that of \"completeness of a set of non-logical axioms\". The completeness theorem and the incompleteness theorem, despite their names, do not contradict one another.\nFurther discussion.\nEarly mathematicians regarded axiomatic geometry as a model of physical space, and obviously, there could only be one such model. The idea that alternative mathematical systems might exist was very troubling to mathematicians of the 19th century and the developers of systems such as Boolean algebra made elaborate efforts to derive them from traditional arithmetic. Galois showed just before his untimely death that these efforts were largely wasted. Ultimately, the abstract parallels between algebraic systems were seen to be more important than the details, and modern algebra was born. In the modern view, axioms may be any set of formulas, as long as they are not known to be inconsistent.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "929", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=929", "title": "Alpha", "text": "First letter of the Greek alphabet\nAlpha (uppercase \u0391, lowercase \u03b1; , \"\", or ) is the first letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals, it has a value of one. Alpha is derived from the Phoenician letter aleph , which is the West Semitic word for \"ox\". Letters that arose from alpha include the Latin letter A and the Cyrillic letter \u0410.\nUses.\nGreek.\nIn Ancient Greek, alpha was pronounced and could be either phonemically long ([a\u02d0]) or short ([a]). Where there is ambiguity, long and short alpha are sometimes written with a macron and breve today: .\nIn Modern Greek, vowel length has been lost, and all instances of alpha simply represent the open front unrounded vowel ].\nIn the polytonic orthography of Greek, alpha, like other vowel letters, can occur with several diacritic marks: any of three accent symbols (), and either of two breathing marks (), as well as combinations of these. It can also combine with the iota subscript ().\nGreek grammar.\nIn the Attic\u2013Ionic dialect of Ancient Greek, long alpha [a\u02d0] fronted to (eta). In Ionic, the shift took place in all positions. In Attic, the shift did not take place after epsilon, iota, and rho (; ). In Doric and Aeolic, long alpha is preserved in all positions.\nPrivative a is the Ancient Greek prefix or , added to words to negate them. It originates from the Proto-Indo-European *\"n\u0325-\" (syllabic nasal) and is cognate with English \"un-\".\nCopulative a is the Greek prefix or . It comes from Proto-Indo-European *\"sm\u0325\".\nMathematics and science.\nThe letter alpha represents various concepts in physics and chemistry, including alpha radiation, angular acceleration, alpha particles, alpha carbon and strength of electromagnetic interaction (as fine-structure constant). Alpha also stands for thermal expansion coefficient of a compound in physical chemistry. It is also commonly used in mathematics in algebraic solutions representing quantities such as angles. Furthermore, in mathematics, the letter alpha is used to denote the area underneath a normal curve in statistics to denote significance level when proving null and alternative hypotheses. In ethology, it is used to name the dominant individual in a group of animals. In aerodynamics, the letter is used as a symbol for the angle of attack of an aircraft and the word \"alpha\" is used as a synonym for this property. In mathematical logic, \u03b1 is sometimes used as a placeholder for ordinal numbers.\nThe proportionality operator \"\u221d\" (in Unicode: U+221D) is sometimes mistaken for alpha.\nThe uppercase letter alpha is not generally used as a symbol because it tends to be rendered identically to the uppercase Latin A.\nInternational Phonetic Alphabet.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, the letter \u0251, which looks similar to the lower-case alpha, represents the open back unrounded vowel.\nHistory and symbolism.\nOrigin.\nThe Phoenician alphabet was adopted for Greek in the early 8th century BC, perhaps in Euboea. \nThe majority of the letters of the Phoenician alphabet were adopted into Greek with much the same sounds as they had had in Phoenician, but \"\u02bc\u0101leph\", the Phoenician letter representing the glottal stop [\u0294],\nwas adopted as representing the vowel [a]; similarly, \"h\u0113\" [h] and \"\u02bdayin\" [\u0295] are Phoenician consonants that became Greek vowels, epsilon [e] and omicron [o], respectively.\nPlutarch.\nPlutarch, in \"Moralia\", presents a discussion on why the letter alpha stands first in the alphabet. Ammonius asks Plutarch what he, being a Boeotian, has to say for Cadmus, the Phoenician who reputedly settled in Thebes and introduced the alphabet to Greece, placing \"alpha\" first because it is the Phoenician name for ox\u2014which, unlike Hesiod, the Phoenicians considered not the second or third, but the first of all necessities. \"Nothing at all,\" Plutarch replied. He then added that he would rather be assisted by Lamprias, his own grandfather, than by Dionysus' grandfather, i.e. Cadmus. For Lamprias had said that the first articulate sound made is \"alpha\", because it is very plain and simple\u2014the air coming off the mouth does not require any motion of the tongue\u2014and therefore this is the first sound that children make.\nAccording to Plutarch's natural order of attribution of the vowels to the planets, alpha was connected with the Moon.\nAlpha and Omega.\nAs the first letter of the alphabet, Alpha as a Greek numeral came to represent the number 1.\nTherefore, Alpha, both as a symbol and term, is used to refer to the \"first\", or \"primary\", or \"principal\" (most significant) occurrence or status of a thing.\nThe New Testament has God declaring himself to be the \"Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.\" (, KJV, and see also ).\nConsequently, the term \"alpha\" has also come to be used to denote \"primary\" position in social hierarchy, examples being \"alpha males\" or pack leaders.\nComputer encodings.\nFor accented Greek characters, see Greek diacritics: Computer encoding.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "930", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=930", "title": "Alvin Toffler", "text": "American writer, futurist and businessman\nAlvin Eugene Toffler (October 4, 1928 \u2013 June 27, 2016) was an American writer, futurist, and businessman known for his works discussing modern technologies, including the digital revolution and the communication revolution, with emphasis on their effects on cultures worldwide. He is regarded as one of the world's outstanding futurists.\nToffler was an associate editor of \"Fortune\" magazine. In his early works he focused on technology and its impact, which he termed \"information overload.\" In 1970, his first major book about the future, \"Future Shock\", became a worldwide best-seller and has sold over 6 million copies.\nHe and his wife Heidi Toffler, who collaborated with him for most of his writings, moved on to examining the reaction to changes in society with another best-selling book, \"The Third Wave\", in 1980. In it, he foresaw such technological advances as cloning, personal computers, the Internet, cable television and mobile communication. His later focus, via their other best-seller, \"Powershift\", (1990), was on the increasing power of 21st-century military hardware and the proliferation of new technologies.\nHe founded Toffler Associates, a management consulting company, and was a visiting scholar at the Russell Sage Foundation, visiting professor at Cornell University, faculty member of the New School for Social Research, a White House correspondent, and a business consultant. Toffler's ideas and writings were a significant influence on the thinking of business and government leaders worldwide, including China's Zhao Ziyang, and AOL founder Steve Case.\nEarly life.\nAlvin Toffler was born on October 4, 1928, in New York City, and raised in Brooklyn. He was the son of Rose (Albaum) and Sam Toffler, a furrier, both Polish Jews who had migrated to America. He had one younger sister. He was inspired to become a writer at the age of 7 by his aunt and uncle, who lived with the Tofflers. \"They were Depression-era literary intellectuals,\" Toffler said, \"and they always talked about exciting ideas.\"\nToffler graduated from New York University in 1950 as an English major, though by his own account he was more focused on political activism than grades. He met his future wife, Adelaide Elizabeth Farrell (nicknamed \"Heidi\"), when she was starting a graduate course in linguistics. Being radical students, they decided against further graduate work and moved to Cleveland, Ohio, where they married on April 29, 1950.\nCareer.\nSeeking experiences to write about, Alvin and Heidi Toffler spent the next five years as blue collar workers on assembly lines while studying industrial mass production in their daily work. He compared his own desire for experience to other writers, such as Jack London, who in his quest for subjects to write about sailed the seas, and John Steinbeck, who went to pick grapes with migrant workers. In their first factory jobs, Heidi became a union shop steward in the aluminum foundry where she worked. Alvin became a millwright and welder. In the evenings Alvin would write poetry and fiction, but discovered he was proficient at neither.\nHis hands-on practical labor experience helped Alvin Toffler land a position at a union-backed newspaper, a transfer to its Washington bureau in 1957, then three years as a White House correspondent, covering Congress and the White House for a Pennsylvania daily newspaper.\nThey returned to New York City in 1959 when \"Fortune\" magazine invited Alvin to become its labor columnist, later having him write about business and management. After leaving \"Fortune\" magazine in 1962, Toffler began a freelance career, writing long form articles for scholarly journals and magazines. His 1964 \"Playboy interviews\" with Russian novelist Vladimir Nabokov and Ayn Rand were considered among the magazine's best. His interview with Rand was the first time the magazine had given such a platform to a female intellectual, which as one commentator said, \"the real bird of paradise Toffler captured for Playboy in 1964 was Ayn Rand.\"\nToffler was hired by IBM to conduct research and write a paper on the social and organizational impact of computers, leading to his contact with the earliest computer \"gurus\" and artificial intelligence researchers and proponents. Xerox invited him to write about its research laboratory and AT&amp;T consulted him for strategic advice. This AT&amp;T work led to a study of telecommunications, which advised the company's top management to break up the company more than a decade before the government forced AT&amp;T to break up.\nIn the mid-1960s, the Tofflers began five years of research on what would become \"Future Shock\", published in 1970. It has sold over 6 million copies worldwide, according to the \"New York Times,\" or over 15\u00a0million copies according to the Tofflers' Web site. Toffler coined the term \"future shock\" to refer to what happens to a society when change happens too fast, which results in social confusion and normal decision-making processes breaking down. The book has never been out of print and has been translated into dozens of languages.\nHe continued the theme in \"The Third Wave\" in 1980. While he describes the first and second waves as the agricultural and industrial revolutions, the \"third wave,\" a phrase he coined, represents the current information, computer-based revolution. He forecast the spread of the Internet and email, interactive media, cable television, cloning, and other digital advancements. He claimed that one of the side effects of the digital age has been \"information overload,\" another term he coined. In 1990, he wrote \"Powershift\", also with the help of his wife, Heidi.\nIn 1996, with American business consultant Tom Johnson, they co-founded Toffler Associates, an advisory firm designed to implement many of the ideas the Tofflers had written on. The firm worked with businesses, NGOs, and governments in the United States, South Korea, Mexico, Brazil, Singapore, Australia, and other countries. During this period in his career, Toffler lectured worldwide, taught at several schools and met world leaders, such as Mikhail Gorbachev, along with key executives and military officials.\nIdeas and opinions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"A new civilization is emerging in our lives, and blind men everywhere are trying to suppress it. This new civilization brings with it new family styles; changed ways of working, loving, and living; a new economy; new political conflicts; and beyond all this an altered consciousness as well...The dawn of this new civilization is the single most explosive fact of our lifetimes.\"\nAlvin Toffler, from \"The Third Wave\" (1980)\nToffler stated many of his ideas during an interview with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation in 1998. \"Society needs people who take care of the elderly and who know how to be compassionate and honest,\" he said. \"Society needs people who work in hospitals. Society needs all kinds of skills that are not just cognitive; they're emotional, they're affectional. You can't run the society on data and computers alone.\"\nHis opinions about the future of education, many of which were in \"Future Shock\", have often been quoted. An often misattributed quote, however, is that of psychologist Herbert Gerjuoy: \"Tomorrow's illiterate will not be the man who can't read; he will be the man who has not learned how to learn.\"\nEarly in his career, after traveling to other countries, he became aware of the new and myriad inputs that visitors received from these other cultures. He explained during an interview that some visitors would become \"truly disoriented and upset\" by the strange environment, which he described as a reaction to culture shock. From that issue, he foresaw another problem for the future, when a culturally \"new environment comes to you\u00a0... and comes to you rapidly.\" That kind of sudden cultural change within one's own country, which he felt many would not understand, would lead to a similar reaction, one of \"future shock\", which he wrote about in his book by that title. Toffler writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn \"The Third Wave\", Toffler describes three types of societies, based on the concept of \"waves\"\u2014each wave pushes the older societies and cultures aside. He describes the \"First Wave\" as the society after agrarian revolution and replaced the first hunter-gatherer cultures. The \"Second Wave,\" he labels society during the Industrial Revolution (ca. late 17th century through the mid-20th century). That period saw the increase of urban industrial populations which had undermined the traditional nuclear family, and initiated a factory-like education system, and the growth of the corporation. Toffler said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \"Third Wave\" was a term he coined to describe the post-industrial society, which began in the late 1950s. His description of this period dovetails with other futurist writers, who also wrote about the Information Age, Space Age, Electronic Era, Global Village, terms which highlighted a scientific-technological revolution. The Tofflers claimed to have predicted a number of geopolitical events, such as the collapse of the Soviet Union, the fall of the Berlin Wall and the future economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region.\nInfluences and popular culture.\nToffler often visited with dignitaries in Asia, including China's Zhao Ziyang, Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew and South Korea's Kim Dae Jung, all of whom were influenced by his views as Asia's emerging markets increased in global significance during the 1980s and 1990s. Although they had originally censored some of his books and ideas, China's government cited him along with Franklin Roosevelt and Bill Gates as being among the Westerners who had most influenced their country. \"The Third Wave\" along with a video documentary based on it became best-sellers in China and were widely distributed to schools. The video's success inspired the marketing of videos on related themes in the late 1990s by Infowars, whose name is derived from the term coined by Toffler in the book. Toffler's influence on Asian thinkers was summed up in an article in \"Daedalus\", published by the American Academy of Arts &amp; Sciences:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nU.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich publicly lauded his ideas about the future, and urged members of Congress to read Toffler's book, \"Creating a New Civilization\" (1995). Others, such as AOL founder Steve Case, cited Toffler's \"The Third Wave\" as a formative influence on his thinking, which inspired him to write \"The Third Wave: An Entrepreneur's Vision of the Future\" in 2016. Case said that Toffler was a \"real pioneer in helping people, companies and even countries lean into the future.\"\nIn 1980, Ted Turner founded CNN, which he said was inspired by Toffler's forecasting the end of the dominance of the three main television networks. Turner's company, Turner Broadcasting, published Toffler's \"Creating a New Civilization\" in 1995. Shortly after the book was released, the former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev hosted the Global Governance Conference in San Francisco with the theme, \"Toward a New Civilization\", which was attended by dozens of world figures, including the Tofflers, George H. W. Bush, Margaret Thatcher, Carl Sagan, Abba Eban and Turner with his then-wife, actress Jane Fonda.\nMexican billionaire Carlos Slim was influenced by his works, and became a friend of the writer. Global marketer J.D. Power also said he was inspired by Toffler's works.\nSince the 1960s, people had tried to make sense out of the effect of new technologies and social change, a problem which made Toffler's writings widely influential beyond the confines of scientific, economic, and public policy. His works and ideas have been subject to various criticisms, usually with the same argumentation used against futurology: that foreseeing the future is nigh impossible.\nTechno music pioneer Juan Atkins cites Toffler's phrase \"techno rebels\" in \"The Third Wave\" as inspiring him to use the word \"techno\" to describe the musical style he helped to create\nMusician Curtis Mayfield released a disco song called \"Future Shock,\" later covered in an electro version by Herbie Hancock. Science fiction author John Brunner wrote \"The Shockwave Rider,\" from the concept of \"future shock.\"\nThe nightclub Toffler, in Rotterdam, is named after him.\nIn the song \"Victoria\" by The Exponents, the protagonist's daily routine and cultural interests are described: \"She's up in time to watch the soap operas, reads Cosmopolitan and Alvin Toffler\".\nCritical assessment.\nAccenture, the management consultancy firm, identified Toffler in 2002 as being among the most influential voices in business leaders, along with Bill Gates and Peter Drucker. Toffler has also been described in a \"Financial Times\" interview as the \"world's most famous futurologist\". In 2006, the \"People's Daily\" classed him among the 50 foreigners who shaped modern China, which one U.S. newspaper notes made him a \"guru of sorts to world statesmen.\" Chinese Premier and General Secretary Zhao Ziyang was greatly influenced by Toffler. He convened conferences to discuss \"The Third Wave\" in the early 1980s, and in 1985 the book was the No. 2 best seller in China.\nAuthor Mark Satin characterizes Toffler as an important early influence on radical centrist political thought.\nNewt Gingrich became close to the Tofflers in the 1970s and said \"The Third Wave\" had immensely influenced his own thinking and was \"one of the great seminal works of our time.\"\nSelected awards.\nToffler has received several prestigious prizes and awards, including the McKinsey Foundation Book Award for Contributions to Management Literature, Officier de L'Ordre des Arts et Lettres, and appointments, including Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the International Institute for Strategic Studies.\nIn 2006, Alvin and Heidi Toffler were recipients of Brown University's Independent Award.\nPersonal life.\nToffler was married to Heidi Toffler (born Adelaide Elizabeth Farrell), also a writer and futurist. They lived in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles, California, and previously lived in Redding, Connecticut.\nThe couple's only child, Karen Toffler (1954\u20132000), died at age 46 after more than a decade suffering from Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome.\nAlvin Toffler died in his sleep on June 27, 2016, at his home in Los Angeles. No cause of death was given. He is buried at Westwood Memorial Park.\nBibliography.\nAlvin Toffler co-wrote his books with his wife Heidi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "931", "revid": "9719271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=931", "title": "The Amazing Spider-Man", "text": "Comic book series\nThe Amazing Spider-Man is an ongoing American superhero comic book series featuring the Marvel Comics superhero Spider-Man as its title character and main protagonist. Being in the mainstream continuity of the franchise, it was the character's first title, launching seven months after his introduction in the final issue of \"Amazing Fantasy\". The series began publication with a March 1963 cover date and has been published nearly continuously to date over six volumes with only one significant interruption. Issues of the title currently feature an issue number within its sixth volume, as well as a \"legacy\" number reflecting the issue's overall number across all \"Amazing Spider-Man\" volumes. The title reached 900 issues in 2022.\nThe series began as a bimonthly periodical before being increased to monthly after four issues. It was the character's sole monthly headlining title until \"Peter Parker, the Spectacular Spider-Man\" launched in 1976. After 441 issues, \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" was restarted in 1999 as issue No. 1 of Volume 2. It ran for 58 issues before reverting to the title's overall issue number with #500 in 2003. The series ran essentially continuously over the first two volumes from 1963 until its landmark 700th issue at the end of 2012 when it was replaced by \"The Superior Spider-Man\" as part of the Marvel NOW! relaunch of Marvel's comic lines. The title was occasionally published biweekly during the first two volumes, and was published three times a month from 2008 to 2010. After the relaunch of \"Action Comics\" and \"Detective Comics\" in 2011, \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" briefly became the highest-numbered active American comic book.\n\"The Amazing Spider-Man\" returned with volume 3 in April 2014 following the conclusion of \"The Superior Spider-Man\" story arc after 18 issues. In late 2015, the series was relaunched with a fourth volume following the 2015 \"Secret Wars\" event. After 32 issues, the volume was once again relaunched as part of \"Marvel Legacy\", returning to the overall \"legacy\" numbering with issue No. 789 in late 2017. Less than a year later, the series was relaunched again with a fifth volume as part of Marvel's \"Fresh Start\". For the first time, although the issue numbers were again restarted from #1, the issues also bore the overall \"legacy\" issue number. A sixth volume commenced in April 2022 to celebrate Spider-Man's 60th anniversary. Since the third volume, the title has had various release schedules, including monthly and bi-weekly, among others.\nPublication history.\nWriter-editor Stan Lee and artist and co-plotter Steve Ditko created the character of Spider-Man, and the pair produced 38 issues from March 1963 to July 1966. Ditko left after the 38th issue, while Lee remained as writer until issue 100. Since then, many writers and artists have taken over the monthly comic through the years, chronicling the adventures of Marvel's most identifiable hero.\n\"The Amazing Spider-Man\" has been the character's flagship series for his first fifty years in publication, and was the only monthly series to star Spider-Man until \"Peter Parker, The Spectacular Spider-Man\", in 1976, although 1972 saw the debut of \"Marvel Team-Up\", with the vast majority of issues featuring Spider-Man along with a rotating cast of other Marvel characters. Most of the major characters and villains of the Spider-Man saga have been introduced in \"Amazing\", and with few exceptions, it is where most key events in the character's history have occurred. The title was published continuously until No. 441 (Nov. 1998) when Marvel Comics relaunched it as vol. 2 No. 1 (Jan. 1999), but on Spider-Man's 40th anniversary, this new title reverted to using the numbering of the original series, beginning again with issue No. 500 (Dec. 2003) and lasting until the final issue, No. 700 (Feb. 2013).\n1960s.\nDue to strong sales on the character's first appearance in \"Amazing Fantasy\" No. 15, Spider-Man was given his own ongoing series in March 1963. The initial years of the series, under Lee and Ditko, chronicled Spider-Man's nascent career as a masked super-human vigilante with his civilian life as hard-luck yet perpetually good-humored and well-meaning teenager Peter Parker. Peter balanced his career as Spider-Man with his job as a freelance photographer for \"The Daily Bugle\" under the bombastic editor-publisher J. Jonah Jameson to support himself and his frail Aunt May. At the same time, Peter dealt with public hostility towards Spider-Man and the antagonism of his classmates Flash Thompson and Liz Allan at Midtown High School, while embarking on a tentative, ill-fated romance with Jameson's secretary, Betty Brant.\nBy focusing on Parker's everyday problems, Lee and Ditko created a groundbreakingly flawed, self-doubting superhero, and the first major teenaged superhero to be a protagonist and not a sidekick. Ditko's quirky art provided a stark contrast to the more cleanly dynamic stylings of Marvel's most prominent artist, Jack Kirby, and combined with the humor and pathos of Lee's writing to lay the foundation for what became an enduring mythos.\nMost of Spider-Man's key villains and supporting characters were introduced during this time. Issue No. 1 (Mar. 1963) featured the first appearances of J. Jonah Jameson and his astronaut son John Jameson, and the supervillain the Chameleon. It included the hero's first encounter with the superhero team the Fantastic Four. Issue No. 2 (May 1963) featured the first appearance of the Vulture and the Tinkerer as well as the beginning of Parker's freelance photography career at the newspaper \"The Daily Bugle\".\nThe Lee-Ditko era continued to usher in a significant number of villains and supporting characters, including Doctor Octopus in No. 3 (July 1963); the Sandman and Betty Brant in No. 4 (Sept. 1963); the Lizard in No. 6 (Nov. 1963); Living Brain in No. 8 (Jan. 1964); Electro in No. 9 (Mar. 1964); Mysterio in No. 13 (June 1964); the Green Goblin in No. 14 (July 1964); Kraven The Hunter in No. 15 (Aug. 1964); reporter Ned Leeds in No. 18 (Nov. 1964); and the Scorpion in No. 20 (Jan. 1965). The Molten Man was introduced in No. 28 (Sept. 1965) which also featured Parker's graduation from high school. Peter began attending Empire State University in No. 31 (Dec. 1965), which featured the first appearances of friends and classmates Gwen Stacy and Harry Osborn. Harry's father, Norman Osborn first appeared in No. 23 (April 1965) as a member of Jameson's country club but was not named nor revealed as Harry's father until No. 37 (June 1966).\nOne of the most celebrated issues of the Lee-Ditko run is No. 33 (Feb. 1966), the third part of the story arc \"If This Be My Destiny...!\", which features the dramatic scene of Spider-Man, through force of will and thoughts of family, escaping from being pinned by heavy machinery. Comics historian Les Daniels noted that \"Steve Ditko squeezes every ounce of anguish out of Spider-Man's predicament, complete with visions of the uncle he failed and the aunt he has sworn to save.\" Peter David observed that \"After his origin, this two-page sequence from \"Amazing Spider-Man\" No. 33 is perhaps the best-loved sequence from the Stan Lee/Steve Ditko era.\" Steve Saffel stated the \"full page Ditko image from \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" No. 33 is one of the most powerful ever to appear in the series and influenced writers and artists for many years to come.\" and Matthew K. Manning wrote that \"Ditko's illustrations for the first few pages of this Lee story included what would become one of the most iconic scenes in Spider-Man's history.\" The story was chosen as No. 15 in the 100 Greatest Marvels of All Time poll of Marvel's readers in 2001. Editor Robert Greenberger wrote in his introduction to the story that \"These first five pages are a modern-day equivalent to Shakespeare as Parker's soliloquy sets the stage for his next action. And with dramatic pacing and storytelling, Ditko delivers one of the great sequences in all comics.\"\nAlthough credited only as artist for most of his run, Ditko would eventually plot the stories as well as draw them, leaving Lee to script the dialogue. A rift between Ditko and Lee developed, and the two men were not on speaking terms long before Ditko completed his last issue, \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" No. 38 (July 1966). The exact reasons for the Ditko-Lee split have never been fully explained. Spider-Man successor artist John Romita Sr., in a 2010 deposition, recalled that Lee and Ditko \"ended up not being able to work together because they disagreed on almost everything, cultural, social, historically, everything, they disagreed on characters...\"\nIn successor penciler Romita Sr.'s first issue, No. 39 (Aug. 1966), nemesis the Green Goblin discovers Spider-Man's secret identity and reveals his own to the captive hero. Romita's Spider-Man \u2013 more polished and heroic-looking than Ditko's \u2013 became the model for two decades. The Lee-Romita era saw the introduction of such characters as \"Daily Bugle\" managing editor Robbie Robertson in No. 52 (Sept. 1967) and NYPD Captain George Stacy, father of Parker's girlfriend Gwen Stacy, in No. 56 (Jan. 1968). The most important supporting character to be introduced during the Romita era was Mary Jane Watson, who made her first full appearance in No. 42 (Nov. 1966), although she first appeared in No. 25 (June 1965) with her face obscured and had been mentioned since No. 15 (Aug. 1964). Peter David wrote in 2010 that Romita \"made the definitive statement of his arrival by pulling Mary Jane out from behind the oversized potted plant [that blocked the reader's view of her face in issue no. 25] and placing her on panel in what would instantly become an iconic moment.\" Romita has stated that in designing Mary Jane, he \"used Ann-Margret from the movie \"Bye Bye Birdie\" as a guide, using her coloring, the shape of her face, her red hair and her form-fitting short skirts.\"\nLee and Romita toned down the prevalent sense of antagonism in Parker's world by improving Parker's relationship with the supporting characters and having stories focused as much on the social and college lives of the characters as they did on Spider-Man's adventures. The stories became more topical, addressing issues such as civil rights, racism, prisoners' rights, the Vietnam War, and political elections.\nIssue No. 50 (June 1967) introduced the highly enduring criminal mastermind the Kingpin, who would become a major force as well in the superhero series \"Daredevil\". Other notable first appearances in the Lee-Romita era include the Rhino in No. 41 (Oct. 1966), the Shocker in No. 46 (Mar. 1967), the Prowler in No. 78 (Nov. 1969), and the Kingpin's son, Richard Fisk, in No. 83 (Apr. 1970).\n1970s.\nSeveral spin-off series debuted in the 1970s: \"Marvel Team-Up\" in 1972, and \"The Spectacular Spider-Man\" in 1976. A short-lived series titled \"Giant-Size Spider-Man\" began in July 1974 and ran six issues through 1975. \"Spidey Super Stories\", a series aimed at children ages 6\u201310, ran for 57 issues from October 1974 through 1982.\nThe flagship title's second decade took a grim turn with a story in #89-90 (Oct.-Nov. 1970) featuring the death of Captain George Stacy. This was the first Spider-Man story to be penciled by Gil Kane, who would alternate drawing duties with Romita for the next year-and-a-half and would draw several landmark issues.\nOne such story took place in the controversial issues #96\u201398 (May\u2013July 1971). Writer-editor Lee defied the Comics Code Authority with this story, in which Parker's friend Harry Osborn, was hospitalized after over-dosing on pills. Lee wrote this story upon a request from the U. S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare for a story about the dangers of drugs. Citing its dictum against depicting drug use, even in an anti-drug context, the CCA refused to put its seal on these issues. With the approval of Marvel publisher Martin Goodman, Lee had the comics published without the seal. The comics sold well and Marvel won praise for its socially conscious efforts. The CCA subsequently loosened the Code to permit negative depictions of drugs, among other new freedoms.\n\"The Six Arms Saga\" of #100\u2013102 (Sept.\u2013Nov. 1971) introduced Morbius, the Living Vampire. The second installment was the first \"Amazing Spider-Man\" story not written by co-creator Lee, with Roy Thomas taking over writing the book for several months before Lee returned to write #105\u2013110 (Feb.-July 1972). Lee, who was going on to become Marvel Comics' publisher, with Thomas becoming editor-in-chief, then turned writing duties over to 19-year-old Gerry Conway, who scripted the series through 1975. Romita penciled Conway's first half-dozen issues, which introduced the gangster Hammerhead in No. 113 (Oct. 1972). Kane then succeeded Romita as penciler, although Romita would continue inking Kane for a time.\nIssue 121 (June 1973 by Conway-Kane-Romita) featured the death of Gwen Stacy at the hands of the Green Goblin in \"The Night Gwen Stacy Died.\" Her demise and the Goblin's apparent death one issue later formed a story arc widely considered as the most defining in the history of Spider-Man. The aftermath of the story deepened both the characterization of Mary Jane Watson and her relationship with Parker.\nIn 1973 Gil Kane was succeeded by Ross Andru, whose run lasted from issue #125 (Oct. 1973) to #185 (Oct. 1978). Issue#129 (Feb. 1974) introduced the Punisher, who would become one of Marvel Comics' most popular characters. The Conway-Andru era featured the first appearances of the Man-Wolf in #124\u2013125 (Sept.-Oct. 1973); the near-marriage of Doctor Octopus and Aunt May in #131 (Apr. 1974); Harry Osborn stepping into his father's role as the Green Goblin in #135\u2013137 (Aug.-Oct.1974); and the original \"Clone Saga\", containing the introduction of Spider-Man's clone, in #147\u2013149 (Aug.-Oct. 1975).\nArchie Goodwin and Gil Kane produced the title's 150th issue (Nov. 1975) before Len Wein became writer with issue No. 151. During Wein's tenure, Harry Osborn and Liz Allen dated and became engaged; J. Jonah Jameson was introduced to his eventual second wife, Marla Madison; and Aunt May suffered a heart attack. Wein's last story on \"Amazing\" was a five-issue arc in #176\u2013180 (Jan.-May 1978) featuring a third Green Goblin (Harry Osborn's psychiatrist, Bart Hamilton).\nMarv Wolfman, Marvel's editor-in-chief from 1975 to 1976, succeeded Wein as writer and, in his first issue, #182 (July 1978), had Parker propose marriage to Watson, who refused in the following issue. Keith Pollard succeeded Andru as artist shortly afterward and, with Wolfman, introduced the likable rogue the Black Cat (Felicia Hardy) in #194 (July 1979). As a love interest for Spider-Man, the Black Cat would go on to be an important supporting character for the better part of the next decade and remain a friend and occasional lover into the 2010s.\n1980s.\n\"The Amazing Spider-Man\" #200 (Jan. 1980) featured the return and death of the burglar who killed Spider-Man's Uncle Ben. Writer Marv Wolfman and penciler Keith Pollard both left the title by mid-year, succeeded by Dennis O'Neil, a writer known for groundbreaking 1970s work at rival DC Comics, and penciler John Romita Jr. O'Neil wrote two issues of \"The Amazing Spider-Man Annual\" which were both drawn by Frank Miller. The 1980 \"Annual\" featured a team-up with Doctor Strange while the 1981 \"Annual\" showcased a meeting with the Punisher. Roger Stern, who had written nearly 20 issues of sister title \"The Spectacular Spider-Man\", took over \"Amazing\" with #224 (Jan. 1982). During his two years on the title, Stern augmented the backgrounds of long-established Spider-Man villains and, with Romita Jr., created the mysterious supervillain the Hobgoblin in #238\u2013239 (Mar.\u2013Apr. 1983). Fans engaged with the mystery of the Hobgoblin's secret identity, which continued throughout #244\u2013245 and 249\u2013251 (Sept.-Oct. 1983 and Feb.-April 1984). One lasting change was the reintroduction of Mary Jane Watson as a more serious, mature woman who becomes Peter's confidante after she reveals that she knows his secret identity. Stern also wrote \"The Kid Who Collects Spider-Man\" in \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" #248 (Jan. 1984), a story which ranks among his most popular.\nBy mid-1984, Tom DeFalco and Ron Frenz took over scripting and penciling. DeFalco helped establish Parker and Watson's mature relationship, laying the foundation for the characters' wedding in 1987. Notably, in #257 (Oct. 1984), Watson tells Parker that she knows he is Spider-Man, and in #259 (Dec. 1984), she reveals to Parker the extent of her troubled childhood. Other notable issues of the DeFalco-Frenz era include #252 (May 1984), the first appearance of Spider-Man's black costume, which the hero would wear almost exclusively for the next four years' worth of comics; the debut of criminal mastermind the Rose in #253 (June 1984); the revelation in #258 (Nov. 1984) that the black costume is a living being, a symbiote; and the introduction of the female mercenary Silver Sable in #265 (June 1985).\nDeFalco and Frenz were both removed from \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" in 1986 by editor Jim Owsley under acrimonious circumstances. A succession of artists including Alan Kupperberg, John Romita Jr., and Alex Saviuk penciled the series from 1987 to 1988, and Owsley wrote the book for the first half of 1987, scripting the five-part \"Gang War\" story (#284\u2013288) that DeFalco plotted. Former \"Spectacular Spider-Man\" writer Peter David scripted #289 (June 1987), which revealed Ned Leeds as being the Hobgoblin although this was retconned in 1996 by Roger Stern into Leeds not being the original Hobgoblin after all.\nDavid Michelinie took over as writer in the next issue, for a story arc in #290\u2013292 (July\u2013Sept. 1987) that led to the marriage of Peter Parker and Mary Jane Watson in \"Amazing Spider-Man Annual\" No. 21. The \"Kraven's Last Hunt\" storyline by writer J.M. DeMatteis and artists Mike Zeck and Bob McLeod crossed over into \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" #293 and 294. Issue No.298 (Mar. 1988) was the first Spider-Man comic to be drawn by future industry star Todd McFarlane, the first regular artist on \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" since Frenz's departure. McFarlane revolutionized Spider-Man's look. His depiction \u2013 \"Ditko-esque\" poses, large eyes; wiry, contorted limbs; and messy, knotted, convoluted webbing \u2013 influenced the way virtually all subsequent artists would draw the character. McFarlane's other significant contribution to the Spider-Man canon was the design for what would become one of Spider-Man's most wildly popular antagonists, the supervillain Venom. Issue No. 299 (Apr. 1988) featured Venom's first appearance (a last-page cameo) before his first full appearance in #300 (May 1988). The latter issue featured Spider-Man reverting to his original red-and-blue costume.\nOther notable issues of the Michelinie-McFarlane era include #312 (Feb. 1989), featuring the Green Goblin vs. the Hobgoblin; and #315\u2013317 (May\u2013July 1989), with the return of Venom. In July 2012, Todd McFarlane's original cover art for \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" No. 328 sold for a bid of $657,250, making it the most expensive American comic book art ever sold at auction.\n1990s.\nWith a civilian life as a married man, the Spider-Man of the 1990s was different from the superhero of the previous three decades. McFarlane left the title in 1990 to write and draw a new series titled simply \"\". His successor, Erik Larsen, penciled the book from early 1990 to mid-1991. After issue No. 350, Larsen was succeeded by Mark Bagley, who had won the 1986 Marvel Tryout Contest and was assigned a number of low-profile penciling jobs followed by a run on \"New Warriors\" in 1990. Bagley penciled the flagship Spider-Man title from 1991 to 1996. During that time, Bagley's rendition of Spider-Man was used extensively for licensed material and merchandise.\nIssues #361\u2013363 (April\u2013June 1992) introduced Carnage, a second symbiote nemesis for Spider-Man. The series' 30th-anniversary issue, No. 365 (Aug. 1992), was a double-sized, hologram-cover issue with the cliffhanger ending of Peter Parker's parents, long thought dead, reappearing alive. It would be close to two years before they were revealed to be impostors, who are killed in No. 388 (April 1994), scripter Michelinie's last issue. His 1987\u20131994 stint gave him the second-longest run as writer on the title, behind Stan Lee.\nIssue No. 375 was released with a gold foil cover. There was an error affecting some issues and which are missing the majority of the foil.\nWith No. 389, writer J. M. DeMatteis, whose Spider-Man credits included the 1987 \"Kraven's Last Hunt\" story arc and a 1991\u20131993 run on \"The Spectacular Spider-Man\", took over the title. From October 1994 to June 1996, \"Amazing\" stopped running stories exclusive to it, and ran installments of multi-part stories that crossed over into all the Spider-Man books. One of the few self-contained stories during this period was in No. 400 (April 1995), which featured the death of Aunt May \u2013 later revealed to have been faked (although the death still stands in the MC2 continuity). The \"Clone Saga\" culminated with the revelation that the Spider-Man who had appeared in the previous 20 years of comics was a clone of the real Spider-Man. This plot twist was massively unpopular with many readers, and was later reversed in the \"Revelations\" story arc that crossed over the Spider-Man books in late 1996.\nThe Clone Saga tied into a publishing gap after No. 406 (Oct. 1995), when the title was temporarily replaced by \"The Amazing Scarlet Spider\" #1\u20132 (Nov.-Dec. 1995), featuring Ben Reilly. The series picked up again with No. 407 (Jan. 1996), with Tom DeFalco returning as writer. Bagley completed his 5\u00bd-year run by September 1996. A succession of artists, including Ron Garney, Steve Skroce, Joe Bennett, Rafael Kayanan and John Byrne penciled the book until the final issue, No. 441 (Nov. 1998), after which Marvel rebooted the title with vol. 2, No. 1 (Jan. 1999).\nRelaunch and the 2000s.\nMarvel began \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" relaunching the 'Amazing' comic book series with (vol. 2) #1 (Jan. 1999). Howard Mackie wrote the first 29 issues. The relaunch included the Sandman being regressed to his criminal ways and the \"death\" of Mary Jane, which was ultimately reversed. Other elements included the introduction of a new Spider-Woman (who was spun off into her own short-lived series) and references to John Byrne's miniseries \"\", which was launched at the same time as the reboot. Byrne also penciled issues #1\u201318 (from 1999 to 2000) and wrote #13\u201314, John Romita Jr. took his place soon after in October 2000. Mackie's run ended with \"The Amazing Spider-Man Annual 2001\", which saw the return of Mary Jane, who then left Parker upon reuniting with him.\nWith issue No. 30 (June 2001), J. Michael Straczynski took over as writer and oversaw additional storylines \u2013 most notably his lengthy \"Spider-Totem\" arc, which raised the issue of whether Spider-Man's powers were magic-based, rather than as the result of a radioactive spider's bite. Additionally, Straczynski resurrected the plot point of Aunt May discovering her nephew was Spider-Man, and returned Mary Jane, with the couple reuniting in \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" (vol. 2) #50. Straczynski gave Spider-Man a new profession, having Parker teach at his former high school.\nIssue No. 30 began a dual numbering system, with the original series numbering (#471) returned and placed alongside the volume two number on the cover. Other longtime, rebooted Marvel Comics titles, including \"Fantastic Four\", likewise were given the dual numbering around this time. After (vol. 2) #58 (Nov. 2003), the title reverted completely to its original numbering for issue No. 500 (Dec. 2003). Mike Deodato, Jr. penciled the series from mid-2004 until 2006.\nThat year Peter Parker revealed his Spider-Man identity on live television in the company-crossover storyline \"Civil War\", in which the superhero community is split over whether to conform to the federal government's new Superhuman Registration Act. This knowledge was erased from the world with the event of the four-part, crossover story arc, \"\", written partially by J. Michael Straczynski and illustrated by Joe Quesada, running through \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" #544\u2013545 (Nov.-Dec. 2007), \"Friendly Neighborhood Spider-Man\" No. 24 (Nov. 2007) and \"The Sensational Spider-Man\" No. 41 (Dec. 2007), the final issues of those two titles. Here, the demon Mephisto makes a Faustian bargain with Parker and Mary Jane, offering to save Parker's dying Aunt May if the couple will allow their marriage to have never existed, rewriting that portion of their pasts. This story arc marked the end of Straczynski's work on the title.\nFollowing this, Marvel made \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" the company's sole Spider-Man title, increasing its frequency of publication to three issues monthly, and inaugurating the series with a sequence of \"back to basics\" story arcs under the banner of \"\". Parker now exists in a changed world where he and Mary Jane had never married, and Parker has no memory of being married to her, with domino effect differences in their immediate world. The most notable of these revisions to Spider-Man continuity are the return of Harry Osborn, whose death in \"The Spectacular Spider-Man\" No. 200 (May 1993) is erased; and the reestablishment of Spider-Man's secret identity, with no one except Mary Jane able to recall that Parker is Spider-Man (although he soon reveals his secret identity to the New Avengers and the Fantastic Four). Under the banner of \"Brand New Day\", Marvel tried to only use newly created villains instead of relying on older ones. Characters like Mister Negative and Overdrive both in Free Comic Book Day 2007 Spider-Man (July 2007), Menace in No. 549 (March 2008), Ana and Sasha Kravinoff in No. 565 (September 2008) and No. 567 (October 2008) respectively, and several more were introduced. The alternating regular writers were initially Dan Slott, Bob Gale, Marc Guggenheim, and Zeb Wells, joined by a rotation of artists that included Steve McNiven, Salvador Larroca, Phil Jimenez, Barry Kitson, Chris Bachalo, Mike McKone, Marcos Mart\u00edn, and John Romita Jr. Joe Kelly, Mark Waid, Fred Van Lente and Roger Stern later joined the writing team and Paolo Rivera, Lee Weeks and Marco Checchetto the artist roster. Waid's work on the series included a meeting between Spider-Man and Stephen Colbert in \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" No. 573 (Dec. 2008).\nIssue No. 583 (March 2009) included a back-up story in which Spider-Man meets President Barack Obama.\n2010s and temporary end of publication.\nMark Waid scripted the opening of \"The Gauntlet\" storyline in issue No. 612 (Jan. 2010). The \"Gauntlet\" story was concluded by \"Grim Hunt\" (No. 634-637) which saw the resurrection of long-dead Spider-Man villain, Kraven the Hunter. The series became a twice-monthly title with Dan Slott as sole writer at issue No. 648 (Jan. 2011), launching the \"\" storyline. Eight additional pages were added per issue. \"Big Time\" saw major changes in Spider-Man/Peter Parker's life, Peter would start working at Horizon Labs and begin a relationship with Carlie Cooper (his first serious relationship since his marriage to Mary Jane), Mac Gargan returned as Scorpion after spending the past few years as Venom, Phil Urich would take up the mantle of Hobgoblin, and the death of J. Jonah Jameson's wife, Marla Jameson. Issues 654 and 654.1 saw the birth of Agent Venom, Flash Thompson bonded with the Venom symbiote, which would lead to Venom getting his own series \"Venom (volume 2)\". Starting in No. 659 and going to No. 665, the series built-up to the \"Spider-Island\" event which officially started in No. 666 and ended in No. 673. \"Ends of the Earth\" was the next event that ran from No. 682 through No. 687. This publishing format lasted until issue No. 700, which concluded the \"Dying Wish\" storyline, in which Parker and Doctor Octopus swapped bodies, and the latter taking on the mantle of Spider-Man when Parker apparently died in Doctor Octopus' body. \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" ended with this issue, with the story continuing in the new series \"The Superior Spider-Man\". Despite \"The Superior Spider-Man\" being considered a different series to \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", the first 33 issue run goes towards the legacy numbering of \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" acting as issues 701\u2013733. In December 2013, the series returned for five issues, numbered 700.1 through 700.5, with the first two written by David Morrell and drawn by Klaus Janson.\n2014 relaunch.\nIn January 2014, Marvel confirmed that \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" would be relaunched on April 30, 2014, starting from issue No. 1, with Peter Parker as Spider-Man once again.\nThe first issue of this new version of \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" was, according to Diamond Comics Distributors, the \"best-selling comic book... in over a decade.\"\nIssues #1\u20136 were a story arc called \"Lucky to be Alive\", taking place immediately after \"Goblin Nation\", with issues No. 4 and No. 5 being a crossover with the \"Original Sin\" storyline. Issue No. 4 introduced Silk, a new heroine who was bitten by the same spider as Peter Parker. Issues #7\u20138 featured a team-up between Ms. Marvel and Spider-Man, and had backup stories that tied into \"Edge of Spider-Verse\". The next major plot arc, titled \"Spider-Verse\", began in Issue No. 9 and ended in No. 15, features every Spider-Man from across the dimensions being hunted by Morlun, and a team-up to stop him, with Peter Parker of Earth-616 in command of the Spider-Men's Alliance. \"The Amazing Spider-Man Annual\" No. 1 of the relaunched series was released in December 2014, featuring stories unrelated to \"Spider-Verse\".\nThe Amazing Spider-Man: Renew Your Vows.\nIn 2015, Marvel started the universe wide Secret Wars event where the core and several other Marvel universes were combined into one big planet called Battleworld. Battleworld was divided into sections with most of them being self-contained universes. Marvel announced that several of these self-contained universes would get their own tie in series and one of them was \"\", an alternate universe where Peter Parker and Mary Jane are still married and give birth to their child Annie May Parker, written by Dan Slott. Despite the series being considered separate from the main \"Amazing Spider-Man\" series, the original 5 issue run is counted towards its legacy numbering acting as No. 752-756.\n2015 relaunch.\nFollowing the 2015 \"Secret Wars\" event, a number of Spider-Man-related titles were either relaunched or created as part of the \"All-New, All-Different Marvel\" event. Among them, \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" was relaunched as well and primarily focused on Peter Parker continuing to run Parker Industries and becoming a successful businessman operating worldwide. It also tied with \"Civil War II\" (involving an Inhuman named Ulysses Cain who can predict possible futures), \"Dead No More\" (where Ben Reilly [the original Scarlet Spider] revealed to be revived and as one of the antagonists instead), and \"Secret Empire\" (during Hydra's reign led by a Hydra influenced Captain America/Steve Rogers, and the dismissal of Parker Industries by Peter Parker to stop Otto Octavius). Starting in September 2017, Marvel started the Marvel Legacy event which renumbered several Marvel series to their original numbering. The \"Amazing Spider-Man\" was put back to its original numbering for #789. Issues #789 through 791 focused on the aftermath of Peter destroying Parker Industries and his fall from grace. Issues #792 and 793 were part of the \"Venom Inc.\" story. \"Threat Level: Red\" was the story for the next three issues which saw Norman Osborn obtain and bond with the Carnage symbiote. \"Go Down Swinging\" saw the results of the combination of Osborn's goblin serum and Carnage symbiote creating the Red Goblin. Issue No. 801 was Dan Slott's goodbye issue.\n2018 relaunch.\nIn March 2018, it was announced that writer Nick Spencer would be writing the main semi-monthly \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" series beginning with a new No. 1, replacing long-time writer Dan Slott, as part of the Fresh Start relaunch that July.\nThe first five-issue story arc was titled 'Back to Basics.' During the \"Back to Basics\" story, Kindred, a mysterious villain with some relation to Peter's past, was introduced, and Peter resumed his romantic relationship with Mary Jane once more. The first major story under Spencer was \"Hunted\" which ran through issues 16 through 23, the story also included four \".HU\" issues for issues 16, 18, 19, and 20. The end of the story saw the death of long-running Spider-Man villain Kraven the Hunter, being replaced by his clone son, The Last Son of Kraven.\n2020s.\nIssue 45 kicked off the \"Sins Rising\" story which saw the resurrected Sin-Eater carry out the plans of Kindred to cleanse the world of sin, particularly that of Norman Osborn. The story concluded with issue 49, issue 850 in legacy numbering, seeing Spider-Man and Green Goblin team up to defeat Sin-Eater. \"Last Remains\" started in issue 50 and concluded in issue 55, the story saw Kindred's plans come to fruition as he tormented Spider-Man. The story has also saw five \".LR\" for issues 50, 51, 52, 53, and 54 which focused on The Order of the Web, a new faction of Spider-People consisting of Julia Carpenter (Madame Web), Miles Morales (Spider-Man), Gwen Stacy (Ghost-Spider), Cindy Moon (Silk), Jessica Drew (Spider-Woman), and Anya Corazon (Spider-Girl) . The story also revealed that Kindred is Harry Osborn. \"Last Remains\" also received two fallout issues called \"Last Remains Post-Mortem\".\nNick Spencer concluded his run with the \"Sinister War\" story which wrapped up in No. 74 (legacy numbering 875). The story saw several retcons to the Spider-Man mythos including that Kindred was Gabriel and Sarah Stacy all along, the fact that the Stacy twins were actually genetically engineered beings using Norman Osborn and Gwen Stacy's DNA, that the Harry Osborn that returned in \"Brand New Day\" was actually a clone, and that Norman had made a deal with Mephisto where he sold Harry's soul to the demon. The story ended with the deaths of the Harry clone, Gabriel, and Sarah and the real Harry's soul being freed from Mephisto's grasp.\nAfter Spencer left the book, Marvel announced the \"Beyond\" era of Spider-Man would start in #75. The book would be moving back to the format it had during \"Brand New Day\" where it would have a rotating cast of writers including Kelly Thompson, Saladin Ahmed, Cody Ziglar, Patrick Gleason, and Zeb Wells. The book would also be released three times a month. \"Beyond\" would focus on Ben Reilly taking up the mantle of Spider-Man once again but backed by the Beyond corporation. Peter also falls ill and cannot be Spider-Man so he gives Ben his blessing to carry on as the main Spider-Man. However, following the conclusion of the storyline in #93, Peter has resumed active duties as Spider-Man, while Ben suffers a mental breakdown and becomes the villain Chasm.\n2022 relaunch.\nIn January 2022, it was announced that writer Zeb Wells and John Romita Jr. would be working on a relaunched \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", bringing the number of volumes for the title to its sixth, with the series beginning in April 2022 as a semi-monthly publication. The relaunch encompasses both a legacy numbering of #900 as well as the 60th anniversary for the character. The relaunch took place months after a mysterious event that left Peter on bad terms with the superhero community and ended his relationship with Mary Jane. He ends up taking a job at Oscorp and begins working closely with Norman Osborn and starts dating Black Cat. The volume's first crossover event was entitled \"Dark Web\", with Chasm having teamed up with Madelyne Pryor to bring limbo to Earth. It's later revealed that Benjamin Rabin, the emissary of the Mayan god of mischief Wayeb', sent Peter and Mary Jane to an alternate dimension to conduct a ceremony that would allow Wayeb to control the Earth. Peter was sent back to his Earth, while due to the alternative passage of time, Mary Jane and Paul, Rabin's son in that dimension, spent four years in the realm together and adopted two children. When Peter eventually rescued them, Mary Jane refused to part with her new family. Rabin then planned to sacrifice Mary Jane to resurrect Wayeb, but is ultimately stopped by Ms. Marvel sacrificing herself.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "933", "revid": "1156538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=933", "title": "AM", "text": "AM or Am may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "935", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=935", "title": "Automated Alice/XII", "text": ""}
{"id": "936", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=936", "title": "Automated Alice/XI", "text": ""}
{"id": "937", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=937", "title": "Automated Alice/X", "text": ""}
{"id": "938", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=938", "title": "Automated Alice/IX", "text": ""}
{"id": "939", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=939", "title": "Automated Alice/VIII", "text": ""}
{"id": "940", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=940", "title": "Automated Alice/VI", "text": ""}
{"id": "941", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=941", "title": "Automated Alice/VII", "text": ""}
{"id": "942", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=942", "title": "Automated Alice/V", "text": ""}
{"id": "943", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=943", "title": "Automated Alice/IV", "text": ""}
{"id": "944", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=944", "title": "Automated Alice/II", "text": ""}
{"id": "945", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=945", "title": "Automated Alice/I", "text": ""}
{"id": "946", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=946", "title": "Automated Alice/III", "text": ""}
{"id": "951", "revid": "46078868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=951", "title": "Antigua and Barbuda", "text": "Country in the Lesser Antilles of the West Indies\nAntigua and Barbuda (, ) is a sovereign island country in the West Indies. It lies at the conjuncture of the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean in the Leeward Islands part of the Lesser Antilles.\nThe country consists of two major islands, Antigua and Barbuda, which are approximately apart, and several smaller islands, including Great Bird, Green, Guiana, Long, Maiden, Prickly Pear, York, and Redonda. The permanent population is approximately 97,120 ( 2019[ [update]] estimates), with 97% residing in Antigua. St. John's, Antigua, is the country's capital, major city, and largest port. Codrington is Barbuda's largest town.\nIn 1493, Christopher Columbus surveyed the island of Antigua, which he named for the Church of Santa Mar\u00eda La Antigua. Great Britain colonized Antigua in 1632 and Barbuda in 1678. A part of the Federal Colony of the Leeward Islands from 1871, Antigua and Barbuda joined the West Indies Federation in 1958. With the breakup of the federation in 1962, it became one of the West Indies Associated States in 1967. Following a period of internal self-governance, it gained full independence from the United Kingdom on 1 November 1981. Antigua and Barbuda is a member of the Commonwealth and a Commonwealth realm; it is a constitutional monarchy with Charles III as its head of state.\nThe economy of Antigua and Barbuda is largely dependent on tourism, which accounts for 80% of its GDP. Like other island nations, Antigua and Barbuda is vulnerable to the effects of climate change, such as sea level rise, and increased intensity of extreme weather like hurricanes. These cause coastal erosion, water scarcity, and other challenges.\nAntigua and Barbuda offers a citizenship by investment program. The country levies no personal income tax.\nEtymology.\n is Spanish for 'ancient' and is Spanish for 'bearded'. The island of Antigua was originally called by the Arawaks and is locally known by that name today; the Caribs possibly called Barbuda . Christopher Columbus, while sailing by in 1493, may have named it , after an icon in the Spanish Seville Cathedral. The \"bearded\" of Barbuda is thought to refer either to the male inhabitants of the island, or the bearded fig trees present there.\nHistory.\nPre-colonial period.\nAntigua was first settled by archaic age hunter-gatherer Amerindians called the Ciboney. Carbon dating has established the earliest settlements started around 3100 BC. They were succeeded by the ceramic age pre-Columbian Arawak-speaking Saladoid people who migrated from the lower Orinoco River. They introduced agriculture, raising, among other crops, the famous Antigua black pineapple (\"Ananas comosus\"), corn, sweet potatoes, chiles, guava, tobacco, and cotton. Later on the more bellicose Caribs also settled the island, possibly by force.\nEuropean arrival and settlement.\nChristopher Columbus was the first European to sight the islands in 1493. The Spanish did not colonise Antigua until after a combination of European and African diseases, malnutrition, and slavery eventually extirpated most of the native population; smallpox was probably the greatest killer.\nThe English settled on Antigua in 1632; Christopher Codrington settled on Barbuda in 1685. Tobacco and then sugar was grown, worked by a large population of slaves transported from West Africa, who soon came to vastly outnumber the European settlers.\nColonial era.\nThe English maintained control of the islands, repulsing an attempted French attack in 1666. The brutal conditions endured by the slaves led to revolts in 1701 and 1729 and a planned revolt in 1736, the last led by Prince Klaas, though it was discovered before it began and the ringleaders were executed. Slavery was abolished in the British Empire in 1833, affecting the economy. This was exacerbated by natural disasters such as the 1843 earthquake and the 1847 hurricane. Mining occurred on the isle of Redonda, however, this ceased in 1929 and the island has since remained uninhabited.\nPart of the Leeward Islands colony, Antigua and Barbuda became part of the short-lived West Indies Federation from 1958 to 1962. Antigua and Barbuda subsequently became an associated state of the United Kingdom with full internal autonomy on 27 February 1967. The 1970s were dominated by discussions as to the islands' future and the rivalry between Vere Bird of the Antigua and Barbuda Labour Party (ABLP) (Premier from 1967 to 1971 and 1976 to 1981) and the Progressive Labour Movement (PLM) of George Walter (Premier 1971\u20131976). Eventually, Antigua and Barbuda gained full independence on 1 November 1981; Vere Bird became prime minister of the new country. The country opted to remain within the Commonwealth, retaining Queen Elizabeth as head of state, with the last governor, Sir Wilfred Jacobs, as governor-general.\nIndependence era.\nThe first two decades of Antigua's independence were dominated politically by the Bird family and the ABLP, with Vere Bird ruling from 1981 to 1994, followed by his son Lester Bird from 1994 to 2004. Though providing a degree of political stability, and boosting tourism to the country, the Bird governments were frequently accused of corruption, cronyism and financial malfeasance. Vere Bird Jr., the elder son, was forced to leave the cabinet in 1990 following a scandal in which he was accused of smuggling Israeli weapons to Colombian drug-traffickers. Another son, Ivor Bird, was convicted of selling cocaine in 1995.\nIn 1995, Hurricane Luis caused severe damage on Barbuda.\nThe ABLP's dominance of Antiguan politics ended with the 2004 Antiguan general election, which was won by Winston Baldwin Spencer's United Progressive Party (UPP). Winston Baldwin Spencer was Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda from 2004 to 2014. However the UPP lost the 2014 Antiguan general election, with the ABLP returning to power under Gaston Browne. ABLP won 15 of the 17 seats in the 2018 snap election under the leadership of incumbent Prime Minister Gaston Browne.\nIn 2016, Nelson's Dockyard was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nMost of Barbuda was devastated in early September 2017 by Hurricane Irma, which brought winds with speeds reaching 295\u00a0km/h (185\u00a0mph). The storm damaged or destroyed 95% of the island's buildings and infrastructure, leaving Barbuda \"barely habitable\" according to Prime Minister Gaston Browne. Nearly everyone on the island was evacuated to Antigua.\nAmidst the following rebuilding efforts on Barbuda that were estimated to cost at least $100 million, the government announced plans to revoke a century-old law of communal land ownership by allowing residents to buy land; a move that has been criticised as promoting \"disaster capitalism\".\nGeography.\nLimestone formations, rather than volcanic activity, have had the most impact on the topography of both Antigua and Barbuda, which are both relatively low-lying islands. Boggy Peak, also known as Mt. Obama from 2008 to 2016, is the highest point on both Antigua and Barbuda. It is the remnant of a volcanic crater and rises a total of 402 meters. Boggy Peak is located in the southwest of Antigua (1,319 feet).\nBoth of these islands have very irregularly shaped coastlines that are dotted with beaches, lagoons, and natural harbors. There are reefs and shoals that surround the islands on all sides. Because of the low amount of rainfall, there are not many streams. On neither of these islands can sufficient quantities of fresh groundwater be found.\nRedonda is a small, uninhabited island located about 40 kilometers (25 miles) to the south-west of Antigua. Redonda is a rocky island.\nCities and villages.\nThe most populous cities in Antigua and Barbuda are mostly on Antigua, being Saint John's, All Saints, Piggotts, and Liberta. The most populous city on Barbuda is Codrington. It is estimated that 25% of the population lives in an urban area, which is much lower than the international average of 55%.\nIslands.\nAntigua and Barbuda consists mostly of its two namesake islands, Antigua, and Barbuda. Other than that, Antigua and Barbuda's biggest islands are Guiana Island and Long Island off the coast of Antigua, and Redonda island, which is far from both of the main islands.\nClimate.\nRainfall averages per year, with the amount varying widely from season to season. In general the wettest period is between September and November. The islands generally experience low humidity and recurrent droughts. Temperatures average , with a range from to in the winter to from to in the summer and autumn. The coolest period is between December and February.\nHurricanes strike on an average of once a year, including the powerful Category 5 Hurricane Irma, on 6 September 2017, which damaged 95% of the structures on Barbuda. Some 1,800 people were evacuated to Antigua.\nAn estimate published by \"Time\" indicated that over $100\u00a0million would be required to rebuild homes and infrastructure. Philmore Mullin, Director of Barbuda's National Office of Disaster Services, said that \"all critical infrastructure and utilities are non-existent \u2013 food supply, medicine, shelter, electricity, water, communications, waste management\". He summarised the situation as follows: \"Public utilities need to be rebuilt in their entirety... It is optimistic to think anything can be rebuilt in six months ... In my 25 years in disaster management, I have never seen something like this.\"\nDemographics.\nEthnic groups.\nAntigua has a population of , mostly made up of people of West African, British, and Portuguese descent. The ethnic distribution consists of 91% Black, 4.4% mixed race, 1.7% White, and 2.9% other (primarily East Indian). Most Whites are of British descent. Christian Levantine Arabs and a small number of East Asians and Sephardic Jews make up the remainder of the population.\nAn increasingly large percentage of the population lives abroad, most notably in the United Kingdom (Antiguan Britons), the United States and Canada. A minority of Antiguan residents are immigrants from other countries, particularly from Dominica, Guyana and Jamaica, and, increasingly, from the Dominican Republic, St. Vincent and the Grenadines and Nigeria. An estimated 4,500 American citizens also make their home in Antigua and Barbuda, making their numbers one of the largest American populations in the English-speaking Eastern Caribbean. 68.47% of the population was born in Antigua and Barbuda.\nLanguages.\nThe language most commonly used in business is English. There is a noticeable distinction between the Antiguan accent and the Barbudan one. \nWhen compared to Antiguan Creole, Standard English was the language of choice in the years leading up to Antigua and Barbuda's attainment of their independence. The Antiguan Creole language is looked down upon by the upper and middle classes in general. The Antiguan Creole language is discouraged from use in the educational system, and instruction is carried out in Standard (British) English instead. \nA significant number of the words that are utilized in the Antiguan dialect are derived from both the British and African languages. This is readily apparent in phrases such as \"Innit?\" which literally translates to \"Isn't it?\" Many common island proverbs can be traced back to Africa, such as the pidgin language. \nApproximately 10,000 people are able to speak in Spanish.\nReligion.\nA majority (77%) of Antiguans are Christians, with the Anglicans (17.6%) being the largest single denomination. Other Christian denominations present are Seventh-day Adventist Church (12.4%), Pentecostalism (12.2%), Moravian Church (8.3%), Roman Catholics\n(8.2%), Methodist Church (5.6%), Wesleyan Holiness Church (4.5%), Church of God (4.1%), Baptists (3.6%), Mormonism (&lt;1.0%), as well as Jehovah's Witnesses.\nGovernance.\nPolitical system.\nThe politics of Antigua and Barbuda take place within a framework of a unitary, parliamentary, representative democratic monarchy, in which the head of state is the monarch who appoints the governor-general as vice-regal representative. Charles III is the present King of Antigua and Barbuda, having served in that position since the death of his mother, Elizabeth II. She had been the queen since the islands' independence from the United Kingdom in 1981. The King is currently represented by Governor-General Sir Rodney Williams. A council of ministers is appointed by the governor-general on the advice of the prime minister, currently Gaston Browne (2014\u2013). The prime minister is the head of government.\nExecutive power is exercised by the government while legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of Parliament. The bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (17 members appointed by members of the government and the opposition party, and approved by the governor-general), and the House of Representatives (17 members elected by first past the post) to serve five-year terms.\nThe current Leader of His Majesty's Loyal Opposition is Jamale Pringle.\nThere has been recent development in the republicanism movement in Antigua and Barbuda, following Barbados becoming a republic in 2021 and following the death of Elizabeth II in 2022, with an opinion poll showing majority support for the change.\nElections.\nThe last election was held on 21 March 2018. The Antigua Barbuda Labour Party (ABLP) led by Prime Minister Gaston Browne won 15 of the 17 seats in the House of Representatives. The previous election was on 12 June 2014, during which the Antigua Labour Party won 14 seats, and the United Progressive Party 3 seats.\nSince 1951, elections have been won by the populist Antigua Labour Party. However, in the Antigua and Barbuda legislative election of 2004 saw the defeat of the longest-serving elected government in the Caribbean.\nVere Bird was prime minister from 1981 to 1994 and chief minister of Antigua from 1960 to 1981, except for the 1971\u20131976 period when the Progressive Labour Movement (PLM) defeated his party. Bird, the nation's first prime minister, is credited with having brought Antigua and Barbuda and the Caribbean into a new era of independence. Prime Minister Lester Bryant Bird succeeded the elder Bird in 1994.\nParty elections.\nGaston Browne defeated his predecessor Lester Bryant Bird at the Antigua Labour Party's biennial convention in November 2012 held to elect a political leader and other officers. The party then altered its name from the Antigua Labour Party (ALP) to the Antigua and Barbuda Labour Party (ABLP). This was done to officially include the party's presence on the sister island of Barbuda in its organisation, the only political party on the mainland to have a physical branch in Barbuda.\nJudiciary.\nThe Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court is the highest court in the region's judicial system (based in Saint Lucia; one judge of the Supreme Court is a resident of the islands and presides over the High Court of Justice). The Caribbean Court of Justice counts Antigua as one of its member states. Its highest court of appeal is the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, which acts in that capacity.\nForeign relations.\nAntigua and Barbuda is a member of the United Nations, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Caribbean Community, the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the Organization of American States, the World Trade Organization and the Eastern Caribbean's Regional Security System.\nAntigua and Barbuda is also a member of the International Criminal Court (with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of Protection for the US military as covered under Article 98 of the Rome Statute).\nIn 2013, Antigua and Barbuda called for reparations for slavery at the United Nations. Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer said \"We have recently seen a number of leaders apologising\", and that they should now \"match their words with concrete and material benefits.\"\nMilitary.\nAbout 260 people are currently serving in the Antigua and Barbuda Defense Force in a variety of capacities. These personnel are distributed across the line infantry regiment, the service and support unit, the air force, and the coast guard. In addition to that, there is something called the Antigua and Barbuda Cadet Corps, which is made up of two hundred young people between the ages of 12 and 18. The Defence Board is in charge of directing the activities of the armed forces of the nation. The National Security Council and the Financial Intelligence Unit are the two intelligence agencies that Antigua and Barbuda have at their disposal. Camp Blizzard serves as the administrative center for the Defense Force.\nIn 2018, Antigua and Barbuda signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nAdministrative divisions.\nAntigua and Barbuda is divided into six parishes and two dependencies:\nAlthough they are referred to as dependencies, both Barbuda and Redonda are actually integral parts of the state and can be thought of as administrative divisions. Simply put, \"dependency\" is just a title. The Redonda is a second-level administrative division that is part of the Saint John Parish's District \"A.\" Barbuda is a local administrative division on the same level as Antigua and Barbuda, and its council is the name of its local governing body. In the year 2023, there have been discussions regarding the possibility of extending governmental authority to Antigua's parishes.\nThere are currently sixty of what are known as major divisions on the islands of Antigua and Barbuda. This administrative tier is known as the second level. \nLocal government in the country of Antigua and Barbuda is only present on the island of Barbuda at the present time; however, there is legislation in place for a system of village councils on the island of Antigua; however, village councils have not been active since the 1940s and 1950s.\nHuman rights.\nAntigua and Barbuda does not allow discrimination in employment and there are laws against domestic abuse and child abuse. Same-sex sexual activity is legal in Antigua and Barbuda since July, 2022.\nEconomy.\nTourism dominates the economy, accounting for more than half of the gross domestic product (GDP). As a destination for the most affluent travelers, Antigua is well-known for its extensive collection of five-star resorts. However, weaker tourist activity in lower and middle market segments since the beginning of the year 2000 has slowed the economy and put the government into a tight fiscal corner. Antigua and Barbuda has enacted policies to attract high-net-worth citizens and residents, such as enacting a 0% personal income tax rate in 2019. These policies were enacted to attract high-net-worth citizens and residents.\nThe provision of investment banking and financial services also constitutes a significant portion of the economy. Major international financial institutions such as the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) and Scotiabank both maintain offices in Antigua. PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Pannell Kerr Forster, and KPMG are some of the other companies in the financial services industry that have offices in Antigua. The United States Securities and Exchange Commission has leveled allegations against the Antigua-based Stanford International Bank, which is owned by the Texas billionaire Allen Stanford, of orchestrating a massive fraud that may have resulted in the theft of approximately $8 billion from investors.\nThe nation, which consists of two islands, directs the majority of its agricultural production toward the markets that are found within the nation. This is done despite the fact that the nation has a limited water supply and a shortage of laborers as a result of the higher wages offered in the tourism and construction industries.\nManufacturing comprises 2% of GDP and is made up of enclave-type assembly for export, the major products being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components. Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to depend on income growth in the industrialised world, especially in the United States, from which about one-third to one-half of all tourists come.\nAccess to biocapacity is lower than world average. In 2016, Antigua and Barbuda had 0.8 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, much less than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person. In 2016, Antigua and Barbuda used 4.3 global hectares of biocapacity per person \u2013 their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use more biocapacity than Antigua and Barbuda contains. As a result, Antigua and Barbuda are running a biocapacity deficit.\nThe Citizenship by Investment Unit (CIU) is the government authority responsible for processing all applications for Agent's Licenses as well as all applications for Citizenship by Investment made by applicants and their family members. This unit was established by the Prime Minister and is known as the Citizenship by Investment Unit.\nTransport.\nThe transportation networks of Antigua and Barbuda are made up of both publicly operated and privately managed services. The roads in the countryside are paved, and their paths are winding and gradual in their ascents and descents; they connect parishes to villages and communities. Cars are driven on the left side of the road. Antigua and Barbuda has a speed limit of 40 miles per hour, and there are traffic signs posted along the main roads that make it easier to commute. Additionally, GPS coordinates have been posted throughout the country, which has made the process of navigation more manageable. \nOn the yellow license plates of public transportation vehicles, the letters \"BUS\" indicate that the vehicle is a bus, and the letters \"TX\" indicate that the vehicle is a taxi. Taxi services are subject to government regulation, which results in the establishment of flat rates rather than the use of meters. It is required that taxi drivers keep a copy of the rates posted inside the cab at all times. Taxis are not hard to come by on Antigua; in particular, you can find them at the airport and in the major hotels. The role of tour guide is one that is frequently taken on by taxi drivers. \nOn the island of Antigua, buses run continuously throughout the day from 5:30 a.m. until 6:00 p.m., connecting the capital city of St. John's with a number of the surrounding villages. On the other hand, buses do not make stops at the airport or in the tourist area to the north. Although the timing of the bus' departure is frequently up to the discretion of the driver, most buses operate according to a predetermined schedule. The routes that most buses take are typically displayed in the front windows of the vehicles, which are typically private minivans with seating for approximately 15 passengers each. Both the East Bus Station on Independence Avenue close to the Botanical Gardens and the Market Street Bus Station close to the Central Market are the two bus stations that serve the city of St. John's. There are also a number of bus companies operating on the island of Barbuda.\nCulture.\nThe culture is primarily influenced by the traditions of West Africa as well as those of the United Kingdom. \nThe most popular sport in the country is cricket. Football, boat racing, and surfing are three additional popular forms of athletic competition. (Antigua Sailing Week attracts locals and visitors from all over the world).\nMusic.\nDue to the fact that the majority of Antiguans and Barbudans are descended from West Africans who were brought to the islands as slaves by Europeans, the musical traditions of Antigua and Barbuda are predominately of an African origin and have only been marginally influenced by European musical traditions. \nThe island nation of Antigua and Barbuda can be found in the Lesser Antilles chain of islands in the Caribbean. It is a second home for many of the popular music genres that are popular throughout the Caribbean, including calypso, soca, steeldrum, zouk, and reggae, and it has produced stars in these genres. Steeldrum and calypso are two musical styles that were brought to Antigua from Trinidad and Tobago, and they are the two that have had the most significant impact on the development of modern Antiguan popular music. \nOther than this, there has been very little to no research done on the musical history of Antigua and Barbuda. As a consequence of this, a significant amount of the knowledge on the subject comes from novels, essays, and other types of secondary sources.\nFestivals.\nAlthough on some islands Carnival may be used to celebrate the beginning of Lent, the national Carnival held every August is held to commemorate the abolition of slavery in the British West Indies. The national Carnival is held in August. The festive pageants, shows, and competitions, along with the other events that take place, are a major draw for tourists.\nCuisine.\nAntigua and Barbuda cuisine is a term used to describe the culinary traditions of the islands of Antigua and Barbuda in the Caribbean. Fungie, pronounced \"foon-jee,\" and pepperpot are the country's official dish and dish of pride. Cornmeal is the main ingredient in fungie, which is a dish that is very similar to the Italian dish polenta. Other popular dishes from this region include ducana, saltfish, seasoned rice, and lobster (from Barbuda). In addition, there are sweets that are made locally, such as peanut brittle, sugar cake, fudge, raspberry and tamarind stew, and other similar dishes.\nDespite the fact that these foods are native to Antigua and Barbuda as well as to a number of other Caribbean nations, the diet of the locals has become increasingly diverse and now also includes traditional dishes from Jamaica and Trinidad, such as jerk meats and roti, as well as specialties from a number of other Caribbean nations. \nSaltfish, eggs, eggplant (also referred to as troba), lettuce, and other vegetables are typically served for breakfast. Lunches typically consist of a starch, such as rice, macaroni, or pasta, with vegetables or salad, an entree (such as fish, chicken, pork, or beef), and a side dish, such as macaroni pie, scalloped potatoes, or plantains. Dinners typically consist of a protein, such as fish, chicken, pork, or beef. On Sundays, the majority of people in the country attend religious services, and then they return home to prepare a wide variety of meals for their families. Due to the fact that most people are off work on Sundays, dinner is typically served earlier in the day (around 2:00 pm). Dinners might consist of pork, chicken baked in the oven, stewed lamb, or turkey, served with rice (prepared in a variety of ways), macaroni pie, salads, and a local beverage. Dessert options include ice cream and cake, apple pie (or mango or pineapple pie when those fruits are in season), gelatin, and cake. The soft, buttery loaf of bread known as Antiguan butter bread does not require any additional butter to be added once it has been baked. This dish is another mainstay of Antiguan cuisine. Breakfast and other meals throughout the day often consist of fresh-baked butter bread and cheese for the community's residents. Throughout the city of Antigua, there are a great number of homes that have small bakeries built onto them. These bakeries sell freshly baked loaves, and locals can go to these bakeries to buy them. They are served alongside cheese, sardines, and/or a bright red sausage that residents of the area occasionally refer to as salami, in addition to a great deal of other foods. In addition, the majority of meals feature something known as \"provisions,\" which is typically a root vegetable or starch such as potatoes, yams, sweet potatoes, or eddo. During Carnival, a popular snack is souse, which is a type of soup that is very spicy and is made with pig feet, knuckles, and tails in addition to many onions. This soup is sold by vendors on the side of the road. Black pudding, also referred to as blood sausage, is a well-seasoned sausage that is made with rice, meat, and blood that is also enjoyed by locals in Antigua. Black pudding is also known as black pudding. On improvised grills, locals in the countryside sell freshly picked corn that has been roasted, typically while still in the husk. The Antiguan pineapple is typically quite succulent and sugary, despite its diminutive size. The entire island is covered with numerous small pineapple plantations. \nThe following are some examples of local beverages: mauby, seamoss, tamarind juice, raspberry juice, mango juice, lemonade, coconut milk, hibiscus juice, ginger beer, passion fruit juice, guava juice, soursop juice, and ginger beer, which is a soft drink. Beer, malts, and rums are some of the alcoholic beverages that can be found here. Many of these drinks are produced locally, such as the award-winning English Harbour Rum and the Wadadli beer, which takes its name from the island's former name. A significant number of residents in the area consume bottled sodas, which they refer to as sweet drink. Punch is a flavor that is enjoyed by many. In addition to Red Stripe beer, Guinness stout, Heineken beer, and Malta, the locals like to drink Red Malta. Ponche Kuba Cream Liqueur is a special celebratory alcoholic drink that is very popular in Antigua during the Christmas holiday season. This beverage has a brown color, has a thick and creamy consistency, is extremely sweet, and contains a high percentage of alcohol.\nMedia.\nThe \"Antigua Daily Observer, the Antigua News Room, and The Antiguan Times\" are the names of the country's three newspapers. The Antigua Observer is the only newspaper that is published every day in printed form.\nIt is possible to watch the local television channel, ABS TV 10. (it is the only station that shows exclusively local programs). There are also a number of radio stations that broadcast regionally and locally. Some of these stations include V2C-AM 620, ZDK-AM 1100, VYBZ-FM 92.9, ZDK-FM 97.1, Observer Radio 91.1 FM, DNECA Radio 90.1 FM, Second Advent Radio 101.5 FM, Abundant Life Radio 103.9 FM, Crusader Radio 107.3 FM, Nice FM 104.3, Pointe FM 99.1, and WTP 93.5FM.\nSports.\nCricket is the most popular sport in the islands. And with Sir Isaac Vivian Alexander Richards who represented the West Indies cricket team between 1974 and 1991, Antigua had one of the worlds' most famous batsmen ever. The Antigua and Barbuda national cricket team represented the country at the 1998 Commonwealth Games, but Antiguan cricketers otherwise play for the Leeward Islands cricket team in domestic matches and the West Indies cricket team internationally. The 2007 Cricket World Cup was hosted in the West Indies from 11 March to 28 April 2007. Antigua hosted eight matches at the Sir Vivian Richards Stadium, which was completed on 11 February 2007 and can hold up to 20,000 people.&lt;br&gt;\nAntigua is a Host of Stanford Twenty20 \u2013 Twenty20 Cricket, a version started by Allen Stanford in 2006 as a regional cricket game with almost all Caribbean islands taking part. From 15 January to 5 February 2022 the Sir Vivian Richards Stadium was one of the venues for the 2022 ICC Under-19 Cricket World Cup.&lt;br&gt;Rugby and Netball are popular as well.\nAssociation football, or soccer, is also a very popular sport. Antigua has a national football team which entered World Cup qualification for the 1974 tournament and for 1986 and beyond. A professional team was formed in 2011, Antigua Barracuda FC, which played in the USL Pro, a lower professional league in the US. The nation's team had a major achievement in 2012, getting out of its preliminary group for the 2014 World Cup, notably due to a victory over powerful Haiti. In its first game in the next CONCACAF group play on 8 June 2012 in Tampa, FL, Antigua and Barbuda, comprising 17 Barracuda players and 7 from the lower English professional leagues, scored a goal against the United States. However, the team lost 3:1 to the US.\nDaniel Bailey had become the first Antiguan to reach a world indoor final, where he won a bronze medal at the 2010 IAAF World Indoor Championships. He was also the first Antiguan to make a 100m final at the 2009 World Championships in Athletics, and the first Antiguan to run under 10 seconds over 100m.\nBrendan Christian won a gold medal in the 200m and bronze medal in the 100m at the 2007 Pan American Games. James Grayman won a bronze medal at the same games in the men's High Jump.\nMiguel Francis is the first Antiguan to run sub 20 seconds in the 200m.\nHeather Samuel won a bronze medal at the 1995 Pan American Games over 100m.\n400m Hurdles Olympian Gold Medalist Rai Benjamin previously represented Antigua and Barbuda before representing the United States. His Silver medal run at the 2020 Olympic Games made him the second-fastest person in history over 400m Hurdles with a time of 46.17.\nSymbols.\nThe frigatebird is the country's official national bird, and the bucida buceras is the official national tree (Whitewood tree).\nClare Waight Keller designed Meghan Markle's wedding veil, which featured the distinctive flora of each Commonwealth nation. To represent Antigua and Barbuda, agave karatto was included in the veil by Clare Waight Keller.\nThe European fallow deer, or Dama dama, is the country's official mammal, despite the fact that it is a non-native species.16\nIn 1992, the government held a contest to design a new national dress for the country, and the winner of the competition was the artist Heather Doram.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "953", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=953", "title": "Azincourt", "text": "Azincourt (]), historically known in English as Agincourt ( ), is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in northern France. It is situated north-west of Saint-Pol-sur-Ternoise on the D71 road between Hesdin and Fruges.\nThe Late Medieval Battle of Agincourt between the English and the French took place in the commune in 1415.\nToponym.\nThe name is attested as \"Aisincurt\" in 1175, derived from a Germanic masculine name Aizo, Aizino and the early Northern French word \"curt\" (which meant a farm with a courtyard; derived from the Late Latin \"cortem\"). The name has no etymological link with Agincourt, Meurthe-et-Moselle (attested as \"Egincourt\" 875), which is derived separately from another Germanic male name \"*Ingin-\".\nHistory.\nAzincourt is known for being near the site of the battle fought on 25 October 1415 in which the army led by King Henry V of England defeated the forces led by Charles d'Albret on behalf of Charles VI of France, which has gone down in history as the Battle of Agincourt. According to M. Forrest, the French knights were so encumbered by their armour that they were exhausted even before the start of the battle.\nAfter he became king in 1509, Henry VIII is purported to have commissioned an English translation of a Life of Henry V so that he could emulate him, on the grounds that he thought that launching a campaign against France would help him to impose himself on the European stage. In 1513, Henry VIII crossed the English Channel, stopping by at Azincourt.\nThe battle, as was the tradition, was named after a nearby castle called Azincourt. The castle has since disappeared and the settlement now known as Azincourt adopted the name in the seventeenth century.\nJohn Cassell wrote in 1857 that \"the village of Azincourt itself is now a group of dirty farmhouses and wretched cottages, but where the hottest of the battle raged, between that village and the commune of Tramecourt, there still remains a wood precisely corresponding with the one in which Henry placed his ambush; and there are yet existing the foundations of the castle of Azincourt, from which the king named the field.\"\nSights.\nThe original battlefield museum in the village featured model knights made out of Action Man figures. This has now been replaced by the Centre historique m\u00e9di\u00e9val d'Azincourt (CHM)\u2014a more professional museum, conference centre and exhibition space incorporating laser, video, slide shows, audio commentaries, and some interactive elements. The museum building is shaped like a longbow similar to those used at the battle by archers under King Henry.\nSince 2004 a large medieval festival organised by the local community, the CHM, The Azincourt Alliance, and various other UK societies commemorating the battle, local history and medieval life, arts and crafts has been held in the village. Prior to this date the festival was held in October, but due to the inclement weather and local heavy clay soil (like the battle) making the festival difficult, it was moved to the last Sunday in July. \nInternational relations.\nAzincourt is twinned with Middleham, United Kingdom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "954", "revid": "1159528691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=954", "title": "Albert Speer", "text": "Architect and Minister of War Production in Germany\nBerthold Konrad Hermann Albert Speer (; ] (); 19 March 1905\u00a0\u2013 1 September 1981) was a German architect who served as the Minister of Armaments and War Production in Nazi Germany during most of World War II. A close ally of Adolf Hitler, he was convicted at the Nuremberg trial and sentenced to 20 years in prison.\nAn architect by training, Speer joined the Nazi Party in 1931. His architectural skills made him increasingly prominent within the Party, and he became a member of Hitler's inner circle. Hitler commissioned him to design and construct structures including the Reich Chancellery and the Nazi party rally grounds in Nuremberg. In 1937, Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for Berlin. In this capacity he was responsible for the Central Department for Resettlement that evicted Jewish tenants from their homes in Berlin. In February 1942, Speer was appointed as Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production. Using misleading statistics, he promoted himself as having performed an armaments miracle that was widely credited with keeping Germany in the war. In 1944, Speer established a task force to increase production of fighter aircraft. It became instrumental in exploiting slave labor for the benefit of the German war effort.\nAfter the war, Albert Speer was among the 24 \"major war criminals\" charged with the crimes of the Nazi regime before the International Military Tribunal. He was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity, principally for the use of slave labor, narrowly avoiding a death sentence. Having served his full term, Speer was released in 1966. He used his writings from the time of imprisonment as the basis for two autobiographical books, \"Inside the Third Reich\" and \"\". Speer's books were a success; the public was fascinated by an inside view of the Third Reich. Speer died of a stroke in 1981. Little remains of his personal architectural work.\nThrough his autobiographies and interviews, Speer carefully constructed an image of himself as a man who deeply regretted having failed to discover the monstrous crimes of the Third Reich. He continued to deny explicit knowledge of, and responsibility for, the Holocaust. This image dominated his historiography in the decades following the war, giving rise to the \"Speer Myth\": the perception of him as an apolitical technocrat responsible for revolutionizing the German war machine. The myth began to fall apart in the 1980s, when the armaments miracle was attributed to Nazi propaganda. Adam Tooze wrote in \"The Wages of Destruction\" that the idea that Speer was an apolitical technocrat was \"absurd\". Martin Kitchen, writing in \"\", stated that much of the increase in Germany's arms production was actually due to systems instituted by Speer's predecessor (Fritz Todt) and furthermore that Speer was intimately involved in the \"Final Solution\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly years and personal life.\nSpeer was born in Mannheim, into an upper-middle-class family. He was the second of three sons of Luise M\u00e1thilde Wilhelmine (Hommel) and Albert Friedrich Speer. In 1918, the family leased their Mannheim residence and moved to a home they had in Heidelberg. Henry T. King, deputy prosecutor at the Nuremberg trials who later wrote a book about Speer said, \"Love and warmth were lacking in the household of Speer's youth.\" His brothers, Ernst and Hermann, bullied him throughout his childhood. Speer was active in sports, taking up skiing and mountaineering. He followed in the footsteps of his father and grandfather and studied architecture.\nSpeer began his architectural studies at the University of Karlsruhe instead of a more highly acclaimed institution because the hyperinflation crisis of 1923 limited his parents' income. In 1924, when the crisis had abated, he transferred to the \"much more reputable\" Technical University of Munich. In 1925, he transferred again, this time to the Technical University of Berlin where he studied under Heinrich Tessenow, whom Speer greatly admired. After passing his exams in 1927, Speer became Tessenow's assistant, a high honor for a man of 22. As such, Speer taught some of his classes while continuing his own postgraduate studies. In Munich Speer began a close friendship, ultimately spanning over 50 years, with Rudolf Wolters, who also studied under Tessenow.\nIn mid-1922, Speer began courting Margarete (Margret) Weber (1905\u20131987), the daughter of a successful craftsman who employed 50 workers. The relationship was frowned upon by Speer's class-conscious mother, who felt the Webers were socially inferior. Despite this opposition, the two married in Berlin on 28 August 1928; seven years elapsed before Margarete was invited to stay at her in-laws' home. The couple would have six children together, but Albert Speer grew increasingly distant from his family after 1933. He remained so even after his release from imprisonment in 1966, despite their efforts to forge closer bonds.\nParty architect and government functionary.\nJoining the Nazis (1931\u20131934).\nIn January 1931, Speer applied for Nazi Party membership, and on 1 March 1931, he became member number 474,481. The same year, with stipends shrinking amid the Depression, Speer surrendered his position as Tessenow's assistant and moved to Mannheim, hoping to make a living as an architect. After he failed to do so, his father gave him a part-time job as manager of his properties. In July\u00a01932, the Speers visited Berlin to help out the Party before the \"Reichstag\" elections. While they were there his friend, Nazi Party official Karl Hanke recommended the young architect to Joseph Goebbels to help renovate the Party's Berlin headquarters. When the commission was completed, Speer returned to Mannheim and remained there as Hitler took office in January\u00a01933.\nThe organizers of the 1933 Nuremberg Rally asked Speer to submit designs for the rally, bringing him into contact with Hitler for the first time. Neither the organizers nor Rudolf Hess were willing to decide whether to approve the plans, and Hess sent Speer to Hitler's Munich apartment to seek his approval. This work won Speer his first national post, as Nazi Party \"Commissioner for the Artistic and Technical Presentation of Party Rallies and Demonstrations\".\nShortly after Hitler came into power, he began to make plans to rebuild the chancellery. At the end of 1933, he contracted Paul Troost to renovate the entire building. Hitler appointed Speer, whose work for Goebbels had impressed him, to manage the building site for Troost. As Chancellor, Hitler had a residence in the building and came by every day to be briefed by Speer and the building supervisor on the progress of the renovations. After one of these briefings, Hitler invited Speer to lunch, to the architect's great excitement. Speer quickly became part of Hitler's inner circle; he was expected to call on him in the morning for a walk or chat, to provide consultation on architectural matters, and to discuss Hitler's ideas. Most days he was invited to dinner.\nIn the English version of his memoirs, Speer says that his political commitment merely consisted of paying his \"monthly dues\". He assumed his German readers would not be so gullible and told them the Nazi Party offered a \"new mission\". He was more forthright in an interview with William Hamsher in which he said he joined the party in order to save \"Germany from Communism\". After the war, he claimed to have had little interest in politics at all and had joined almost by chance. Like many of those in power in the Third Reich, he was not an ideologue, \"nor was he anything more than an instinctive anti-Semite.\" The historian Magnus Brechtken, discussing Speer, said he did not give anti-Jewish public speeches and that his anti-Semitism can best be understood through his actions\u2014which were anti-Semitic. Brechtken added that, throughout Speer's life, his central motives were to gain power, rule, and acquire wealth.\nNazi architect (1934\u20131937).\nWhen Troost died on 21 January 1934, Speer effectively replaced him as the Party's chief architect. Hitler appointed Speer as head of the Chief Office for Construction, which placed him nominally on Hess's staff.\nOne of Speer's first commissions after Troost's death was the \"Zeppelinfeld\" stadium in Nuremberg. It was used for Nazi propaganda rallies and can be seen in Leni Riefenstahl's propaganda film \"Triumph of the Will\". The building was able to hold 340,000 people. Speer insisted that as many events as possible be held at night, both to give greater prominence to his lighting effects and to hide the overweight Nazis. Nuremberg was the site of many official Nazi buildings. Many more buildings were planned. If built, the German Stadium would have accommodated 400,000 spectators. Speer modified Werner March's design for the being built for the 1936 Summer Olympics. He added a stone exterior that pleased Hitler. Speer designed the German Pavilion for the 1937 international exposition in Paris.\nBerlin's General Building Inspector (1937\u20131942).\nOn 30 January 1937, Hitler appointed Speer as General Building Inspector for the Reich Capital. This carried with it the rank of State Secretary in the Reich government and gave him extraordinary powers over the Berlin city government. He was to report directly to Hitler, and was independent of both the mayor and the Gauleiter of Berlin. Hitler ordered Speer to develop plans to rebuild Berlin. These centered on a three-mile-long grand boulevard running from north to south, which Speer called the \"Prachtstrasse\", or Street of Magnificence; he also referred to it as the \"North\u2013South Axis\". At the northern end of the boulevard, Speer planned to build the \"Volkshalle\", a huge domed assembly hall over high, with floor space for 180,000 people. At the southern end of the avenue, a great triumphal arch, almost high and able to fit the Arc de Triomphe inside its opening, was planned. The existing Berlin railroad termini were to be dismantled, and two large new stations built. Speer hired Wolters as part of his design team, with special responsibility for the \"Prachtstrasse\". The outbreak of World War II in 1939 led to the postponement, and later the abandonment, of these plans.\nPlans to build a new Reich chancellery had been underway since 1934. Land had been purchased by the end of 1934 and starting in March 1936 the first buildings were demolished to create space at Vo\u00dfstra\u00dfe. Speer was involved virtually from the beginning. In the aftermath of the Night of the Long Knives, he had been commissioned to renovate the Borsig Palace on the corner of Vo\u00dfstra\u00dfe and Wilhelmstra\u00dfe as headquarters of the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA). He completed the preliminary work for the new chancellery by May 1936. In June 1936 he charged a personal honorarium of 30,000 Reichsmark and estimated the chancellery would be completed within three to four years. Detailed plans were completed in July 1937 and the first shell of the new chancellery was complete on 1 January 1938. On 27 January 1938, Speer received plenipotentiary powers from Hitler to finish the new chancellery by 1 January 1939. For propaganda Hitler claimed during the topping-out ceremony on 2 August 1938, that he had ordered Speer to complete the new chancellery that year. Shortages of labor meant the construction workers had to work in ten-to-twelve-hour shifts. The \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) built two concentration camps in 1938 and used the inmates to quarry stone for its construction. A brick factory was built near the Oranienburg concentration camp at Speer's behest; when someone commented on the poor conditions there, Speer stated, \"The Yids got used to making bricks while in Egyptian captivity\". The chancellery was completed in early January 1939. The building itself was hailed by Hitler as the \"crowning glory of the greater German political empire\".\nDuring the Chancellery project, the pogrom of \"Kristallnacht\" took place. Speer made no mention of it in the first draft of \"Inside the Third Reich\". It was only on the urgent advice of his publisher that he added a mention of seeing the ruins of the Central Synagogue in Berlin from his car. \"Kristallnacht\" accelerated Speer's ongoing efforts to dispossess Berlin's Jews from their homes. From 1939 on, Speer's Department used the Nuremberg Laws to evict Jewish tenants of non-Jewish landlords in Berlin, to make way for non-Jewish tenants displaced by redevelopment or bombing. Eventually, 75,000 Jews were displaced by these measures. Speer denied he knew they were being put on Holocaust trains and claimed that those displaced were, \"Completely free and their families were still in their apartments\". He also said: \"\u00a0... en route to my ministry on the city highway, I could see\u00a0... crowds of people on the platform of nearby Nikolassee Railroad Station. I knew that these must be Berlin Jews who were being evacuated. I am sure that an oppressive feeling struck me as I drove past. I presumably had a sense of somber events.\" Matthias Schmidt said Speer had personally inspected concentration camps and described his comments as an \"outright farce\". Martin Kitchen described Speer's often repeated line that he knew nothing of the \"dreadful things\" as hollow\u2014because not only was he fully aware of the fate of the Jews he was actively participating in their persecution.\nAs Germany started World War II in Europe, Speer instituted quick-reaction squads to construct roads or clear away debris; before long, these units would be used to clear bomb sites. Speer used forced Jewish labor on these projects, in addition to regular German workers. Construction stopped on the Berlin and N\u00fcremberg plans at the outbreak of war. Though stockpiling of materials and other work continued, this slowed to a halt as more resources were needed for the armament industry. Speer's offices undertook building work for each branch of the military, and for the SS, using slave labor. Speer's building work made him among the wealthiest of the Nazi elite.\nMinister of Armaments.\nAppointment and increasing power.\nAs one of the younger and more ambitious men in Hitler's inner circle, Speer was approaching the height of his power. In 1938, Prussian Minister President Hermann G\u00f6ring had appointed him to the Prussian State Council. In 1941, he was elected to the \"Reichstag\" from electoral constituency 2 (Berlin\u2013West). On 8 February 1942, Reich Minister of Armaments and Munitions Fritz Todt died in a plane crash shortly after taking off from Hitler's eastern headquarters at Rastenburg. Speer arrived there the previous evening and accepted Todt's offer to fly with him to Berlin. Speer cancelled some hours before take-off because the previous night he had been up late in a meeting with Hitler. Hitler appointed Speer in Todt's place. Martin Kitchen, a British historian, says that the choice was not surprising. Speer was loyal to Hitler, and his experience building prisoner of war camps and other structures for the military qualified him for the job. Speer succeeded Todt not only as Reich Minister but in all his other powerful positions, including Inspector General of German Roadways, Inspector General for Water and Energy and Head of the Nazi Party's Office of Technology. At the same time, Hitler also appointed Speer as head of the Organisation Todt, a massive, government-controlled construction company. Characteristically Hitler did not give Speer any clear remit; he was left to fight his contemporaries in the regime for power and control. As an example, he wanted to be given power over all armaments issues under G\u00f6ring's Four Year Plan. G\u00f6ring was reluctant to grant this. However Speer secured Hitler's support, and on 1 March 1942, G\u00f6ring signed a decree naming Speer \"General Plenipotentiary for Armament Tasks\" in the Four Year Plan. Speer proved to be ambitious, unrelenting and ruthless. Speer set out to gain control not just of armaments production in the army, but in the whole armed forces. It did not immediately dawn on his political rivals that his calls for rationalization and reorganization were hiding his desire to sideline them and take control. By April 1942, Speer had persuaded G\u00f6ring to create a three-member Central Planning Board within the Four Year Plan, which he used to obtain supreme authority over procurement and allocation of raw materials and scheduling of production in order to consolidate German war production in a single agency.\nSpeer was f\u00eated at the time, and in the post-war era, for performing an \"armaments miracle\" in which German war production dramatically increased. This miracle was brought to a halt in the summer of 1943 by, among other factors, the first sustained Allied bombing. Other factors probably contributed to the increase more than Speer himself. Germany's armaments production had already begun to result in increases under his predecessor, Todt. Naval armaments were not under Speer's supervision until October 1943, nor the Luftwaffe's armaments until June of the following year. Yet each showed comparable increases in production despite not being under Speer's control. Another factor that produced the boom in ammunition was the policy of allocating more coal to the steel industry. Production of every type of weapon peaked in June and July 1944, but there was now a severe shortage of fuel. After August 1944, oil from the Romanian fields was no longer available. Oil production became so low that any possibility of offensive action became impossible and weaponry lay idle.\nAs Minister of Armaments, Speer was responsible for supplying weapons to the army. With Hitler's full agreement, he decided to prioritize tank production, and he was given unrivaled power to ensure success. Hitler was closely involved with the design of the tanks, but kept changing his mind about the specifications. This delayed the program, and Speer was unable to remedy the situation. In consequence, despite tank production having the highest priority, relatively little of the armaments budget was spent on it. This led to a significant German Army failure at the Battle of Prokhorovka, a major turning point on the Eastern Front against the Soviet Red Army.\nAs head of Organisation Todt, Speer was directly involved in the construction and alteration of concentration camps. He agreed to expand Auschwitz and some other camps, allocating 13.7 million Reichsmarks for the work to be carried out. This allowed an extra 300 huts to be built at Auschwitz, increasing the total human capacity to 132,000. Included in the building works was material to build gas chambers, crematoria and morgues. The SS called this \"Professor Speer's Special Programme\".\nSpeer realized that with six million workers drafted into the armed forces, there was a labor shortage in the war economy, and not enough workers for his factories. In response, Hitler appointed Fritz Sauckel as a \"manpower dictator\" to obtain new workers. Speer and Sauckel cooperated closely to meet Speer's labor demands. Hitler gave Sauckel a free hand to obtain labor, something that delighted Speer, who had requested 1,000,000 \"voluntary\" laborers to meet the need for armament workers. Sauckel had whole villages in France, Holland and Belgium forcibly rounded up and shipped to Speer's factories. Sauckel obtained new workers often using the most brutal methods. In occupied areas of the Soviet Union, that had been subject to partisan action, civilian men and women were rounded up en masse and sent to work forcibly in Germany. By April 1943, Sauckel had supplied 1,568,801 \"voluntary\" laborers, forced laborers, prisoners of war and concentration camp prisoners to Speer for use in his armaments factories. It was for the maltreatment of these people, that Speer was principally convicted at the Nuremberg Trials.\nConsolidation of arms production.\nFollowing his appointment as Minister of Armaments, Speer was in control of armaments production solely for the Army. He coveted control of the production of armaments for the \"Luftwaffe\" and \"Kriegsmarine\" as well. He set about extending his power and influence with unexpected ambition. His close relationship with Hitler provided him with political protection, and he was able to outwit and outmaneuver his rivals in the regime. Hitler's cabinet was dismayed at his tactics, but, regardless, he was able to accumulate new responsibilities and more power. By July 1943, he had gained control of armaments production for the \"Luftwaffe\" and \"Kriegsmarine\". In August 1943, he took control of most of the Ministry of Economics, to become, in Admiral D\u00f6nitz's words, \"Europe's economic dictator\". His formal title was changed on 2 September 1943, to \"Reich Minister for Armaments and War Production\". He had become one of the most powerful people in Nazi Germany.\nSpeer and his hand-picked director of submarine construction Otto Merker believed that the shipbuilding industry was being held back by outdated methods, and revolutionary new approaches imposed by outsiders would dramatically improve output. This belief proved incorrect, and Speer and Merker's attempt to build the \"Kriegsmarine\"'s new generation of submarines, the Type XXI and Type XXIII, as prefabricated sections at different facilities rather than at single dockyards contributed to the failure of this strategically important program. The designs were rushed into production, and the completed submarines were crippled by flaws which resulted from the way they had been constructed. While dozens of submarines were built, few ever entered service.\nIn December 1943, Speer visited Organisation Todt workers in Lapland, while there he seriously damaged his knee and was incapacitated for several months. He was under the dubious care of Professor Karl Gebhardt at a medical clinic called Hohenlychen where patients \"mysteriously failed to survive\". In mid-January 1944, Speer had a lung embolism and fell seriously ill. Concerned about retaining power, he did not appoint a deputy and continued to direct work of the Armaments Ministry from his bedside. Speer's illness coincided with the Allied \"Big Week\", a series of bombing raids on the German aircraft factories that were a devastating blow to aircraft production. His political rivals used the opportunity to undermine his authority and damage his reputation with Hitler. He lost Hitler's unconditional support and began to lose power.\nIn response to the Allied Big Week, Adolf Hitler authorized the creation of a Fighter Staff committee. Its aim was to ensure the preservation and growth of fighter aircraft production. The task force was established by 1 March 1944, orders of Speer, with support from Erhard Milch of the Reich Aviation Ministry. Production of German fighter aircraft more than doubled between 1943 and 1944. The growth, however, consisted in large part of models that were becoming obsolescent and proved easy prey for Allied aircraft. On 1 August 1944, Speer merged the Fighter Staff into a newly formed Armament Staff committee.\nThe Fighter Staff committee was instrumental in bringing about the increased exploitation of slave labor in the war economy. The SS provided 64,000 prisoners for 20 separate projects from various concentration camps including Mittelbau-Dora. Prisoners worked for Junkers, Messerschmitt, Henschel and , among others. To increase production, Speer introduced a system of punishments for his workforce. Those who feigned illness, slacked off, sabotaged production or tried to escape were denied food or sent to concentration camps. In 1944, this became endemic; over half a million workers were arrested. By this time, 140,000 people were working in Speer's underground factories. These factories were death-traps; discipline was brutal, with regular executions. There were so many corpses at the Dora underground factory, for example, that the crematorium was overwhelmed. Speer's own staff described the conditions there as \"hell\".\nThe largest technological advance under Speer's command came through the rocket program. It began in 1932 but had not supplied any weaponry. Speer enthusiastically supported the program and in March 1942 made an order for A4 rockets, the predecessor of the world's first ballistic missile, the V-2 rocket. The rockets were researched at a facility in Peenem\u00fcnde along with the V-1 flying bomb. The V-2's first target was Paris on 8 September 1944. The program while advanced proved to be an impediment to the war economy. The large capital investment was not repaid in military effectiveness. The rockets were built at an underground factory at Mittelwerk. Labor to build the A4 rockets came from the Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp. Of the 60,000 people who ended up at the camp 20,000 died, due to the appalling conditions.\nOn 14 April 1944, Speer lost control of Organisation Todt to his Deputy, Franz Xaver Dorsch. He opposed the assassination attempt against Hitler on 20 July 1944. He was not involved in the plot, and played a minor role in the regime's efforts to regain control over Berlin after Hitler survived. After the plot Speer's rivals attacked some of his closest allies and his management system fell out of favor with radicals in the party. He lost yet more authority.\nDefeat of Nazi Germany.\nLosses of territory and a dramatic expansion of the Allied strategic bombing campaign caused the collapse of the German economy from late 1944. Air attacks on the transport network were particularly effective, as they cut the main centres of production off from essential coal supplies. In January 1945, Speer told Goebbels that armaments production could be sustained for at least a year. However, he concluded that the war was lost after Soviet forces captured the important Silesian industrial region later that month. Nevertheless, Speer believed that Germany should continue the war for as long as possible with the goal of winning better conditions from the Allies than the unconditional surrender they insisted upon. During January and February, Speer claimed that his ministry would deliver \"decisive weapons\" and a large increase in armaments production which would \"bring about a dramatic change on the battlefield\". Speer gained control over the railways in February, and asked Heinrich Himmler to supply concentration camp prisoners to work on their repair.\nBy mid-March, Speer had accepted that Germany's economy would collapse within the next eight weeks. While he sought to frustrate directives to destroy industrial facilities in areas at risk of capture, so that they could be used after the war, he still supported the war's continuation. Speer provided Hitler with a memorandum on 15 March, which detailed Germany's dire economic situation and sought approval to cease demolitions of infrastructure. Three days later, he also proposed to Hitler that Germany's remaining military resources be concentrated along the Rhine and Vistula rivers in an attempt to prolong the fighting. This ignored military realities, as the German armed forces were unable to match the Allies' firepower and were facing total defeat. Hitler rejected Speer's proposal to cease demolitions. Instead, he issued the \"Nero Decree\" on 19 March, which called for the destruction of all infrastructure as the army retreated. Speer was appalled by this order, and persuaded several key military and political leaders to ignore it. During a meeting with Speer on 28/29 March, Hitler rescinded the decree and gave him authority over demolitions. Speer ended them, though the army continued to blow up bridges.\nBy April, little was left of the armaments industry, and Speer had few official duties. Speer visited the \"F\u00fchrerbunker\" on 22 April for the last time. He met Hitler and toured the damaged Chancellery before leaving Berlin to return to Hamburg. On 29 April, the day before committing suicide, Hitler dictated a final political testament which dropped Speer from the successor government. Speer was to be replaced by his subordinate, Karl-Otto Saur. Speer was disappointed that Hitler had not selected him as his successor. After Hitler's death, Speer offered his services to the so-called Flensburg Government, headed by Hitler's successor, Karl D\u00f6nitz. He took a role in that short-lived regime as Minister of Industry and Production. Speer provided information to the Allies, regarding the effects of the air war, and on a broad range of subjects, beginning on 10 May. On 23 May, two weeks after the surrender of German forces, British troops arrested the members of the Flensburg Government and brought Nazi Germany to a formal end.\nPost-war.\nNuremberg trial.\nSpeer was taken to several internment centres for Nazi officials and interrogated. In September 1945, he was told that he would be tried for war crimes, and several days later, he was moved to Nuremberg and incarcerated there. Speer was indicted on four counts: participating in a common plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of crime against peace; planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression and other crimes against peace; war crimes; and crimes against humanity.\nThe chief United States prosecutor, Robert H. Jackson, of the U.S. Supreme Court said, \"Speer joined in planning and executing the program to dragoon prisoners of war and foreign workers into German war industries, which waxed in output while the workers waned in starvation.\" Speer's attorney, Hans Fl\u00e4chsner, successfully contrasted Speer from other defendants and portrayed him as an artist thrust into political life who had always remained a non-ideologue.\nSpeer was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity, principally for the use of slave labor and forced labor. He was acquitted on the other two counts. He had claimed that he was unaware of Nazi extermination plans, and the Allies had no proof that he was aware. His claim was revealed to be false in a private correspondence written in 1971 and publicly disclosed in 2007. On 1 October 1946, he was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment. While three of the eight judges (two Soviet and American Francis Biddle) advocated the death penalty for Speer, the other judges did not, and a compromise sentence was reached after two days of discussions.\nImprisonment.\nOn 18 July 1947, Speer was transferred to Spandau Prison in Berlin to serve his prison term. There he was known as Prisoner Number Five. Speer's parents died while he was incarcerated. His father, who died in 1947, despised the Nazis and was silent upon meeting Hitler. His mother died in 1952. As a Nazi Party member, she had greatly enjoyed dining with Hitler. Wolters and longtime Speer secretary Annemarie Kempf, while not permitted direct communication with Speer in Spandau, did what they could to help his family and carry out the requests Speer put in letters to his wife\u2014the only written communication he was officially allowed. Beginning in 1948, Speer had the services of Toni Proost, a sympathetic Dutch orderly to smuggle mail and his writings.\nIn 1949, Wolters opened a bank account for Speer and began fundraising among those architects and industrialists who had benefited from Speer's activities during the war. Initially, the funds were used only to support Speer's family, but increasingly the money was used for other purposes. They paid for Toni Proost to go on holiday, and for bribes to those who might be able to secure Speer's release. Once Speer became aware of the existence of the fund, he sent detailed instructions about what to do with the money. Wolters raised a total of DM158,000 for Speer over the final seventeen years of his sentence.\nThe prisoners were forbidden to write memoirs. Speer was able to have his writings sent to Wolters, however, and they eventually amounted to 20,000 pages. He had completed his memoirs by November 1953, which became the basis of \"Inside the Third Reich\". In \"Spandau Diaries\", Speer aimed to present himself as a tragic hero who had made a Faustian bargain for which he endured a harsh prison sentence.\nMuch of Speer's energy was dedicated to keeping fit, both physically and mentally, during his long confinement. Spandau had a large enclosed yard where inmates were allocated plots of land for gardening. Speer created an elaborate garden complete with lawns, flower beds, shrubbery, and fruit trees. To make his daily walks around the garden more engaging Speer embarked on an imaginary trip around the globe. Carefully measuring distance travelled each day, he mapped distances to the real-world geography. He had walked more than , ending his sentence near Guadalajara, Mexico. Speer also read, studied architectural journals, and brushed up on English and French. In his writings, Speer claimed to have finished five thousand books while in prison. His sentence of twenty years amounted to 7,305 days, which only allotted one and a half days per book.\nSpeer's supporters maintained calls for his release. Among those who pledged support for his sentence to be commuted were Charles de Gaulle and US diplomat George Wildman Ball. Willy Brandt was an advocate of his release, putting an end to the de-Nazification proceedings against him, which could have caused his property to be confiscated. Speer's efforts for an early release came to naught. The Soviet Union, having demanded a death sentence at trial, was unwilling to entertain a reduced sentence. Speer served a full term and was released at midnight on 1 October 1966.\nRelease and later life.\nSpeer's release from prison was a worldwide media event. Reporters and photographers crowded both the street outside Spandau and the lobby of the Hotel Berlin where Speer spent the night. He said little, reserving most comments for a major interview published in \"Der Spiegel\" in November 1966. Although he stated he hoped to resume an architectural career, his sole project, a collaboration for a brewery, was unsuccessful. Instead, he revised his Spandau writings into two autobiographical books, \"Inside the Third Reich\" (in German, \"Erinnerungen\", or \"Reminiscences\") and \"\". He later published a work about Himmler and the SS which has been published in English as \"The Slave State: Heinrich Himmler's Masterplan for SS Supremacy\" or \"Infiltration: How Heinrich Himmler Schemed to Build an SS Industrial Empire\" (in German, \"Der Sklavenstaat - Meine Auseinandersetzung mit der SS\"). Speer was aided in shaping the works by Joachim Fest and Wolf Jobst Siedler from the publishing house Ullstein. He found himself unable to re-establish a relationship with his children, even with his son Albert who had also become an architect. According to Speer's daughter Hilde Schramm, \"One by one my sister and brothers gave up. There was no communication.\" He supported Hermann, his brother, financially after the war. However, his other brother Ernst had died in the Battle of Stalingrad, despite repeated requests from his parents for Speer to repatriate him.\nFollowing his release from Spandau, Speer donated the \"Chronicle\", his personal diary, to the German Federal Archives. It had been edited by Wolters and made no mention of the Jews. David Irving discovered discrepancies between the deceptively edited \"Chronicle\" and independent documents. Speer asked Wolters to destroy the material he had omitted from his donation but Wolters refused and retained an original copy. Wolters' friendship with Speer deteriorated and one year before Speer's death Wolters gave Matthias Schmidt access to the unedited \"Chronicle\". Schmidt authored the first book that was highly critical of Speer.\nSpeer's memoirs were a phenomenal success. The public was fascinated by an inside view of the Third Reich and a major war criminal became a popular figure almost overnight. Importantly, he provided an alibi to older Germans who had been Nazis. If Speer, who had been so close to Hitler, had not known the full extent of the crimes of the Nazi regime and had just been \"following orders\", then they could tell themselves and others they too had done the same. So great was the need to believe this \"Speer Myth\" that Fest and Siedler were able to strengthen it\u2014even in the face of mounting historical evidence to the contrary.\nDeath.\nSpeer made himself widely available to historians and other enquirers. In October 1973, he made his first trip to Britain, flying to London to be interviewed on the BBC \"Midweek\" programme. In the same year, he appeared on the television programme \"The World at War\". Speer returned to London in 1981 to participate in the BBC \"Newsnight\" programme. He suffered a stroke and died in London on 1 September.\nHe had remained married to his wife, but he had formed a relationship with a German woman living in London and was with her at the time of his death. His daughter, Margret Nissen, wrote in her 2005 memoirs that after his release from Spandau he spent all of his time constructing the \"Speer Myth\".\nThe Speer myth.\nThe Good Nazi.\nAfter his release from Spandau, Speer portrayed himself as the \"good Nazi\". He was well-educated, middle class, and bourgeois, and could contrast himself with those who, in the popular mind, typified \"bad Nazis\". In his memoirs and interviews, he had distorted the truth and made so many major omissions that his lies became known as \"myths\". Speer even invented his own birth's circumstances, stating falsely that he was born at midday amid crashes of thunder and bells of the nearby Christ Church, whereas it was between three and five o'clock, and the church was built only some years after. Speer took his myth-making to a mass media level and his \"cunning apologies\" were reproduced frequently in post-war Germany. Isabell Trommer writes in her biography of Speer that Fest and Siedler were co-authors of Speer's memoirs and co-creators of his myths. In return they were paid handsomely in royalties and other financial inducements. Speer, Siedler and Fest had constructed a masterpiece; the image of the \"good Nazi\" remained in place for decades, despite historical evidence indicating that it was false.\nSpeer had carefully constructed an image of himself as an apolitical technocrat who deeply regretted having failed to discover the monstrous crimes of the Third Reich. This construction was accepted almost at face value by historian Hugh Trevor-Roper when investigating the death of Adolf Hitler for British Intelligence and in writing \"The Last Days of Hitler\". Trevor-Roper frequently refers to Speer as \"a technocrat [who] nourished a technocrat's philosophy\", one who cared only for his building projects or his ministerial duties, and who thought that politics was irrelevant, at least until Hitler's Nero Decree which Speer, according to his own telling, worked assiduously to counter. Trevor-Roper \u2013 who calls Speer an administrative genius whose basic instincts were peaceful and constructive \u2013 does take Speer to task, however, for his failure to recognize the immorality of Hitler and Nazism, calling him \"the real criminal of Nazi Germany\":\nFor ten years he sat at the very centre of political power; his keen intelligence diagnosed the nature and observed the mutations of Nazi government and policy; he saw and despised the personalities around him; he heard their outrageous orders and understood their fantastic ambitions; but he did nothing. Supposing politics to be irrelevant, he turned aside and built roads and bridges and factories, while the logical consequences of government by madmen emerged. Ultimately, when their emergence involved the ruin of all his work, Speer accepted the consequences and acted. Then it was too late; Germany had been destroyed.\nAfter Speer's death, Matthias Schmidt published a book that demonstrated that Speer had ordered the eviction of Jews from their Berlin homes. By 1999, historians had amply demonstrated that Speer had lied extensively. Even so, public perceptions of Speer did not change substantially until Heinrich Breloer aired a biographical film on TV in 2004. The film began a process of demystification and critical reappraisal. Adam Tooze in his book \"The Wages of Destruction\" said Speer had manoeuvred himself through the ranks of the regime skillfully and ruthlessly and that the idea he was a technocrat blindly carrying out orders was \"absurd\". Trommer said he was not an apolitical technocrat; instead, he was one of the most powerful and unscrupulous leaders in the Nazi regime. Kitchen said he had deceived the Nuremberg Tribunal and post-war Germany. Brechtken said that if his extensive involvement in the Holocaust had been known at the time of his trial he would have been sentenced to death.\nThe image of the good Nazi was supported by numerous Speer myths. In addition to the myth that he was an apolitical technocrat, he claimed he did not have full knowledge of the Holocaust or the persecution of the Jews. Another myth posits that Speer revolutionized the German war machine after his appointment as Minister of Armaments. He was credited with a dramatic increase in the shipment of arms that was widely reported as keeping Germany in the war. Another myth centered around a faked plan to assassinate Hitler with poisonous gas. The idea for this myth came to him after he recalled the panic when car fumes came through an air ventilation system. He fabricated the additional details. Brechtken wrote that his most brazen lie was fabricated during an interview with a French journalist in 1952. The journalist described an invented scenario in which Speer had refused Hitler's orders and Hitler had left with tears in his eyes. Speer liked the scenario so much that he wrote it into his memoirs. The journalist had unwittingly collaborated in one of his myths.\nSpeer also sought to portray himself as an opponent of Hitler's leadership. Despite his opposition to the 20 July plot, he falsely claimed in his memoirs to have been sympathetic to the plotters. He maintained Hitler was cool towards him for the remainder of his life after learning they had included him on a list of potential ministers. This formed a key element of the myths Speer encouraged. Speer also falsely claimed that he had realised the war was lost at an early stage, and thereafter worked to preserve the resources needed for the civilian population's survival. In reality, he had sought to prolong the war until further resistance was impossible, thus contributing to the large number of deaths and the extensive destruction Germany suffered in the conflict's final months.\nDenial of responsibility.\nSpeer maintained at the Nuremberg trials and in his memoirs that he had no direct knowledge of the Holocaust. He admitted only to being uncomfortable around Jews in the published version of the \"Spandau Diaries\". In his final statement at Nuremberg, Speer gave the impression of apologizing, although he did not directly admit any personal guilt and the only victim he mentioned was the German people. Historian Martin Kitchen states that Speer was actually \"fully aware of what had happened to the Jews\" and was \"intimately involved in the 'Final Solution'\". Brechtken said Speer only admitted to a generalized responsibility for the Holocaust to hide his direct and actual responsibility. Speer was photographed with slave laborers at Mauthausen concentration camp during a visit on 31 March 1943; he also visited Gusen concentration camp. Although survivor Francisco Boix testified at the Nuremberg trials about Speer's visit, Taylor writes that, had the photo been available, he would have been hanged. In 2005, \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that documents had surfaced indicating that Speer had approved the allocation of materials for the expansion of Auschwitz concentration camp after two of his assistants inspected the facility on a day when almost a thousand Jews were massacred. Heinrich Breloer, discussing the construction of Auschwitz, said Speer was not just a cog in the work\u2014he was the \"terror itself\".\nSpeer did not deny being present at the Posen speeches to Nazi leaders at a conference in Posen (Pozna\u0144) on 6 October 1943, but claimed to have left the auditorium before Himmler said during his speech: \"The grave decision had to be taken to cause this people to vanish from the earth\", and later, \"The Jews must be exterminated\". Speer is mentioned several times in the speech, and Himmler addresses him directly. In 2007, \"The Guardian\" reported that a letter from Speer dated 23 December 1971, had been found in a collection of his correspondence with H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Jeanty, the widow of a Belgian resistance fighter. In the letter, Speer says, \"There is no doubt\u2014I was present as Himmler announced on October 6, 1943, that all Jews would be killed.\"\nArmaments miracle.\nSpeer was credited with an \"armaments miracle\". During the winter of 1941\u201342, in the light of Germany's disastrous defeat in the Battle of Moscow, the German leadership including Friedrich Fromm, Georg Thomas and Fritz Todt had come to the conclusion that the war could not be won. The rational position to adopt was to seek a political solution that would end the war without defeat. Speer in response used his propaganda expertise to display a new dynamism of the war economy. He produced spectacular statistics, claiming a sixfold increase in munitions production, a fourfold increase in artillery production, and he sent further propaganda to the newsreels of the country. He was able to curtail the discussion that the war should be ended.\nThe armaments \"miracle\" was a myth; Speer had used statistical manipulation to support his claims. The production of armaments did go up; however, this was due to the normal causes of reorganization before Speer came to office, the relentless mobilization of slave labor and a deliberate reduction in the quality of output to favor quantity. By July 1943 Speer's armaments propaganda became irrelevant because a catalogue of dramatic defeats on the battlefield meant the prospect of losing the war could no longer be hidden from the German public.\nArchitectural legacy.\nLittle remains of Speer's personal architectural works, other than the plans and photographs. No buildings designed by Speer during the Nazi era are extant in Berlin, other than the 4 entrance pavilions and underpasses leading to the Victory Column or Siegess\u00e4ule, and the \"Schwerbelastungsk\u00f6rper\", a heavy load-bearing body built around 1941. The concrete cylinder, high, was used to measure ground subsidence as part of feasibility studies for a massive triumphal arch and other large structures planned within Hitler's post-war renewal project for the city of Berlin as the world capital Germania. The cylinder is now a protected landmark and is open to the public. The tribune of the \"Zeppelinfeld\" stadium in Nuremberg, though partly demolished, can also be seen.\nDuring the war, the Speer-designed New Reich Chancellery was largely destroyed by air raids and in the Battle of Berlin. The exterior walls survived, but they were eventually dismantled by the Soviets. Unsubstantiated rumors have claimed that the remains were used for other building projects such as the Humboldt University, Mohrenstra\u00dfe metro station and Soviet war memorials in Berlin.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nPrinted sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "956", "revid": "1739907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=956", "title": "Asteraceae", "text": "Large family of flowering plants\nThe family Asteraceae (), alternatively Compositae, consists of over 32,000 known species of flowering plants in over 1,900 genera within the order Asterales. Commonly referred to as the aster, daisy, composite, or sunflower family, Compositae were first described in the year 1740. The number of species in Asteraceae is rivaled only by the Orchidaceae, and which is the larger family is unclear as the quantity of extant species in each family is unknown. \nMost species of Asteraceae are annual, biennial, or perennial herbaceous plants, but there are also shrubs, vines, and trees. The family has a widespread distribution, from subpolar to tropical regions, in a wide variety of habitats. Most occur in hot desert and cold or hot semi-desert climates, and they are found on every continent but Antarctica. Their primary common characteristic is flower heads, technically known as capitula, consisting of sometimes hundreds of tiny individual florets enclosed by a whorl of protective involucral bracts.\nThe oldest known fossils are pollen grains from the Late Cretaceous (Campanian to Maastrichtian) of Antarctica, dated to c.\u200976\u201366 million years ago (mya). It is estimated that the crown group of Asteraceae evolved at least 85.9 mya (Late Cretaceous, Santonian) with a stem node age of 88\u201389 mya (Late Cretaceous, Coniacian).\nAsteraceae is an economically important family, providing food staples, garden plants, and herbal medicines. Species outside of their native ranges can be considered weedy or invasive.\nDescription.\nMembers of the Asteraceae are mostly herbaceous plants, but some shrubs, vines, and trees (such as \"Lachanodes arborea\") do exist. Asteraceae species are generally easy to distinguish from other plants because of their unique inflorescence and other shared characteristics, such as the joined anthers of the stamens. Nonetheless, determining genera and species of some groups such as \"Hieracium\" is notoriously difficult (see \"damned yellow composite\" for example).\nRoots.\nMembers of the family Asteraceae generally produce taproots, but sometimes they possess fibrous root systems. Some species have underground stems in the form of caudices or rhizomes. These can be fleshy or woody depending on the species.\nStems.\nStems are herbaceous, aerial, branched, and cylindrical with glandular hairs, generally erect, but can be prostrate to ascending. The stems can contain secretory canals with resin, or latex, which is particularly common among the Cichorioideae.\nLeaves.\nLeaves can be alternate, opposite, or whorled. They may be simple, but are often deeply lobed or otherwise incised, often conduplicate or revolute. The margins also can be entire or toothed. Resin or latex also can be present in the leaves. \nInflorescences.\nNearly all Asteraceae bear their flowers in dense flower heads called \"capitula\". They are surrounded by involucral bracts, and when viewed from a distance, each capitulum may appear to be a single flower. Enlarged outer (peripheral) flowers in the capitulum may resemble petals, and the involucral bracts may look like a calyx.\nFloral heads.\nIn plants of the Asteraceae, what appears to be a single \"daisy\"-type flower is actually a composite of several much smaller flowers, known as the \"capitulum\" or \"head\". By visually presenting as a single flower, the capitulum functions in attracting pollinators, in the same manner that other \"showy\" flowering plants in numerous other, older, plant families have evolved to attract pollinators. The previous name for the family, \"Compositae\", reflects the fact that what appears to be a single floral entity is in fact a \"composite\" of much smaller flowers.\nThe \"petals\" or \"sunrays\" in an \"asteraceous\" head are in fact individual strap-shaped flowers called \"ray flowers\" or \"ray florets\", and the \"sun disk\" is made up of smaller, radially symmetric, individual flowers called \"disc flowers\" or \"disc florets\". The word \"aster\" means \"star\" in Greek, referring to the appearance of most family members as a \"celestial body with rays\".\nThe capitulum, which often appears to be a single flower, is often referred to as a \"head\". In some species, the entire head is able to pivot its floral stem in the course of the day to track the sun (like a \"smart\" solar panel), thus maximizing the reflectivity of the entire floral unit and further attracting flying pollinators.\nNearest to the flower stem lie a series of small, usually green, scale-like bracts . These are known as \"phyllaries\"; collectively, they form the involucre, which serves to protect the immature head of florets during its development.29 The individual florets are arranged atop a dome-like structure called the \"receptacle\".\nThe individual florets in a head consist, developmentally, of five fused petals (rarely four); instead of sepals, they have threadlike, hairy, or bristly structures, known collectively as a \"pappus\", (plural \"pappi\"). The pappus surrounds the ovary and can, when mature and attached to a seed, adhere to animal fur or be carried by air currents, aiding in seed dispersal. The whitish, fluffy head of a dandelion, commonly blown on by children, consists of numerous seeds resting on the receptacle, each seed attached to its pappus. The pappi provide a parachute-like structure to help the seed travel from its point of origin to a more hospitable site.\nA \"ray flower\" is a two- or three-lobed, strap-shaped, individual flower, found in the head of most members of the Asteraceae. The corolla of the ray flower may have two tiny, vestigial teeth, opposite to the three-lobed strap, or tongue, indicating its evolution by fusion from an ancestral, five-part corolla. In some species, the 3:2 arrangement is reversed, with two lobes, and zero or three tiny teeth visible opposite the tongue.\nA \"ligulate flower\" is a five-lobed, strap-shaped, individual flower found in the heads of certain other asteraceous species. A \"ligule\" is the strap-shaped tongue of the corolla of either a ray flower or of a ligulate flower. A \"disk flower\" (or \"disc flower\") is a radially-symmetric individual flower in the head, which is ringed by the ray flowers when both are present. In some species, ray flowers may be arranged around the disc in irregular symmetry, or with a weakly bilaterally symmetric arrangement.\nVariations.\nA \"radiate head\" has disc flowers surrounded by ray flowers. A \"ligulate head\" has all ligulate flowers and no disc flowers. When an Asteraceae flower head has only disc flowers that are either sterile, male, or bisexual, (but not female and fertile,) it is a \"discoid head\". \n\"Disciform heads\" possess only disc flowers in their heads, but may produce two different sex types (male or female) within their disciform head.\nSome other species produce two different head types: \"staminate\" (all-male), or \"pistillate\" (all-female). In a few unusual species, the \"head\" will consist of one single disc flower; alternatively, a few species will produce both single-flowered female heads, along with multi-flowered male heads, in their \"pollination strategy\".\nFloral structures.\nThe distinguishing characteristic of Asteraceae is their inflorescence, a type of specialised, composite flower head or \"pseudanthium\", technically called a calathium or \"capitulum\", that may look superficially like a single flower. The \"capitulum\" is a contracted raceme composed of numerous individual sessile flowers, called \"florets\", all sharing the same receptacle.\nA set of bracts forms an involucre surrounding the base of the capitulum. These are called \"phyllaries\", or \"involucral bracts\". They may simulate the sepals of the pseudanthium. These are mostly herbaceous but can also be brightly coloured (e.g. \"Helichrysum\") or have a scarious (dry and membranous) texture. The phyllaries can be free or fused, and arranged in one to many rows, overlapping like the tiles of a roof (\"imbricate\") or not (this variation is important in identification of tribes and genera).\nEach floret may be subtended by a bract, called a \"palea\" or \"receptacular bract\". These bracts are often called \"chaff\". The presence or absence of these bracts, their distribution on the receptacle, and their size and shape are all important diagnostic characteristics for genera and tribes.\nThe florets have five petals fused at the base to form a corolla tube and they may be either actinomorphic or zygomorphic. \"Disc florets\" are usually actinomorphic, with five petal lips on the rim of the corolla tube. The petal lips may be either very short, or long, in which case they form deeply lobed petals. The latter is the only kind of floret in the Carduoideae, while the first kind is more widespread. \"Ray florets\" are always highly zygomorphic and are characterised by the presence of a \"ligule\", a strap-shaped structure on the edge of the corolla tube consisting of fused petals. In the Asteroideae and other minor subfamilies these are usually borne only on florets at the circumference of the capitulum and have a 3+2 scheme \u2013 above the fused corolla tube, three very long fused petals form the ligule, with the other two petals being inconspicuously small. The Cichorioideae has only ray florets, with a 5+0 scheme \u2013 all five petals form the ligule. A 4+1 scheme is found in the Barnadesioideae. The tip of the ligule is often divided into teeth, each one representing a petal. Some marginal florets may have no petals at all (filiform floret).\nThe calyx of the florets may be absent, but when present is always modified into a pappus of two or more teeth, scales or bristles and this is often involved in the dispersion of the seeds. As with the bracts, the nature of the pappus is an important diagnostic feature.\nThere are usually four or five stamens. The filaments are fused to the corolla, while the anthers are generally connate (\"syngenesious\" anthers), thus forming a sort of tube around the style (\"theca\"). They commonly have basal and/or apical appendages. Pollen is released inside the tube and is collected around the growing style, and then, as the style elongates, is pushed out of the tube (\"n\u00fcdelspritze\").\nThe pistil consists of two connate carpels. The style has two lobes. Stigmatic tissue may be located in the interior surface or form two lateral lines. The ovary is inferior and has only one ovule, with basal placentation.\nFruits and seeds.\nIn members of the Asteraceae the fruit is achene-like, and is called a \"cypsela\" (plural \"cypselae\"). Although there are two fused carpels, there is only one locule, and only one seed per fruit is formed. It may sometimes be winged or spiny because the pappus, which is derived from calyx tissue often remains on the fruit (for example in dandelion). In some species, however, the pappus falls off (for example in \"Helianthus\"). Cypsela morphology is often used to help determine plant relationships at the genus and species level. The mature seeds usually have little endosperm or none.\nPollen.\nThe pollen of composites is typically echinolophate, a morphological term meaning \"with elaborate systems of ridges and spines dispersed around and between the apertures.\"\nMetabolites.\nIn Asteraceae, the energy store is generally in the form of inulin rather than starch. They produce iso/chlorogenic acid, sesquiterpene lactones, pentacyclic triterpene alcohols, various alkaloids, acetylenes (cyclic, aromatic, with vinyl end groups), tannins. They have terpenoid essential oils that never contain iridoids.\nAsteraceae produce secondary metabolites, such as flavonoids and terpenoids. Some of these molecules can inhibit protozoan parasites such as \"Plasmodium\", \"Trypanosoma\", \"Leishmania\" and parasitic intestinal worms, and thus have potential in medicine.\nTaxonomy.\nHistory.\nCompositae, the original name for Asteraceae, were first described in 1740 by Dutch botanist Adriaan van Royen.117\u2013118 Traditionally, two subfamilies were recognised: Asteroideae (or Tubuliflorae) and Cichorioideae (or Liguliflorae).242 The latter has been shown to be extensively paraphyletic, and has now been divided into 12 subfamilies, but the former still stands. The study of this family is known as synantherology.\nPhylogeny.\nThe phylogenetic tree of subfamilies presented below is based on Panero &amp; Funk (2002) updated in 2014, and now also includes the monotypic Famatinanthoideae.\nThe diamond (\u2666) denotes a very poorly supported node (&lt;50% bootstrap support), the dot (\u2022) a poorly supported node (&lt;80%).\nThe family includes over 32,000 currently accepted species, in over 1,900 genera (list) in 13 subfamilies. The number of species in the family Asteraceae is rivaled only by Orchidaceae. Which is the larger family is unclear, because of the uncertainty about how many extant species each family includes. The four subfamilies Asteroideae, Cichorioideae, Carduoideae and Mutisioideae contain 99% of the species diversity of the whole family (approximately 70%, 14%, 11% and 3% respectively).\nBecause of the morphological complexity exhibited by this family, agreeing on generic circumscriptions has often been difficult for taxonomists. As a result, several of these genera have required multiple revisions.\nPaleontology and evolutionary processes.\nThe oldest known fossils of members of Asteraceae are pollen grains from the Late Cretaceous of Antarctica, dated to \u223c76\u201366 mya (Campanian to Maastrichtian) and assigned to the extant genus \"Dasyphyllum\". Barreda, \"et al.\" (2015) estimated that the crown group of Asteraceae evolved at least 85.9 mya (Late Cretaceous, Santonian) with a stem node age of 88\u201389 mya (Late Cretaceous, Coniacian).\nIt is not known whether the precise cause of their great success was the development of the highly specialised capitulum, their ability to store energy as fructans (mainly inulin), which is an advantage in relatively dry zones, or some combination of these and possibly other factors. Heterocarpy, or the ability to produce different fruit morphs, has evolved and is common in Asteraceae. It allows seeds to be dispersed over varying distances and each is adapted to different environments, increasing chances of survival.\nEtymology and pronunciation.\nThe name Asteraceae () comes to international scientific vocabulary from Neo-Latin, from \"Aster\", the type genus, + \"-aceae\", a standardized suffix for plant family names in modern taxonomy. The genus name comes from the Classical Latin word , \"star\", which came from Ancient Greek (), \"star\". It refers to the star-like form of the inflorescence. \nThe original name Compositae is still valid under the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants. It refers to the \"composite\" nature of the capitula, which consist of a few or many individual flowers.\nThe vernacular name \"daisy\", widely applied to members of this family, is derived from the Old English name of the daisy (\"Bellis perennis\"): , meaning \"day's eye\". This is because the petals open at dawn and close at dusk.\nDistribution and habitat.\nAsteraceae species have a widespread distribution, from subpolar to tropical regions in a wide variety of habitats. Most occur in hot desert and cold or hot semi-desert climates, and they are found on every continent but Antarctica. They are especially numerous in tropical and subtropical regions (notably Central America, eastern Brazil, the Mediterranean, the Levant, southern Africa, central Asia, and southwestern China). The largest proportion of the species occur in the arid and semi-arid regions of subtropical and lower temperate latitudes. The Asteraceae family comprises 10% of all flowering plant species.\nEcology.\nAsteraceae are especially common in open and dry environments. Many members of Asteraceae are pollinated by insects, which explains their value in attracting beneficial insects, but anemophily is also present (e.g. \"Ambrosia\", \"Artemisia\"). There are many apomictic species in the family.\nSeeds are ordinarily dispersed intact with the fruiting body, the cypsela. \"Anemochory\" (wind dispersal) is common, assisted by a hairy pappus. \"Epizoochory\" is another common method, in which the dispersal unit, a single cypsela (e.g. \"Bidens\") or entire capitulum (e.g. \"Arctium\") has hooks, spines or some structure to attach to the fur or plumage (or even clothes, as in the photo) of an animal just to fall off later far from its mother plant. \nSome members of Asteraceae are economically important as weeds. Notable in the United States are \"Senecio jacobaea\" (ragwort), \"Senecio vulgaris\" (groundsel), and \"Taraxacum\" (dandelion). Some are invasive species in particular regions, often having been introduced by human agency. Examples include various tumbleweeds, \"Bidens\", ragweeds, thistles, and dandelion. Dandelion was introduced into North America by European settlers who used the young leaves as a salad green. A number of species are toxic to grazing animals.\nUses.\nAsteraceae is an economically important family, providing products such as cooking oils, leaf vegetables like lettuce, sunflower seeds, artichokes, sweetening agents, coffee substitutes and herbal teas. Several genera are of horticultural importance, including pot marigold (\"Calendula officinalis\"), \"Echinacea\" (coneflowers), various daisies, fleabane, chrysanthemums, dahlias, zinnias, and heleniums. Asteraceae are important in herbal medicine, including \"Grindelia\", yarrow, and many others.\nCommercially important plants in Asteraceae include the food crops \"Lactuca sativa\" (lettuce), \"Cichorium\" (chicory), \"Cynara scolymus\" (globe artichoke), \"Helianthus annuus\" (sunflower), \"Smallanthus sonchifolius\" (yac\u00f3n), \"Carthamus tinctorius\" (safflower) and \"Helianthus tuberosus\" (Jerusalem artichoke).\nPlants are used as herbs and in herbal teas and other beverages. Chamomile, for example, comes from two different species: the annual \"Matricaria chamomilla\" (German chamomile) and the perennial \"Chamaemelum nobile\" (Roman chamomile). \"Calendula\" (known as pot marigold) is grown commercially for herbal teas and potpourri. \"Echinacea\" is used as a medicinal tea. The wormwood genus \"Artemisia\" includes absinthe (\"A. absinthium\") and tarragon (\"A. dracunculus\"). Winter tarragon (\"Tagetes lucida\"), is commonly grown and used as a tarragon substitute in climates where tarragon will not survive.\nMany members of the family are grown as ornamental plants for their flowers, and some are important ornamental crops for the cut flower industry. Some examples are \"Chrysanthemum\", \"Gerbera\", \"Calendula\", \"Dendranthema\", \"Argyranthemum\", \"Dahlia\", \"Tagetes\", \"Zinnia\", and many others.\nMany species of this family possess medicinal properties and are used as traditional antiparasitic medicine.\nMembers of the family are also commonly featured in medical and phytochemical journals because the sesquiterpene lactone compounds contained within them are an important cause of allergic contact dermatitis. Allergy to these compounds is the leading cause of allergic contact dermatitis in florists in the US. Pollen from ragweed \"Ambrosia\" is among the main causes of so-called hay fever in the United States.\nAsteraceae are also used for some industrial purposes. French Marigold (\"Tagetes patula\") is common in commercial poultry feeds and its oil is extracted for uses in cola and the cigarette industry. The genera \"Chrysanthemum\", \"Pulicaria\", \"Tagetes\", and \"Tanacetum\" contain species with useful insecticidal properties. \"Parthenium argentatum\" (guayule) is a source of hypoallergenic latex.\nSeveral members of the family are copious nectar producers and are useful for evaluating pollinator populations during their bloom. \"Centaurea\" (knapweed), \"Helianthus annuus\" (domestic sunflower), and some species of \"Solidago\" (goldenrod) are major \"honey plants\" for beekeepers. \"Solidago\" produces relatively high protein pollen, which helps honey bees over winter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "957", "revid": "1750837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=957", "title": "Apiaceae", "text": "Family of flowering plants\nApiaceae () or Umbelliferae is a family of mostly aromatic flowering plants named after the type genus \"Apium\" and commonly known as the celery, carrot or parsley family, or simply as umbellifers. It is the 16th-largest family of flowering plants, with more than 3,800 species in about 446 genera, including such well-known and economically important plants as ajwain, angelica, anise, asafoetida, caraway, carrot, celery, chervil, coriander, cumin, dill, fennel, lovage, cow parsley, parsley, parsnip and sea holly, as well as silphium, a plant whose identity is unclear and which may be extinct.\nThe family Apiaceae includes a significant number of phototoxic species, such as giant hogweed, and a smaller number of highly poisonous species, such as poison hemlock, water hemlock, spotted cowbane, fool's parsley, and various species of water dropwort.\nDescription.\nMost Apiaceae are annual, biennial or perennial herbs (frequently with the leaves aggregated toward the base), though a minority are woody shrubs or small trees such as \"Bupleurum fruticosum\". Their leaves are of variable size and alternately arranged, or with the upper leaves becoming nearly opposite. The leaves may be petiolate or sessile. There are no stipules but the petioles are frequently sheathing and the leaves may be perfoliate. The leaf blade is usually dissected, ternate, or pinnatifid, but simple and entire in some genera, e.g. \"Bupleurum\". Commonly, their leaves emit a marked smell when crushed, aromatic to fetid, but absent in some species.\nThe defining characteristic of this family is the inflorescence, the flowers nearly always aggregated in terminal umbels, that may be simple or more commonly compound, often umbelliform cymes. The flowers are usually perfect (hermaphroditic) and actinomorphic, but there may be zygomorphic flowers at the edge of the umbel, as in carrot (\"Daucus carota\") and coriander, with petals of unequal size, the ones pointing outward from the umbel larger than the ones pointing inward. Some are andromonoecious, polygamomonoecious, or even dioecious (as in \"Acronema\"), with a distinct calyx and corolla, but the calyx is often highly reduced, to the point of being undetectable in many species, while the corolla can be white, yellow, pink or purple. The flowers are nearly perfectly pentamerous, with five petals and five stamens.\nThere is often variation in the functionality of the stamens even within a single inflorescence. Some flowers are functionally staminate (where a pistil may be present but has no ovules capable of being fertilized) while others are functionally pistillate (where stamens are present but their anthers do not produce viable pollen). Pollination of one flower by the pollen of a different flower of the same plant (geitonogamy) is common. The gynoecium consists of two carpels fused into a single, bicarpellate pistil with an inferior ovary. Stylopodia support two styles and secrete nectar, attracting pollinators like flies, mosquitoes, gnats, beetles, moths, and bees. The fruit is a schizocarp consisting of two fused carpels that separate at maturity into two mericarps, each containing a single seed. The fruits of many species are dispersed by wind but others such as those of \"Daucus\" spp., are covered in bristles, which may be hooked in sanicle \"Sanicula europaea\" and thus catch in the fur of animals. The seeds have an oily endosperm and often contain essential oils, containing aromatic compounds that are responsible for the flavour of commercially important umbelliferous seed such as anise, cumin and coriander. The shape and details of the ornamentation of the ripe fruits are important for identification to species level.\nTaxonomy.\nApiaceae was first described by John Lindley in 1836. The name is derived from the type genus \"Apium\", which was originally used by Pliny the Elder circa 50 AD for a celery-like plant. The alternative name for the family, Umbelliferae, derives from the inflorescence being generally in the form of a compound umbel. The family was one of the first to be recognized as a distinct group in Jacques Daleschamps' 1586 \"Historia generalis plantarum\". With Robert Morison's 1672 \"Plantarum umbelliferarum distribution nova\" it became the first group of plants for which a systematic study was published.\nThe family is solidly placed within the Apiales order in the APG III system. It is closely related to Araliaceae and the boundaries between these families remain unclear. Traditionally groups within the family have been delimited largely based on fruit morphology, and the results from this have not been congruent with the more recent molecular phylogenetic analyses. The subfamilial and tribal classification for the family is currently in a state of flux, with many of the groups being found to be grossly paraphyletic or polyphyletic.\nClassification and phylogeny.\nPrior to molecular phylogenetic studies, the family was subdivided primarily based on fruit characteristics. Molecular phylogenetic analyses from the mid-1990s onwards have shown that fruit characters evolved in parallel many times, so that using them in classification resulted in units that were not monophyletic. In 2004, it was proposed that Apiaceae should be divided into four subfamilies:\nApioideae is by far the largest subfamily with about 90% of the genera. Most subsequent studies have supported this division, although leaving some genera unplaced. A 2021 study suggested the relationships shown in the following cladogram.\nThe \"Platysace\" clade and the genera \"Klotzschia\" and \"Hermas\" fell outside the four subfamilies. It was suggested that they could be accommodated in subfamilies of their own. \"Phlyctidocarpa\" was formerly placed in the subfamily Apioideae, but if kept there makes Apioideae paraphyletic. It could be placed in an enlarged Saniculoideae, or restored to Apioideae if the latter were expanded to include Saniculoideae.\nThe subfamilies can be further divided into tribes and clades, with many clades falling outside formally recognized tribes.\nGenera.\nThe number of genera accepted by sources varies. As of December\u00a02022[ [update]], Plants of the World Online (PoWO) accepted 444 genera, while GRIN Taxonomy accepted 462. The PoWO genera are not a subset of those in GRIN; for example, \"Haloselinum\" is accepted by PoWO but not by GRIN, while \"Halosciastrum\" is accepted by GRIN but not by PoWO, which treats it as a synonym of \"Angelica\". The Angiosperm Phylogeny Website had an \"approximate list\" of 446 genera.\nEcology.\nThe black swallowtail butterfly, \"Papilio polyxenes\", uses the family Apiaceae for food and host plants for oviposition. The 22-spot ladybird is also commonly found eating mildew on these plants.\nUses.\nMany members of this family are cultivated for various purposes. Parsnip (\"Pastinaca sativa\"), carrot (\"Daucus carota\") and Hamburg parsley (\"Petroselinum crispum\") produce tap roots that are large enough to be useful as food. Many species produce essential oils in their leaves or fruits and as a result are flavourful aromatic herbs. Examples are parsley (\"Petroselinum crispum\"), coriander (\"Coriandrum sativum\"), culantro, and dill (\"Anethum graveolens\"). The seeds may be used in cuisine, as with coriander (\"Coriandrum sativum\"), fennel (\"Foeniculum vulgare\"), cumin (\"Cuminum cyminum\"), and caraway (\"Carum carvi\").\nOther notable cultivated Apiaceae include chervil (\"Anthriscus cerefolium\"), angelica (\"Angelica\" spp.), celery (\"Apium graveolens\"), arracacha (\"Arracacia xanthorrhiza\"), sea holly (\"Eryngium\" spp.), asafoetida (\"Ferula asafoetida\"), galbanum (\"Ferula gummosa\"), cicely (\"Myrrhis odorata\"), anise (\"Pimpinella anisum\"), lovage (\"Levisticum officinale\"), and hacquetia (\"Sanicula epipactis\").\nCultivation.\nGenerally, all members of this family are best cultivated in the cool-season garden; they may not grow at all if the soils are too warm. Almost every widely cultivated plant of this group is a considered useful as a companion plant. One reason is that the tiny flowers, clustered into umbels, are well suited for ladybugs, parasitic wasps, and predatory flies, which drink nectar when not reproducing. They then prey upon insect pests on nearby plants. Some of the members of this family considered \"herbs\" produce scents that are believed to mask the odours of nearby plants, thus making them harder for insect pests to find.\nOther uses.\nThe poisonous members of the Apiaceae have been used for a variety of purposes globally. The poisonous \"Oenanthe crocata\" has been used as an aid in suicides, and arrow poisons have been made from various other family species.\n\"Daucus carota\" has been used as coloring for butter.\n\"Dorema ammoniacum\", \"Ferula galbaniflua\", and \"Ferula moschata\" (sumbul) are sources of incense.\nThe woody \"Azorella compacta\" Phil. has been used in South America for fuel.\nToxicity.\nMany species in the family Apiaceae produce phototoxic substances (called furanocoumarins) that sensitize human skin to sunlight. Contact with plant parts that contain furanocoumarins, followed by exposure to sunlight, may cause phytophotodermatitis, a serious skin inflammation. Phototoxic species include \"Ammi majus\", \"Notobubon galbanum,\" the parsnip (\"Pastinaca sativa\") and numerous species of the genus \"Heracleum\", especially the giant hogweed (\"Heracleum mantegazzianum\"). Of all the plant species that have been reported to induce phytophotodermatitis, approximately half belong to the family Apiaceae.\nThe family Apiaceae also includes a smaller number of poisonous species, including poison hemlock, water hemlock, spotted cowbane, fool's parsley, and various species of water dropwort.\nSome members of the family Apiaceae, including carrot, celery, fennel, parsley and parsnip, contain polyynes, an unusual class of organic compounds that exhibit cytotoxic effects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "958", "revid": "17794675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=958", "title": "Axon", "text": "Long projection on a neuron that conducts signals to other neurons\nAn axon (from Greek \u1f04\u03be\u03c9\u03bd \"\u00e1x\u014dn\", axis), or nerve fiber (or nerve fibre: see spelling differences), is a long, slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, in vertebrates, that typically conducts electrical impulses known as action potentials away from the nerve cell body. The function of the axon is to transmit information to different neurons, muscles, and glands. In certain sensory neurons (pseudounipolar neurons), such as those for touch and warmth, the axons are called afferent nerve fibers and the electrical impulse travels along these from the periphery to the cell body and from the cell body to the spinal cord along another branch of the same axon. Axon dysfunction can be the cause of many inherited and acquired neurological disorders that affect both the peripheral and central neurons. Nerve fibers are classed into three types\u00a0\u2013 group A nerve fibers, group B nerve fibers, and group C nerve fibers. Groups A and B are myelinated, and group C are unmyelinated. These groups include both sensory fibers and motor fibers. Another classification groups only the sensory fibers as Type I, Type II, Type III, and Type IV.\nAn axon is one of two types of cytoplasmic protrusions from the cell body of a neuron; the other type is a dendrite. Axons are distinguished from dendrites by several features, including shape (dendrites often taper while axons usually maintain a constant radius), length (dendrites are restricted to a small region around the cell body while axons can be much longer), and function (dendrites receive signals whereas axons transmit them). Some types of neurons have no axon and transmit signals from their dendrites. In some species, axons can emanate from dendrites known as axon-carrying dendrites. No neuron ever has more than one axon; however in invertebrates such as insects or leeches the axon sometimes consists of several regions that function more or less independently of each other.\nAxons are covered by a membrane known as an axolemma; the cytoplasm of an axon is called axoplasm. Most axons branch, in some cases very profusely. The end branches of an axon are called telodendria. The swollen end of a telodendron is known as the axon terminal which joins the dendron or cell body of another neuron forming a synaptic connection. Axons make contact with other cells\u00a0\u2013 usually other neurons but sometimes muscle or gland cells\u00a0\u2013 at junctions called synapses. In some circumstances, the axon of one neuron may form a synapse with the dendrites of the same neuron, resulting in an autapse. At a synapse, the membrane of the axon closely adjoins the membrane of the target cell, and special molecular structures serve to transmit electrical or electrochemical signals across the gap. Some synaptic junctions appear along the length of an axon as it extends; these are called \"en passant\" (\"in passing\") synapses and can be in the hundreds or even the thousands along one axon. Other synapses appear as terminals at the ends of axonal branches.\nA single axon, with all its branches taken together, can innervate multiple parts of the brain and generate thousands of synaptic terminals. A bundle of axons make a nerve tract in the central nervous system, and a fascicle in the peripheral nervous system. In placental mammals the largest white matter tract in the brain is the corpus callosum, formed of some 200 million axons in the human brain.\nAnatomy.\nAxons are the primary transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they form nerves. Some axons can extend up to one meter or more while others extend as little as one millimeter. The longest axons in the human body are those of the sciatic nerve, which run from the base of the spinal cord to the big toe of each foot. The diameter of axons is also variable. Most individual axons are microscopic in diameter (typically about one micrometer (\u00b5m) across). The largest mammalian axons can reach a diameter of up to 20\u00a0\u00b5m. The squid giant axon, which is specialized to conduct signals very rapidly, is close to 1 millimeter in diameter, the size of a small pencil lead. The numbers of axonal telodendria (the branching structures at the end of the axon) can also differ from one nerve fiber to the next. Axons in the central nervous system (CNS) typically show multiple telodendria, with many synaptic end points. In comparison, the cerebellar granule cell axon is characterized by a single T-shaped branch node from which two parallel fibers extend. Elaborate branching allows for the simultaneous transmission of messages to a large number of target neurons within a single region of the brain.\nThere are two types of axons in the nervous system: myelinated and unmyelinated axons. Myelin is a layer of a fatty insulating substance, which is formed by two types of glial cells: Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes. In the peripheral nervous system Schwann cells form the myelin sheath of a myelinated axon. Oligodendrocytes form the insulating myelin in the CNS. Along myelinated nerve fibers, gaps in the myelin sheath known as nodes of Ranvier occur at evenly spaced intervals. The myelination enables an especially rapid mode of electrical impulse propagation called saltatory conduction.\nThe myelinated axons from the cortical neurons form the bulk of the neural tissue called white matter in the brain. The myelin gives the white appearance to the tissue in contrast to the grey matter of the cerebral cortex which contains the neuronal cell bodies. A similar arrangement is seen in the cerebellum. Bundles of myelinated axons make up the nerve tracts in the CNS. Where these tracts cross the midline of the brain to connect opposite regions they are called \"commissures\". The largest of these is the corpus callosum that connects the two cerebral hemispheres, and this has around 20 million axons.\nThe structure of a neuron is seen to consist of two separate functional regions, or compartments\u00a0\u2013 the cell body together with the dendrites as one region, and the axonal region as the other.\nAxonal region.\nThe axonal region or compartment, includes the axon hillock, the initial segment, the rest of the axon, and the axon telodendria, and axon terminals. It also includes the myelin sheath. The Nissl bodies that produce the neuronal proteins are absent in the axonal region. Proteins needed for the growth of the axon, and the removal of waste materials, need a framework for transport. This axonal transport is provided for in the axoplasm by arrangements of microtubules and intermediate filaments known as neurofilaments.\nAxon hillock.\nThe axon hillock is the area formed from the cell body of the neuron as it extends to become the axon. It precedes the initial segment. The received action potentials that are summed in the neuron are transmitted to the axon hillock for the generation of an action potential from the initial segment.\nAxonal initial segment.\nThe axonal initial segment (AIS) is a structurally and functionally separate microdomain of the axon. One function of the initial segment is to separate the main part of an axon from the rest of the neuron; another function is to help initiate action potentials. Both of these functions support neuron cell polarity, in which dendrites (and, in some cases the soma) of a neuron receive input signals at the basal region, and at the apical region the neuron's axon provides output signals.\nThe axon initial segment is unmyelinated and contains a specialized complex of proteins. It is between approximately 20 and 60\u00a0\u00b5m in length and functions as the site of action potential initiation. Both the position on the axon and the length of the AIS can change showing a degree of plasticity that can fine-tune the neuronal output. A longer AIS is associated with a greater excitability. Plasticity is also seen in the ability of the AIS to change its distribution and to maintain the activity of neural circuitry at a constant level.\nThe AIS is highly specialized for the fast conduction of nerve impulses. This is achieved by a high concentration of voltage-gated sodium channels in the initial segment where the action potential is initiated. The ion channels are accompanied by a high number of cell adhesion molecules and scaffolding proteins that anchor them to the cytoskeleton. Interactions with ankyrin G are important as it is the major organizer in the AIS.\nAxonal transport.\nThe axoplasm is the equivalent of cytoplasm in the cell. Microtubules form in the axoplasm at the axon hillock. They are arranged along the length of the axon, in overlapping sections, and all point in the same direction\u00a0\u2013 towards the axon terminals. This is noted by the positive endings of the microtubules. This overlapping arrangement provides the routes for the transport of different materials from the cell body. Studies on the axoplasm has shown the movement of numerous vesicles of all sizes to be seen along cytoskeletal filaments\u00a0\u2013 the microtubules, and neurofilaments, in both directions between the axon and its terminals and the cell body.\nOutgoing anterograde transport from the cell body along the axon, carries mitochondria and membrane proteins needed for growth to the axon terminal. Ingoing retrograde transport carries cell waste materials from the axon terminal to the cell body. Outgoing and ingoing tracks use different sets of motor proteins. Outgoing transport is provided by kinesin, and ingoing return traffic is provided by dynein. Dynein is minus-end directed. There are many forms of kinesin and dynein motor proteins, and each is thought to carry a different cargo. The studies on transport in the axon led to the naming of kinesin.\nMyelination.\nIn the nervous system, axons may be myelinated, or unmyelinated. This is the provision of an insulating layer, called a myelin sheath. The myelin membrane is unique in its relatively high lipid to protein ratio.\nIn the peripheral nervous system axons are myelinated by glial cells known as Schwann cells. In the central nervous system the myelin sheath is provided by another type of glial cell, the oligodendrocyte. Schwann cells myelinate a single axon. An oligodendrocyte can myelinate up to 50 axons.\nThe composition of myelin is different in the two types. In the CNS the major myelin protein is proteolipid protein, and in the PNS it is myelin basic protein.\nNodes of Ranvier.\nNodes of Ranvier (also known as \"myelin sheath gaps\") are short unmyelinated segments of a myelinated axon, which are found periodically interspersed between segments of the myelin sheath. Therefore, at the point of the node of Ranvier, the axon is reduced in diameter. These nodes are areas where action potentials can be generated. In saltatory conduction, electrical currents produced at each node of Ranvier are conducted with little attenuation to the next node in line, where they remain strong enough to generate another action potential. Thus in a myelinated axon, action potentials effectively \"jump\" from node to node, bypassing the myelinated stretches in between, resulting in a propagation speed much faster than even the fastest unmyelinated axon can sustain.\nAxon terminals.\nAn axon can divide into many branches called telodendria (Greek for 'end of tree'). At the end of each telodendron is an axon terminal (also called a synaptic bouton, or terminal bouton). Axon terminals contain synaptic vesicles that store the neurotransmitter for release at the synapse. This makes multiple synaptic connections with other neurons possible. Sometimes the axon of a neuron may synapse onto dendrites of the same neuron, when it is known as an autapse.\nAction potentials.\nMost axons carry signals in the form of action potentials, which are discrete electrochemical impulses that travel rapidly along an axon, starting at the cell body and terminating at points where the axon makes synaptic contact with target cells. The defining characteristic of an action potential is that it is \"all-or-nothing\"\u00a0\u2013 every action potential that an axon generates has essentially the same size and shape. This all-or-nothing characteristic allows action potentials to be transmitted from one end of a long axon to the other without any reduction in size. There are, however, some types of neurons with short axons that carry graded electrochemical signals, of variable amplitude.\nWhen an action potential reaches a presynaptic terminal, it activates the synaptic transmission process. The first step is rapid opening of calcium ion channels in the membrane of the axon, allowing calcium ions to flow inward across the membrane. The resulting increase in intracellular calcium concentration causes synaptic vesicles (tiny containers enclosed by a lipid membrane) filled with a neurotransmitter chemical to fuse with the axon's membrane and empty their contents into the extracellular space. The neurotransmitter is released from the presynaptic nerve through exocytosis. The neurotransmitter chemical then diffuses across to receptors located on the membrane of the target cell. The neurotransmitter binds to these receptors and activates them. Depending on the type of receptors that are activated, the effect on the target cell can be to excite the target cell, inhibit it, or alter its metabolism in some way. This entire sequence of events often takes place in less than a thousandth of a second. Afterward, inside the presynaptic terminal, a new set of vesicles is moved into position next to the membrane, ready to be released when the next action potential arrives. The action potential is the final electrical step in the integration of synaptic messages at the scale of the neuron.\nExtracellular recordings of action potential propagation in axons has been demonstrated in freely moving animals. While extracellular somatic action potentials have been used to study cellular activity in freely moving animals such as place cells, axonal activity in both white and gray matter can also be recorded. Extracellular recordings of axon action potential propagation is distinct from somatic action potentials in three ways: 1. The signal has a shorter peak-trough duration (~150\u03bcs) than of pyramidal cells (~500\u03bcs) or interneurons (~250\u03bcs). 2. The voltage change is triphasic. 3. Activity recorded on a tetrode is seen on only one of the four recording wires. In recordings from freely moving rats, axonal signals have been isolated in white matter tracts including the alveus and the corpus callosum as well hippocampal gray matter.\nIn fact, the generation of action potentials in vivo is sequential in nature, and these sequential spikes constitute the digital codes in the neurons. Although previous studies indicate an axonal origin of a single spike evoked by short-term pulses, physiological signals in vivo trigger the initiation of sequential spikes at the cell bodies of the neurons.\nIn addition to propagating action potentials to axonal terminals, the axon is able to amplify the action potentials, which makes sure a secure propagation of sequential action potentials toward the axonal terminal. In terms of molecular mechanisms, voltage-gated sodium channels in the axons possess lower threshold and shorter refractory period in response to short-term pulses.\nDevelopment and growth.\nDevelopment.\nThe development of the axon to its target, is one of the six major stages in the overall development of the nervous system. Studies done on cultured hippocampal neurons suggest that neurons initially produce multiple neurites that are equivalent, yet only one of these neurites is destined to become the axon. It is unclear whether axon specification precedes axon elongation or vice versa, although recent evidence points to the latter. If an axon that is not fully developed is cut, the polarity can change and other neurites can potentially become the axon. This alteration of polarity only occurs when the axon is cut at least 10 \u03bcm shorter than the other neurites. After the incision is made, the longest neurite will become the future axon and all the other neurites, including the original axon, will turn into dendrites. Imposing an external force on a neurite, causing it to elongate, will make it become an axon. Nonetheless, axonal development is achieved through a complex interplay between extracellular signaling, intracellular signaling and cytoskeletal dynamics.\nExtracellular signaling.\nThe extracellular signals that propagate through the extracellular matrix surrounding neurons play a prominent role in axonal development. These signaling molecules include proteins, neurotrophic factors, and extracellular matrix and adhesion molecules.\nNetrin (also known as UNC-6) a secreted protein, functions in axon formation. When the UNC-5 netrin receptor is mutated, several neurites are irregularly projected out of neurons and finally a single axon is extended anteriorly. The neurotrophic factors\u00a0\u2013 nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-3 (NTF3) are also involved in axon development and bind to Trk receptors.\nThe ganglioside-converting enzyme plasma membrane ganglioside sialidase (PMGS), which is involved in the activation of TrkA at the tip of neutrites, is required for the elongation of axons. PMGS asymmetrically distributes to the tip of the neurite that is destined to become the future axon.\nIntracellular signaling.\nDuring axonal development, the activity of PI3K is increased at the tip of destined axon. Disrupting the activity of PI3K inhibits axonal development. Activation of PI3K results in the production of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PtdIns) which can cause significant elongation of a neurite, converting it into an axon. As such, the overexpression of phosphatases that dephosphorylate PtdIns leads into the failure of polarization.\nCytoskeletal dynamics.\nThe neurite with the lowest actin filament content will become the axon. PGMS concentration and f-actin content are inversely correlated; when PGMS becomes enriched at the tip of a neurite, its f-actin content is substantially decreased. In addition, exposure to actin-depolimerizing drugs and toxin B (which inactivates Rho-signaling) causes the formation of multiple axons. Consequently, the interruption of the actin network in a growth cone will promote its neurite to become the axon.\nGrowth.\nGrowing axons move through their environment via the growth cone, which is at the tip of the axon. The growth cone has a broad sheet-like extension called a lamellipodium which contain protrusions called filopodia. The filopodia are the mechanism by which the entire process adheres to surfaces and explores the surrounding environment. Actin plays a major role in the mobility of this system. Environments with high levels of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) create an ideal environment for axonal growth. This seems to provide a \"sticky\" surface for axons to grow along. Examples of CAMs specific to neural systems include N-CAM, TAG-1\u00a0\u2013 an axonal glycoprotein\u00a0\u2013 and MAG, all of which are part of the immunoglobulin superfamily. Another set of molecules called extracellular matrix-adhesion molecules also provide a sticky substrate for axons to grow along. Examples of these molecules include laminin, fibronectin, tenascin, and perlecan. Some of these are surface bound to cells and thus act as short range attractants or repellents. Others are difusible ligands and thus can have long range effects.\nCells called guidepost cells assist in the guidance of neuronal axon growth. These cells that help axon guidance, are typically other neurons that are sometimes immature. When the axon has completed its growth at its connection to the target, the diameter of the axon can increase by up to five times, depending on the speed of conduction required.\nIt has also been discovered through research that if the axons of a neuron were damaged, as long as the soma (the cell body of a neuron) is not damaged, the axons would regenerate and remake the synaptic connections with neurons with the help of guidepost cells. This is also referred to as neuroregeneration.\nNogo-A is a type of neurite outgrowth inhibitory component that is present in the central nervous system myelin membranes (found in an axon). It has a crucial role in restricting axonal regeneration in adult mammalian central nervous system. In recent studies, if Nogo-A is blocked and neutralized, it is possible to induce long-distance axonal regeneration which leads to enhancement of functional recovery in rats and mouse spinal cord. This has yet to be done on humans. A recent study has also found that macrophages activated through a specific inflammatory pathway activated by the Dectin-1 receptor are capable of promoting axon recovery, also however causing neurotoxicity in the neuron.\nLength regulation.\nAxons vary largely in length from a few micrometers up to meters in some animals. This emphasizes that there must be a cellular length regulation mechanism allowing the neurons both to sense the length of their axons and to control their growth accordingly. It was discovered that motor proteins play an important role in regulating the length of axons. Based on this observation, researchers developed an explicit model for axonal growth describing how motor proteins could affect the axon length on the molecular level. These studies suggest that motor proteins carry signaling molecules from the soma to the growth cone and vice versa whose concentration oscillates in time with a length-dependent frequency.\nClassification.\nThe axons of neurons in the human peripheral nervous system can be classified based on their physical features and signal conduction properties. Axons were known to have different thicknesses (from 0.1 to 20\u00a0\u00b5m) and these differences were thought to relate to the speed at which an action potential could travel along the axon\u00a0\u2013 its \"conductance velocity\". Erlanger and Gasser proved this hypothesis, and identified several types of nerve fiber, establishing a relationship between the diameter of an axon and its nerve conduction velocity. They published their findings in 1941 giving the first classification of axons.\nAxons are classified in two systems. The first one introduced by Erlanger and Gasser, grouped the fibers into three main groups using the letters A, B, and C. These groups, group A, group B, and group C include both the sensory fibers (afferents) and the motor fibers (efferents). The first group A, was subdivided into alpha, beta, gamma, and delta fibers\u00a0\u2013 A\u03b1, A\u03b2, A\u03b3, and A\u03b4. The motor neurons of the different motor fibers, were the lower motor neurons\u00a0\u2013 alpha motor neuron, beta motor neuron, and gamma motor neuron having the A\u03b1, A\u03b2, and A\u03b3 nerve fibers, respectively.\nLater findings by other researchers identified two groups of Aa fibers that were sensory fibers. These were then introduced into a system that only included sensory fibers (though some of these were mixed nerves and were also motor fibers). This system refers to the sensory groups as Types and uses Roman numerals: Type Ia, Type Ib, Type II, Type III, and Type IV.\nMotor.\nLower motor neurons have two kind of fibers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Sensory.\nDifferent sensory receptors innervate different types of nerve fibers. Proprioceptors are innervated by type Ia, Ib and II sensory fibers, mechanoreceptors by type II and III sensory fibers and nociceptors and thermoreceptors by type III and IV sensory fibers.\nAutonomic.\nThe autonomic nervous system has two kinds of peripheral fibers:\nClinical significance.\nIn order of degree of severity, injury to a nerve can be described as neurapraxia, axonotmesis, or neurotmesis.\nConcussion is considered a mild form of diffuse axonal injury. Axonal injury can also cause central chromatolysis. The dysfunction of axons in the nervous system is one of the major causes of many inherited neurological disorders that affect both peripheral and central neurons.\nWhen an axon is crushed, an active process of axonal degeneration takes place at the part of the axon furthest from the cell body. This degeneration takes place quickly following the injury, with the part of the axon being sealed off at the membranes and broken down by macrophages. This is known as Wallerian degeneration. Dying back of an axon can also take place in many neurodegenerative diseases, particularly when axonal transport is impaired, this is known as Wallerian-like degeneration. Studies suggest that the degeneration happens as\na result of the axonal protein NMNAT2, being prevented from reaching all of the axon.\nDemyelination of axons causes the multitude of neurological symptoms found in the disease multiple sclerosis.\nDysmyelination is the abnormal formation of the myelin sheath. This is implicated in several leukodystrophies, and also in schizophrenia.\nA severe traumatic brain injury can result in widespread lesions to nerve tracts damaging the axons in a condition known as diffuse axonal injury. This can lead to a persistent vegetative state. It has been shown in studies on the rat that axonal damage from a single mild traumatic brain injury, can leave a susceptibility to further damage, after repeated mild traumatic brain injuries.\nA nerve guidance conduit is an artificial means of guiding axon growth to enable neuroregeneration, and is one of the many treatments used for different kinds of nerve injury.\nTerminology.\nSome general dictionaries define \"nerve fiber\" as any neuronal process, including both axons and dendrites. However, medical sources generally use \"nerve fiber\" to refer to the axon only.\nHistory.\nGerman anatomist Otto Friedrich Karl Deiters is generally credited with the discovery of the axon by distinguishing it from the dendrites. Swiss R\u00fcdolf Albert von K\u00f6lliker and German Robert Remak were the first to identify and characterize the axon initial segment. K\u00f6lliker named the axon in 1896. Louis-Antoine Ranvier was the first to describe the gaps or nodes found on axons and for this contribution these axonal features are now commonly referred to as the nodes of Ranvier. Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal, a Spanish anatomist, proposed that axons were the output components of neurons, describing their functionality. Joseph Erlanger and Herbert Gasser earlier developed the classification system for peripheral nerve fibers, based on axonal conduction velocity, myelination, fiber size etc. Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley also employed the squid giant axon (1939) and by 1952 they had obtained a full quantitative description of the ionic basis of the action potential, leading to the formulation of the Hodgkin\u2013Huxley model. Hodgkin and Huxley were awarded jointly the Nobel Prize for this work in 1963. The formulae detailing axonal conductance were extended to vertebrates in the Frankenhaeuser\u2013Huxley equations. The understanding of the biochemical basis for action potential propagation has advanced further, and includes many details about individual ion channels.\nOther animals.\nThe axons in invertebrates have been extensively studied. The longfin inshore squid, often used as a model organism has the longest known axon. The giant squid has the largest axon known. Its size ranges from 0.5 (typically) to 1\u00a0mm in diameter and is used in the control of its jet propulsion system. The fastest recorded conduction speed of 210\u00a0m/s, is found in the ensheathed axons of some pelagic Penaeid shrimps and the usual range is between 90 and 200\u00a0meters/s (cf 100\u2013120\u00a0m/s for the fastest myelinated vertebrate axon.)\nIn other cases as seen in rat studies an axon originates from a dendrite; such axons are said to have \"dendritic origin\". Some axons with dendritic origin similarly have a \"proximal\" initial segment that starts directly at the axon origin, while others have a \"distal\" initial segment, discernibly separated from the axon origin. In many species some of the neurons have axons that emanate from the dendrite and not from the cell body, and these are known as axon-carrying dendrites. In many cases, an axon originates at an axon hillock on the soma; such axons are said to have \"somatic origin\". Some axons with somatic origin have a \"proximal\" initial segment adjacent the axon hillock, while others have a \"distal\" initial segment, separated from the soma by an extended axon hillock.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "959", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=959", "title": "Agma", "text": ""}
{"id": "960", "revid": "1160721901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=960", "title": "Aramaic alphabet", "text": "Script used to write the Aramaic language\nThe ancient Aramaic alphabet was adapted by Arameans from the Phoenician alphabet and became a distinct script by the 8th century BC. It was used to write the Aramaic languages spoken by ancient Aramean pre-Christian tribes throughout the Fertile Crescent. It was also adopted by other peoples as their own alphabet when empires and their subjects underwent linguistic Aramaization during a language shift for governing purposes\u2014a precursor to Arabization centuries later\u2014including among Assyrians who permanently replaced their Akkadian language and its cuneiform script with Aramaic and its script, and among Jews (but not Samaritans), who adopted the Aramaic language as their vernacular and started using the Aramaic alphabet even for writing Hebrew, displacing the former Paleo-Hebrew alphabet. (The modern Hebrew alphabet derives from the Aramaic alphabet, in contrast to the modern Samaritan alphabet, which derives from Paleo-Hebrew). The letters in the Aramaic alphabet all represent consonants, some of which are also used as \"matres lectionis\" to indicate long vowels.\nThe Aramaic alphabet is historically significant since virtually all modern Middle Eastern writing systems can be traced back to it. That is primarily due to the widespread usage of the Aramaic language after it was adopted as both a \"lingua franca\" and the official language of the Neo-Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian Empires, and their successor, the Achaemenid Empire.\nAmong the descendant scripts in modern use, the Jewish Hebrew alphabet bears the closest relation to the Imperial Aramaic script of the 5th century BC, with an identical letter inventory and, for the most part, nearly identical letter shapes. By contrast the Samaritan Hebrew script is directly descended from Proto-Hebrew/Phoenician script, which was in turn the ancestor of the Aramaic alphabet. The Aramaic alphabet was also an ancestor to the Nabataean alphabet, which in turn had the Arabic alphabet as a descendant.\nWriting systems (like the Aramaic) that indicate consonants but do not indicate most vowels other than by means of \"matres lectionis\" or added diacritical signs, have been called abjads by Peter T. Daniels to distinguish them from alphabets such as the Greek alphabet that represent vowels more systematically. The term was coined to avoid the notion that a writing system that represents sounds must be either a syllabary or an alphabet, which would imply that a system like Aramaic must be either a syllabary (as argued by Ignace Gelb) or an incomplete or deficient alphabet (as most other writers had said before Daniels). Rather, Daniels put forward, this is a different type of writing system, intermediate between syllabaries and 'full' alphabets.\nOrigins.\nThe earliest inscriptions in the Aramaic language use the Phoenician alphabet. Over time, the alphabet developed into the form shown below. Aramaic gradually became the \"lingua franca\" throughout the Middle East, with the script at first complementing and then displacing Assyrian cuneiform, as the predominant writing system.\nAchaemenid Empire (The First Persian Empire).\nAround 500 BC, following the Achaemenid conquest of Mesopotamia under Darius I, Old Aramaic was adopted by the Persians as the \"vehicle for written communication between the different regions of the vast Persian empire with its different peoples and languages. The use of a single official language, which modern scholarship has dubbed as Official Aramaic, Imperial Aramaic or Achaemenid Aramaic, can be assumed to have greatly contributed to the astonishing success of the Achaemenid Persians in holding their far-flung empire together for as long as they did.\"\nImperial Aramaic was highly standardised; its orthography was based more on historical roots than any spoken dialect and was influenced by Old Persian. The Aramaic glyph forms of the period are often divided into two main styles, the \"lapidary\" form, usually inscribed on hard surfaces like stone monuments, and a cursive form whose lapidary form tended to be more conservative by remaining more visually similar to Phoenician and early Aramaic. Both were in use through the Achaemenid Persian period, but the cursive form steadily gained ground over the lapidary, which had largely disappeared by the 3rd century BC.\nFor centuries after the fall of the Achaemenid Empire in 331 BC, Imperial Aramaic, or something near enough to it to be recognisable, would remain an influence on the various native Iranian languages. The Aramaic script would survive as the essential characteristics of the Iranian Pahlavi writing system.\n30 Aramaic documents from Bactria have been recently discovered, an analysis of which was published in November 2006. The texts, which were rendered on leather, reflect the use of Aramaic in the 4th century BC in the Persian Achaemenid administration of Bactria and Sogdiana.\nThe widespread usage of Achaemenid Aramaic in the Middle East led to the gradual adoption of the Aramaic alphabet for writing Hebrew. Formerly, Hebrew had been written using an alphabet closer in form to that of Phoenician, the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet.\nAramaic-derived scripts.\nSince the evolution of the Aramaic alphabet out of the Phoenician one was a gradual process, the division of the world's alphabets into the ones derived from the Phoenician one directly and the ones derived from Phoenician via Aramaic is somewhat artificial. In general, the alphabets of the Mediterranean region (Anatolia, Greece, Italy) are classified as Phoenician-derived, adapted from around the 8th century BC, and those of the East (the Levant, Persia, Central Asia and India) are considered Aramaic-derived, adapted from around the 6th century BC from the Imperial Aramaic script of the Achaemenid Empire.\nAfter the fall of the Achaemenid Empire, the unity of the Imperial Aramaic script was lost, diversifying into a number of descendant cursives.\nThe Hebrew and Nabataean alphabets, as they stood by the Roman era, were little changed in style from the Imperial Aramaic alphabet. Ibn Khaldun (1332\u20131406) alleges that not only the old Nabataean writing was influenced by the \"Syrian script\" (i.e. Aramaic), but also the old Chaldean script.\nA cursive Hebrew variant developed from the early centuries AD, but it remained restricted to the status of a variant used alongside the noncursive. By contrast, the cursive developed out of the Nabataean alphabet in the same period soon became the standard for writing Arabic, evolving into the Arabic alphabet as it stood by the time of the early spread of Islam.\nThe development of cursive versions of Aramaic also led to the creation of the Syriac, Palmyrene and Mandaic alphabets, which formed the basis of the historical scripts of Central Asia, such as the Sogdian and Mongolian alphabets.\nThe Old Turkic script is generally considered to have its ultimate origins in Aramaic, in particular via the Pahlavi or Sogdian alphabets, as suggested by V. Thomsen, or possibly via Kharosthi (\"cf\"., Issyk inscription).\nBrahmi script was also possibly derived or inspired by Aramaic. Brahmic family of scripts includes Devanagari.\nLanguages using the alphabet.\nToday, Biblical Aramaic, Jewish Neo-Aramaic dialects and the Aramaic language of the Talmud are written in the modern-Hebrew alphabet (distinguished from the Old Hebrew script). In classical Jewish literature, the name given to the modern-Hebrew script was \"Ashurit\" (the ancient Assyrian script), a script now known widely as the Aramaic script. It is believed that during the period of Assyrian dominion that Aramaic script and language received official status. Syriac and Christian Neo-Aramaic dialects are today written in the Syriac alphabet, which script has superseded the more ancient Assyrian script and now bears its name. Mandaic is written in the Mandaic alphabet. The near-identical nature of the Aramaic and the classical Hebrew alphabets caused Aramaic text to be typeset mostly in the standard Hebrew script in scholarly literature.\nMaaloula.\nIn Maaloula, one of few surviving communities in which a Western Aramaic dialect is still spoken, an Aramaic institute was established in 2007 by Damascus University that teaches courses to keep the language alive. The institute's activities were suspended in 2010 amidst fears that the square Aramaic alphabet used in the program too closely resembled the square script of the Hebrew alphabet and all the signs with the square Aramaic script were taken down. The program stated that they would instead use the more distinct Syriac alphabet, although use of the Aramaic alphabet has continued to some degree. Al Jazeera Arabic also broadcast a program about Western Neo-Aramaic and the villages in which it is spoken with the square script still in use.\nLetters.\nMatres lectionis.\nIn Aramaic writing, \"waw\" and \"yodh\" serve a double function. Originally, they represented only the consonants \"w\" and \"y\", but they were later adopted to indicate the long vowels \"\u016b\" and \"\u012b\" respectively as well (often also \"\u014d\" and \"\u0113\" respectively). In the latter role, they are known as \"\" or \"mothers of reading\".\n\u0100lap, likewise, has some of the characteristics of a \"\" because in initial positions, it indicates a glottal stop (followed by a vowel), but otherwise, it often also stands for the long vowels \"\u0101\" or \"\u0113\". Among Jews, the influence of Hebrew often led to the use of H\u0113 instead, at the end of a word.\nThe practice of using certain letters to hold vowel values spread to Aramaic-derived writing systems, such as in Arabic and Hebrew, which still follow the practice.\nUnicode.\nThe Imperial Aramaic alphabet was added to the Unicode Standard in October 2009, with the release of version 5.2.\nThe Unicode block for Imperial Aramaic is U+10840\u2013U+1085F:\nThe Syriac Aramaic alphabet was added to the Unicode Standard in September 1999, with the release of version 3.0.\nThe Syriac Abbreviation (a type of overline) can be represented with a special control character called the Syriac Abbreviation Mark (U+070F). The Unicode block for Syriac Aramaic is U+0700\u2013U+074F:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "963", "revid": "2952402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=963", "title": "Arguments for the existence of God", "text": ""}
{"id": "966", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=966", "title": "American shot", "text": "Cinematic technique\n\"American shot\" or \"cowboy shot\" is a translation of a phrase from French film criticism, \",\" and refers to a medium-long (\"knee\") film shot of a group of characters, who are arranged so that all are visible to the camera. The usual arrangement is for the actors to stand in an irregular line from one side of the screen to the other, with the actors at the end coming forward a little and standing more in profile than the others. The purpose of the composition is to allow complex dialogue scenes to be played out without changes in camera position. In some literature, this is simply referred to as a 3/4 shot.\nOne of the other main reasons why French critics called it \"American shot\" was its frequent use in the western genre. This was because a shot that started at knee level would reveal the weapon of a cowboy, usually holstered at their waist. It is actually the closest the camera can get to an actor while keeping both their face and their holstered gun in frame.\nThe French critics thought it was characteristic of American films of the 1930s or 1940s; however, it was mostly characteristic of cheaper American movies, such as Charlie Chan mysteries where people collected in front of a fireplace or at the foot of the stairs in order to explain what happened a few minutes ago.\nHoward Hawks legitimized this style in his films, allowing characters to act, even when not talking, when most of the audience would not be paying attention. It became his trademark style.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "967", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=967", "title": "Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis", "text": "Autoimmune disease\nMedical condition\nAcute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), or acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis, is a rare autoimmune disease marked by a sudden, widespread attack of inflammation in the brain and spinal cord. As well as causing the brain and spinal cord to become inflamed, ADEM also attacks the nerves of the central nervous system and damages their myelin insulation, which, as a result, destroys the white matter. The cause is often a trigger such as from viral infection or vaccinations.\nADEM's symptoms resemble the symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS), so the disease itself is sorted into the classification of the multiple sclerosis borderline diseases. However, ADEM has several features that distinguish it from MS. Unlike MS, ADEM occurs usually in children and is marked with rapid fever, although adolescents and adults can get the disease too. ADEM consists of a single flare-up whereas MS is marked with several flare-ups (or relapses), over a long period of time. Relapses following ADEM are reported in up to a quarter of patients, but the majority of these 'multiphasic' presentations following ADEM likely represent MS. ADEM is also distinguished by a loss of consciousness, coma and death, which is very rare in MS, except in severe cases.\nIt affects about 8 per 1,000,000 people per year. Although it occurs in all ages, most reported cases are in children and adolescents, with the average age around 5 to 8 years old. The disease affects males and females almost equally. ADEM shows seasonal variation with higher incidence in winter and spring months which may coincide with higher viral infections during these months. The mortality rate may be as high as 5%; however, full recovery is seen in 50 to 75% of cases with increase in survival rates up to 70 to 90% with figures including minor residual disability as well. The average time to recover from ADEM flare-ups is one to six months.\nADEM produces multiple inflammatory lesions in the brain and spinal cord, particularly in the white matter. Usually these are found in the subcortical and central white matter and cortical gray-white junction of both cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord, but periventricular white matter and gray matter of the cortex, thalami and basal ganglia may also be involved.\nWhen a person has more than one demyelinating episode of ADEM, the disease is then called recurrent disseminated encephalomyelitis or multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (MDEM). Also, a fulminant course in adults has been described.\nSigns and symptoms.\nADEM has an abrupt onset and a monophasic course. Symptoms usually begin 1\u20133 weeks after infection. Major symptoms include fever, headache, nausea and vomiting, confusion, vision impairment, drowsiness, seizures and coma. Although initially the symptoms are usually mild, they worsen rapidly over the course of hours to days, with the average time to maximum severity being about four and a half days. Additional symptoms include hemiparesis, paraparesis, and cranial nerve palsies.\nADEM in COVID-19.\nNeurological symptoms were the main presentation of COVID-19, which did not correlate with the severity of respiratory symptoms. The high incidence of ADEM with hemorrhage is striking. Brain inflammation is likely caused by an immune response to the disease rather than neurotropism. CSF analysis was not indicative of an infectious process, neurological impairment was not present in the acute phase of the infection, and neuroimaging findings were not typical of classical toxic and metabolic disorders. The finding of bilateral periventricular relatively asymmetrical lesions allied with deep white matter involvement, that may also be present in cortical gray-white matter junction, thalami, basal ganglia, cerebellum, and brainstem suggests an acute demyelination process. Additionally, hemorrhagic white matter lesions, clusters of macrophages related to axonal injury and ADEM-like appearance were also found in subcortical white matter.\nCauses.\nSince the discovery of the anti-MOG specificity against multiple sclerosis diagnosis it is considered that ADEM is one of the possible clinical causes of anti-MOG associated encephalomyelitis.\nAbout how the anti-MOG antibodies appear in the patients serum there are several theories:\nDiagnosis.\nThe term ADEM has been inconsistently used at different times. Currently, the commonly accepted international standard for the clinical case definition is the one published by the International Pediatric MS Study Group, revision 2007.\nGiven that the definition is clinical, it is currently unknown if all the cases of ADEM are positive for anti-MOG autoantibody; in any case, it appears to be strongly related to ADEM diagnosis.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nMultiple sclerosis.\nWhile ADEM and MS both involve autoimmune demyelination, they differ in many clinical, genetic, imaging, and histopathological aspects. Some authors consider MS and its borderline forms to constitute a spectrum, differing only in chronicity, severity, and clinical course, while others consider them discretely different diseases.\nTypically, ADEM appears in children following an antigenic challenge and remains monophasic. Nevertheless, ADEM does occur in adults, and can also be clinically multiphasic.\nProblems for differential diagnosis increase due to the lack of agreement for a definition of multiple sclerosis. If MS were defined only by the separation in time and space of the demyelinating lesions as McDonald did, it would not be enough to make a difference, as some cases of ADEM satisfy these conditions. Therefore, some authors propose to establish the dividing line as the shape of the lesions around the veins, being therefore \"perivenous vs. confluent demyelination\".\nThe pathology of ADEM is very similar to that of MS with some differences. The pathological hallmark of ADEM is perivenous inflammation with limited \"sleeves of demyelination\". Nevertheless, MS-like plaques (confluent demyelination) can appear\nPlaques in the white matter in MS are sharply delineated, while the glial scar in ADEM is smooth. Axons are better preserved in ADEM lesions. Inflammation in ADEM is widely disseminated and ill-defined, and finally, lesions are strictly perivenous, while in MS they are disposed around veins, but not so sharply.\nNevertheless, the co-occurrence of perivenous and confluent demyelination in some individuals suggests pathogenic overlap between acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis and misclassification even with biopsy or even postmortem ADEM in adults can progress to MS\nMultiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis.\nWhen the person has more than one demyelinating episode of ADEM, the disease is then called recurrent disseminated encephalomyelitis or multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (MDEM).\nIt has been found that anti-MOG auto-antibodies are related to this kind of ADEM\nAnother variant of ADEM in adults has been described, also related to anti-MOG auto-antibodies, has been named fulminant disseminated encephalomyelitis, and it has been reported to be clinically ADEM, but showing MS-like lesions on autopsy. It has been classified inside the anti-MOG associated inflammatory demyelinating diseases.\nAcute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis.\nAcute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (AHL, or AHLE), acute hemorrhagic encephalomyelitis (AHEM), acute necrotizing hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (ANHLE), Weston-Hurst syndrome, or Hurst's disease, is a hyperacute and frequently fatal form of ADEM. AHL is relatively rare (less than 100 cases have been reported in the medical literature as of 2006[ [update]]), it is seen in about 2% of ADEM cases, and is characterized by necrotizing vasculitis of venules and hemorrhage, and edema. Death is common in the first week and overall mortality is about 70%, but increasing evidence points to favorable outcomes after aggressive treatment with corticosteroids, immunoglobulins, cyclophosphamide, and plasma exchange. About 70% of survivors show residual neurological deficits, but some survivors have shown surprisingly little deficit considering the extent of the white matter affected.\nThis disease has been occasionally associated with ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, malaria, sepsis associated with immune complex deposition, methanol poisoning, and other underlying conditions. Also anecdotal association with MS has been reported\nLaboratory studies that support diagnosis of AHL are: peripheral leukocytosis, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis associated with normal glucose and increased protein. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), lesions of AHL typically show extensive T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) white matter hyperintensities with areas of hemorrhages, significant edema, and mass effect.\nTreatment.\nNo controlled clinical trials have been conducted on ADEM treatment, but aggressive treatment aimed at rapidly reducing inflammation of the CNS is standard. The widely accepted first-line treatment is high doses of intravenous corticosteroids, such as methylprednisolone or dexamethasone, followed by 3\u20136 weeks of gradually lower oral doses of prednisolone. Patients treated with methylprednisolone have shown better outcomes than those treated with dexamethasone. Oral tapers of less than three weeks duration show a higher chance of relapsing, and tend to show poorer outcomes. Other anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive therapies have been reported to show beneficial effect, such as plasmapheresis, high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), mitoxantrone and cyclophosphamide. These are considered alternative therapies, used when corticosteroids cannot be used or fail to show an effect.\nThere is some evidence to suggest that patients may respond to a combination of methylprednisolone and immunoglobulins if they fail to respond to either separately\nIn a study of 16 children with ADEM, 10 recovered completely after high-dose methylprednisolone, one severe case that failed to respond to steroids recovered completely after IV Ig; the five most severe cases \u2013 with ADAM and severe peripheral neuropathy \u2013 were treated with combined high-dose methylprednisolone and immunoglobulin, two remained paraplegic, one had motor and cognitive handicaps, and two recovered. A recent review of IVIg treatment of ADEM (of which the previous study formed the bulk of the cases) found that 70% of children showed complete recovery after treatment with IVIg, or IVIg plus corticosteroids. A study of IVIg treatment in adults with ADEM showed that IVIg seems more effective in treating sensory and motor disturbances, while steroids seem more effective in treating impairments of cognition, consciousness and rigor. This same study found one subject, a 71-year-old man who had not responded to steroids, that responded to an IVIg treatment 58 days after disease onset.\nPrognosis.\nFull recovery is seen in 50 to 70% of cases, ranging to 70 to 90% recovery with some minor residual disability (typically assessed using measures such as mRS or EDSS), average time to recover is one to six months. The mortality rate may be as high as 5\u201310%. Poorer outcomes are associated with unresponsiveness to steroid therapy, unusually severe neurological symptoms, or sudden onset. Children tend to have more favorable outcomes than adults, and cases presenting without fevers tend to have poorer outcomes. The latter effect may be due to either protective effects of fever, or that diagnosis and treatment is sought more rapidly when fever is present. \nADEM can progress to MS. It will be considered MS if some lesions appear in different times and brain areas\nMotor deficits.\nResidual motor deficits are estimated to remain in about 8 to 30% of cases, the range in severity from mild clumsiness to ataxia and hemiparesis.\nNeurocognitive.\nPatients with demyelinating illnesses, such as MS, have shown cognitive deficits even when there is minimal physical disability. Research suggests that similar effects are seen after ADEM, but that the deficits are less severe than those seen in MS. A study of six children with ADEM (mean age at presentation 7.7 years) were tested for a range of neurocognitive tests after an average of 3.5 years of recovery. All six children performed in the normal range on most tests, including verbal IQ and performance IQ, but performed at least one standard deviation below age norms in at least one cognitive domain, such as complex attention (one child), short-term memory (one child) and internalizing behaviour/affect (two children). Group means for each cognitive domain were all within one standard deviation of age norms, demonstrating that, as a group, they were normal. These deficits were less severe than those seen in similar aged children with a diagnosis of MS.\nAnother study compared nineteen children with a history of ADEM, of which 10 were five years of age or younger at the time (average age 3.8 years old, tested an average of 3.9 years later) and nine were older (mean age 7.7y at time of ADEM, tested an average of 2.2 years later) to nineteen matched controls. Scores on IQ tests and educational achievement were lower for the young onset ADEM group (average IQ 90) compared to the late onset (average IQ 100) and control groups (average IQ 106), while the late onset ADEM children scored lower on verbal processing speed. Again, all groups means were within one standard deviation of the controls, meaning that while effects were statistically reliable, the children were as a whole, still within the normal range. There were also more behavioural problems in the early onset group, although there is some suggestion that this may be due, at least in part, to the stress of hospitalization at a young age.\nResearch.\nThe relationship between ADEM and anti-MOG associated encephalomyelitis is currently under research. A new entity called MOGDEM has been proposed.\nAbout animal models, the main animal model for MS, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is also an animal model for ADEM. Being an acute monophasic illness, EAE is far more similar to ADEM than MS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "969", "revid": "36788768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=969", "title": "Ataxia", "text": "Neurological impairment of voluntary muscle movement\nMedical condition\nAtaxia (from Greek \u03b1- [a negative prefix] + -\u03c4\u03ac\u03be\u03b9\u03c2 [order] = \"lack of order\") is a neurological sign consisting of lack of voluntary coordination of muscle movements that can include gait abnormality, speech changes, and abnormalities in eye movements, that indicates dysfunction of parts of the nervous system that coordinate movement, such as the cerebellum. These nervous system dysfunctions occur in several different patterns, with different results and different possible causes. Ataxia can be limited to one side of the body, which is referred to as hemiataxia. Friedreich's ataxia has gait abnormality as the most commonly presented symptom. Dystaxia is a mild degree of ataxia.\nTypes.\nCerebellar.\nThe term cerebellar ataxia is used to indicate ataxia due to dysfunction of the cerebellum. The cerebellum is responsible for integrating a significant amount of neural information that is used to coordinate smoothly ongoing movements and to participate in motor planning. Although ataxia is not present with all cerebellar lesions, many conditions affecting the cerebellum do produce ataxia. People with cerebellar ataxia may have trouble regulating the force, range, direction, velocity, and rhythm of muscle contractions. This results in a characteristic type of irregular, uncoordinated movement that can manifest itself in many possible ways, such as asthenia, asynergy, delayed reaction time, and dyschronometria. Individuals with cerebellar ataxia could also display instability of gait, difficulty with eye movements, dysarthria, dysphagia, hypotonia, dysmetria, and dysdiadochokinesia. These deficits can vary depending on which cerebellar structures have been damaged, and whether the lesion is bi- or unilateral.\nPeople with cerebellar ataxia may initially present with poor balance, which could be demonstrated as an inability to stand on one leg or perform tandem gait. As the condition progresses, walking is characterized by a widened base and high stepping, as well as staggering and lurching from side to side. Turning is also problematic and could result in falls. As cerebellar ataxia becomes severe, great assistance and effort are needed to stand and walk. Dysarthria, an impairment with articulation, may also be present and is characterized by \"scanning\" speech that consists of slower rate, irregular rhythm, and variable volume. Also, slurring of speech, tremor of the voice, and ataxic respiration may occur. Cerebellar ataxia could result with incoordination of movement, particularly in the extremities. Overshooting (or hypermetria) occurs with finger-to-nose testing and heel to shin testing; thus, dysmetria is evident. Impairments with alternating movements (dysdiadochokinesia), as well as dysrhythmia, may also be displayed. Tremor of the head and trunk (titubation) may be seen in individuals with cerebellar ataxia.\nDysmetria is thought to be caused by a deficit in the control of interaction torques in multijoint motion. Interaction torques are created at an associated joint when the primary joint is moved. For example, if a movement required reaching to touch a target in front of the body, flexion at the shoulder would create a torque at the elbow, while extension of the elbow would create a torque at the wrist. These torques increase as the speed of movement increases and must be compensated and adjusted for to create coordinated movement. This may, therefore, explain decreased coordination at higher movement velocities and accelerations.\nSensory.\nThe term sensory ataxia is used to indicate ataxia due to loss of proprioception, the loss of sensitivity to the positions of joint and body parts. This is generally caused by dysfunction of the dorsal columns of the spinal cord, because they carry proprioceptive information up to the brain. In some cases, the cause of sensory ataxia may instead be dysfunction of the various parts of the brain that receive positional information, including the cerebellum, thalamus, and parietal lobes.\nSensory ataxia presents itself with an unsteady \"stomping\" gait with heavy heel strikes, as well as a postural instability that is usually worsened when the lack of proprioceptive input cannot be compensated for by visual input, such as in poorly lit environments.\nPhysicians can find evidence of sensory ataxia during physical examination by having patients stand with their feet together and eyes shut. In affected patients, this will cause the instability to worsen markedly, producing wide oscillations and possibly a fall; this is called a positive Romberg's test. Worsening of the finger-pointing test with the eyes closed is another feature of sensory ataxia. Also, when patients are standing with arms and hands extended toward the physician, if the eyes are closed, the patients' fingers tend to \"fall down\" and then be restored to the horizontal extended position by sudden muscular contractions (the \"ataxic hand\").\nVestibular.\nThe term vestibular ataxia is used to indicate ataxia due to dysfunction of the vestibular system, which in acute and unilateral cases is associated with prominent vertigo, nausea, and vomiting. In slow-onset, chronic bilateral cases of vestibular dysfunction, these characteristic manifestations may be absent, and dysequilibrium may be the sole presentation.\nCauses.\nThe three types of ataxia have overlapping causes, so can either coexist or occur in isolation. Cerebellar ataxia can have many causes despite normal neuroimaging.\nFocal lesions.\nAny type of focal lesion of the central nervous system (such as stroke, brain tumor, multiple sclerosis, inflammatory [such as sarcoidosis], and \"chronic lymphocytyc inflammation with pontine perivascular enhancement responsive to steroids syndrome\" [CLIPPERS]) will cause the type of ataxia corresponding to the site of the lesion: cerebellar if in the cerebellum; sensory if in the dorsal spinal cord...to include cord compression by thickened ligamentum flavum or stenosis of the boney spinal canal...(and rarely in the thalamus or parietal lobe); or vestibular if in the vestibular system (including the vestibular areas of the cerebral cortex).\nExogenous substances (metabolic ataxia).\nExogenous substances that cause ataxia mainly do so because they have a depressant effect on central nervous system function. The most common example is ethanol (alcohol), which is capable of causing reversible cerebellar and vestibular ataxia. Chronic intake of ethanol causes atrophy of the cerebellum by oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stresses induced by thiamine deficiency. Other examples include various prescription drugs (e.g. most antiepileptic drugs have cerebellar ataxia as a possible adverse effect), Lithium level over 1.5mEq/L, synthetic cannabinoid HU-211 ingestion and various other medical and recreational drugs (e.g. ketamine, PCP or dextromethorphan, all of which are NMDA receptor antagonists that produce a dissociative state at high doses). A further class of pharmaceuticals which can cause short term ataxia, especially in high doses, are benzodiazepines. Exposure to high levels of methylmercury, through consumption of fish with high mercury concentrations, is also a known cause of ataxia and other neurological disorders.\nRadiation poisoning.\nAtaxia can be induced as a result of severe acute radiation poisoning with an absorbed dose of more than 30 grays.\nVitamin B12 deficiency.\nVitamin B12 deficiency may cause, among several neurological abnormalities, overlapping cerebellar and sensory ataxia. Neuropsychological symptoms may include sense loss, difficulty in proprioception, poor balance, loss of sensation in the feet, changes in reflexes, dementia, and psychosis, can be reversible with treatment. Complications may include a neurological complex known as subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord, and other neurological disorders.\nHypothyroidism.\nSymptoms of neurological dysfunction may be the presenting feature in some patients with hypothyroidism. These include reversible cerebellar ataxia, dementia, peripheral neuropathy, psychosis and coma. Most of the neurological complications improve completely after thyroid hormone replacement therapy.\nCauses of isolated sensory ataxia.\nPeripheral neuropathies may cause generalised or localised sensory ataxia (e.g. a limb only) depending on the extent of the neuropathic involvement. Spinal disorders of various types may cause sensory ataxia from the lesioned level below, when they involve the dorsal columns.\nNon-hereditary cerebellar degeneration.\nNon-hereditary causes of cerebellar degeneration include chronic alcohol use disorder, head injury, paraneoplastic and non-paraneoplastic autoimmune ataxia, high altitude cerebral oedema, coeliac disease, normal pressure hydrocephalus and infectious or post-infectious cerebellitis.\nHereditary ataxias.\nAtaxia may depend on hereditary disorders consisting of degeneration of the cerebellum or of the spine; most cases feature both to some extent, and therefore present with overlapping cerebellar and sensory ataxia, even though one is often more evident than the other. Hereditary disorders causing ataxia include autosomal dominant ones such as spinocerebellar ataxia, episodic ataxia, and dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy, as well as autosomal recessive disorders such as Friedreich's ataxia (sensory and cerebellar, with the former predominating) and Niemann Pick disease, ataxia-telangiectasia (sensory and cerebellar, with the latter predominating),autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia-14 and abetalipoproteinaemia. An example of X-linked ataxic condition is the rare fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome or FXTAS.\nArnold\u2013Chiari malformation (congenital ataxia).\nArnold\u2013Chiari malformation is a malformation of the brain. It consists of a downward displacement of the cerebellar tonsils and the medulla through the foramen magnum, sometimes causing hydrocephalus as a result of obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid outflow.\nSuccinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency.\nSuccinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency is an autosomal-recessive gene disorder where mutations in the ALDH5A1 gene results in the accumulation of gamma-Hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) in the body. GHB accumulates in the nervous system and can cause ataxia as well as other neurological dysfunction.\nWilson's disease.\nWilson's disease is an autosomal-recessive gene disorder whereby an alteration of the ATP7B gene results in an inability to properly excrete copper from the body. Copper accumulates in the nervous system and liver and can cause ataxia as well as other neurological and organ impairments.\nGluten ataxia.\nGluten ataxia is an autoimmune disease triggered by the ingestion of gluten. Early diagnosis and treatment with a gluten-free diet can improve ataxia and prevent its progression. The effectiveness of the treatment depends on the elapsed time from the onset of the ataxia until diagnosis, because the death of neurons in the cerebellum as a result of gluten exposure is irreversible. It accounts for 40% of ataxias of unknown origin and 15% of all ataxias. Less than 10% of people with gluten ataxia present any gastrointestinal symptom and only about 40% have intestinal damage. This entity is classified into primary auto-immune cerebellar ataxias (PACA).\nPotassium pump.\nMalfunction of the sodium-potassium pump may be a factor in some ataxias. The Na+-K+ pump has been shown to control and set the intrinsic activity mode of cerebellar Purkinje neurons. This suggests that the pump might not simply be a homeostatic, \"housekeeping\" molecule for ionic gradients; but could be a computational element in the cerebellum and the brain. Indeed, an ouabain block of Na+-K+ pumps in the cerebellum of a live mouse results in it displaying ataxia and dystonia. Ataxia is observed for lower ouabain concentrations, dystonia is observed at higher ouabain concentrations.\nCerebellar ataxia associated with anti-GAD antibodies.\nAntibodies against the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD: enzyme changing glutamate into GABA) cause cerebellar deficits. The antibodies impair motor learning and cause behavioral deficits.\nGAD antibodies related ataxia is part of the group called immune-mediated cerebellar ataxias. The antibodies induce a synaptopathy. The cerebellum is particularly vulnerable to autoimmune disorders. Cerebellar circuitry has capacities to compensate and restore function thanks to cerebellar reserve, gathering multiple forms of plasticity. LTDpathies gather immune disorders targeting long-term depression (LTD), a form of plasticity.\nTreatment.\nThe treatment of ataxia and its effectiveness depend on the underlying cause. Treatment may limit or reduce the effects of ataxia, but it is unlikely to eliminate them entirely. Recovery tends to be better in individuals with a single focal injury (such as stroke or a benign tumour), compared to those who have a neurological degenerative condition. A review of the management of degenerative ataxia was published in 2009. A small number of rare conditions presenting with prominent cerebellar ataxia are amenable to specific treatment and recognition of these disorders is critical. Diseases include vitamin E deficiency, abetalipoproteinemia, cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, Niemann\u2013Pick type C disease, Refsum's disease, glucose transporter type 1 deficiency, episodic ataxia type 2, gluten ataxia, glutamic acid decarboxylase ataxia. Novel therapies target the RNA defects associated with cerebellar disorders, using in particular anti-sense oligonucleotides.\nThe movement disorders associated with ataxia can be managed by pharmacological treatments and through physical therapy and occupational therapy to reduce disability. Some drug treatments that have been used to control ataxia include: 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), idebenone, amantadine, physostigmine, L-carnitine or derivatives, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, vigabatrin, phosphatidylcholine, acetazolamide, 4-aminopyridine, buspirone, and a combination of coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E.\nPhysical therapy requires a focus on adapting activity and facilitating motor learning for retraining specific functional motor patterns. A recent systematic review suggested that physical therapy is effective, but there is only moderate evidence to support this conclusion. The most commonly used physical therapy interventions for cerebellar ataxia are vestibular habituation, Frenkel exercises, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF), and balance training; however, therapy is often highly individualized and gait and coordination training are large components of therapy.\nCurrent research suggests that, if a person is able to walk with or without a mobility aid, physical therapy should include an exercise program addressing five components: static balance, dynamic balance, trunk-limb coordination, stairs, and contracture prevention. Once the physical therapist determines that the individual is able to safely perform parts of the program independently, it is important that the individual be prescribed and regularly engage in a supplementary home exercise program that incorporates these components to further improve long term outcomes. These outcomes include balance tasks, gait, and individual activities of daily living. While the improvements are attributed primarily to changes in the brain and not just the hip or ankle joints, it is still unknown whether the improvements are due to adaptations in the cerebellum or compensation by other areas of the brain.\nDecomposition, simplification, or slowing of multijoint movement may also be an effective strategy that therapists may use to improve function in patients with ataxia. Training likely needs to be intense and focused\u2014as indicated by one study performed with stroke patients experiencing limb ataxia who underwent intensive upper limb retraining. Their therapy consisted of constraint-induced movement therapy which resulted in improvements of their arm function. Treatment should likely include strategies to manage difficulties with everyday activities such as walking. Gait aids (such as a cane or walker) can be provided to decrease the risk of falls associated with impairment of balance or poor coordination. Severe ataxia may eventually lead to the need for a wheelchair. To obtain better results, possible coexisting motor deficits need to be addressed in addition to those induced by ataxia. For example, muscle weakness and decreased endurance could lead to increasing fatigue and poorer movement patterns.\nThere are several assessment tools available to therapists and health care professionals working with patients with ataxia. The International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS) is one of the most widely used and has been proven to have very high reliability and validity. Other tools that assess motor function, balance and coordination are also highly valuable to help the therapist track the progress of their patient, as well as to quantify the patient's functionality. These tests include, but are not limited to:\nOther uses.\nThe term \"ataxia\" is sometimes used in a broader sense to indicate lack of coordination in some physiological process. Examples include optic ataxia (lack of coordination between visual inputs and hand movements, resulting in inability to reach and grab objects) and ataxic respiration (lack of coordination in respiratory movements, usually due to dysfunction of the respiratory centres in the medulla oblongata). Optic ataxia may be caused by lesions to the posterior parietal cortex, which is responsible for combining and expressing positional information and relating it to movement. Outputs of the posterior parietal cortex include the spinal cord, brain stem motor pathways, pre-motor and pre-frontal cortex, basal ganglia and the cerebellum. Some neurons in the posterior parietal cortex are modulated by intention. Optic ataxia is usually part of Balint's syndrome, but can be seen in isolation with injuries to the superior parietal lobule, as it represents a disconnection between visual-association cortex and the frontal premotor and motor cortex.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "970", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=970", "title": "AmbientCalculusOnline", "text": ""}
{"id": "972", "revid": "1160824887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=972", "title": "Abdul Alhazred", "text": ""}
{"id": "973", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=973", "title": "A priori and a posterior knowledge", "text": ""}
{"id": "974", "revid": "35016608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=974", "title": "Ada Lovelace", "text": "English mathematician (1815\u20131852)\nAugusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace (\"n\u00e9e\" Byron; 10 December 1815\u00a0\u2013 27 November 1852) was an English mathematician and writer, chiefly known for her work on Charles Babbage's proposed mechanical general-purpose computer, the Analytical Engine. She was the first to recognise that the machine had applications beyond pure calculation, and to have published the first algorithm intended to be carried out by such a machine. As a result, she is often regarded as the first computer programmer.\nAda Byron was the only legitimate child of poet Lord Byron and Lady Byron. All of Byron's other children were born out of wedlock to other women. Byron separated from his wife a month after Ada was born and left England forever. Four months later, he commemorated the parting in a poem that begins, \"Is thy face like thy mother's my fair child! ADA! sole daughter of my house and heart?\" He died in Greece when Ada was eight. Her mother remained bitter and promoted Ada's interest in mathematics and logic in an effort to prevent her from developing her father's perceived insanity. Despite this, Ada remained interested in him, naming her two sons Byron and Gordon. Upon her death, she was buried next to him at her request. Although often ill in her childhood, Ada pursued her studies assiduously. She married William King in 1835. King was made Earl of Lovelace in 1838, Ada thereby becoming Countess of Lovelace.\nHer educational and social exploits brought her into contact with scientists such as Andrew Crosse, Charles Babbage, Sir David Brewster, Charles Wheatstone, Michael Faraday, and the author Charles Dickens, contacts which she used to further her education. Ada described her approach as \"poetical science\" and herself as an \"Analyst (&amp; Metaphysician)\".\nWhen she was eighteen, her mathematical talents led her to a long working relationship and friendship with fellow British mathematician Charles Babbage, who is known as \"the father of computers\". She was in particular interested in Babbage's work on the Analytical Engine. Lovelace first met him in June 1833, through their mutual friend, and her private tutor, Mary Somerville.\nBetween 1842 and 1843, Ada translated an article by the military engineer Luigi Menabrea (later Prime Minister of Italy) about the Analytical Engine, supplementing it with an elaborate set of notes, simply called \"Notes\". Lovelace's notes are important in the early history of computers, containing what many consider to be the first computer program\u2014that is, an algorithm designed to be carried out by a machine. Other historians reject this perspective and point out that Babbage's personal notes from the years 1836/1837 contain the first programs for the engine. She also developed a vision of the capability of computers to go beyond mere calculating or number-crunching, while many others, including Babbage himself, focused only on those capabilities. Her mindset of \"poetical science\" led her to ask questions about the Analytical Engine (as shown in her notes) examining how individuals and society relate to technology as a collaborative tool.\nBiography.\nChildhood.\nLord Byron expected his child to be a \"glorious boy\" and was disappointed when Lady Byron gave birth to a girl. The child was named after Byron's half-sister, Augusta Leigh, and was called \"Ada\" by Byron himself. On 16 January 1816, at Lord Byron's command, Lady Byron left for her parents' home at Kirkby Mallory, taking their five-week-old daughter with her. Although English law at the time granted full custody of children to the father in cases of separation, Lord Byron made no attempt to claim his parental rights, but did request that his sister keep him informed of Ada's welfare.\nOn 21 April, Lord Byron signed the deed of separation, although very reluctantly, and left England for good a few days later. Aside from an acrimonious separation, Lady Byron continued throughout her life to make allegations about her husband's immoral behaviour. This set of events made Lovelace infamous in Victorian society. Ada did not have a relationship with her father. He died in 1824 when she was eight years old. Her mother was the only significant parental figure in her life. Lovelace was not shown the family portrait of her father until her 20th birthday.\nLovelace did not have a close relationship with her mother. She was often left in the care of her maternal grandmother Judith, Hon. Lady Milbanke, who doted on her. However, because of societal attitudes of the time\u2014which favoured the husband in any separation, with the welfare of any child acting as mitigation\u2014Lady Byron had to present herself as a loving mother to the rest of society. This included writing anxious letters to Lady Milbanke about her daughter's welfare, with a cover note saying to retain the letters in case she had to use them to show maternal concern. In one letter to Lady Milbanke, she referred to her daughter as \"it\": \"I talk to it for your satisfaction, not my own, and shall be very glad when you have it under your own.\" Lady Byron had her teenage daughter watched by close friends for any sign of moral deviation. Lovelace dubbed these observers the \"Furies\" and later complained they exaggerated and invented stories about her.\nLovelace was often ill, beginning in early childhood. At the age of eight, she experienced headaches that obscured her vision. In June 1829, she was paralyzed after a bout of measles. She was subjected to continuous bed rest for nearly a year, something which may have extended her period of disability. By 1831, she was able to walk with crutches. Despite the illnesses, she developed her mathematical and technological skills.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Ada was twelve years old, this future \"Lady Fairy\", as Charles Babbage affectionately called her, decided she wanted to fly. Ada Byron went about the project methodically, thoughtfully, with imagination and passion. Her first step, in February 1828, was to construct wings. She investigated different material and sizes. She considered various materials for the wings: paper, oilsilk, wires, and feathers. She examined the anatomy of birds to determine the right proportion between the wings and the body. She decided to write a book, \"Flyology,\" illustrating, with plates, some of her findings. She decided what equipment she would need; for example, a compass, to \"cut across the country by the most direct road\", so that she could surmount mountains, rivers, and valleys. Her final step was to integrate steam with the \"art of flying\".\nAda Byron had an affair with a tutor in early 1833. She tried to elope with him after she was caught, but the tutor's relatives recognised her and contacted her mother. Lady Byron and her friends covered the incident up to prevent a public scandal. Lovelace never met her younger half-sister, Allegra, the daughter of Lord Byron and Claire Clairmont. Allegra died in 1822 at the age of five. Lovelace did have some contact with Elizabeth Medora Leigh, the daughter of Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh, who purposely avoided Lovelace as much as possible when introduced at court.\nAdult years.\nLovelace became close friends with her tutor Mary Somerville, who introduced her to Charles Babbage in 1833. She had a strong respect and affection for Somerville, and they corresponded for many years. Other acquaintances included the scientists Andrew Crosse, Sir David Brewster, Charles Wheatstone, Michael Faraday and the author Charles Dickens. She was presented at Court at the age of seventeen \"and became a popular belle of the season\" in part because of her \"brilliant mind\". By 1834 Ada was a regular at Court and started attending various events. She danced often and was able to charm many people, and was described by most people as being dainty, although John Hobhouse, Byron's friend, described her as \"a large, coarse-skinned young woman but with something of my friend's features, particularly the mouth\". This description followed their meeting on 24 February 1834 in which Ada made it clear to Hobhouse that she did not like him, probably due to her mother's influence, which led her to dislike all of her father's friends. This first impression was not to last, and they later became friends.\nOn 8 July 1835, she married William, 8th Baron King, becoming Lady King. They had three homes: Ockham Park, Surrey; a Scottish estate on Loch Torridon in Ross-shire; and a house in London. They spent their honeymoon at Worthy Manor in Ashley Combe near Porlock Weir, Somerset. The Manor had been built as a hunting lodge in 1799 and was improved by King in preparation for their honeymoon. It later became their summer retreat and was further improved during this time. From 1845, the family's main house was Horsley Towers, built in the Tudorbethan fashion by the architect of the Houses of Parliament, Charles Barry, and later greatly enlarged to Lovelace's own designs.\nThey had three children: Byron (born 1836); Anne Isabella (called Annabella, born 1837); and Ralph Gordon (born 1839). Immediately after the birth of Annabella, Lady King experienced \"a tedious and suffering illness, which took months to cure\". Ada was a descendant of the extinct Barons Lovelace and in 1838, her husband was made Earl of Lovelace and Viscount Ockham, meaning Ada became the Countess of Lovelace. In 1843\u201344, Ada's mother assigned William Benjamin Carpenter to teach Ada's children and to act as a \"moral\" instructor for Ada. He quickly fell for her and encouraged her to express any frustrated affections, claiming that his marriage meant he would never act in an \"unbecoming\" manner. When it became clear that Carpenter was trying to start an affair, Ada cut it off.\nIn 1841, Lovelace and Medora Leigh (the daughter of Lord Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh) were told by Ada's mother that Ada's father was also Medora's father. On 27 February 1841, Ada wrote to her mother: \"I am not in the least \"astonished\". In fact, you merely \"confirm\" what I have for \"years and years\" felt scarcely a doubt about, but should have considered it most improper in me to hint to you that I in any way suspected.\" She did not blame the incestuous relationship on Byron, but instead blamed Augusta Leigh: \"I fear she is more inherently wicked than he ever was.\" In the 1840s, Ada flirted with scandals: firstly, from a relaxed approach to extra-marital relationships with men, leading to rumours of affairs; and secondly, from her love of gambling. She apparently lost more than \u00a33,000 on the horses during the later 1840s. The gambling led to her forming a syndicate with male friends, and an ambitious attempt in 1851 to create a mathematical model for successful large bets. This went disastrously wrong, leaving her thousands of pounds in debt to the syndicate, forcing her to admit it all to her husband. She had a shadowy relationship with Andrew Crosse's son John from 1844 onwards. John Crosse destroyed most of their correspondence after her death as part of a legal agreement. She bequeathed him the only heirlooms her father had personally left to her. During her final illness, she would panic at the idea of the younger Crosse being kept from visiting her.\nEducation.\nFrom 1832, when she was seventeen, her mathematical abilities began to emerge, and her interest in mathematics dominated the majority of her adult life. Her mother's obsession with rooting out any of the insanity of which she accused Byron was one of the reasons that Ada was taught mathematics from an early age. She was privately educated in mathematics and science by William Frend, William King, and Mary Somerville, the noted 19th-century researcher and scientific author. In the 1840s, the mathematician Augustus De Morgan extended her \"much help in her mathematical studies\" including study of advanced calculus topics including the \"numbers of Bernoulli\" (that formed her celebrated algorithm for Babbage's Analytical Engine). In a letter to Lady Byron, De Morgan suggested that Ada's skill in mathematics might lead her to become \"an original mathematical investigator, perhaps of first-rate eminence\".\nLovelace often questioned basic assumptions through integrating poetry and science. Whilst studying differential calculus, she wrote to De Morgan:\nI may remark that the curious transformations many formulae can undergo, the unsuspected and to a beginner apparently impossible identity of forms exceedingly dissimilar at first sight, is I think one of the chief difficulties in the early part of mathematical studies. I am often reminded of certain sprites and fairies one reads of, who are at one's elbows in \"one\" shape now, and the next minute in a form most dissimilar.\nLovelace believed that intuition and imagination were critical to effectively applying mathematical and scientific concepts. She valued metaphysics as much as mathematics, viewing both as tools for exploring \"the unseen worlds around us\".\nDeath.\nLovelace died at the age of 36 on 27 November 1852, from uterine cancer. The illness lasted several months, in which time Annabella took command over whom Ada saw, and excluded all of her friends and confidants. Under her mother's influence, Ada had a religious transformation and was coaxed into repenting of her previous conduct and making Annabella her executor. She lost contact with her husband after confessing something to him on 30 August which caused him to abandon her bedside. It is not known what she told him. She was buried, at her request, next to her father at the Church of St. Mary Magdalene in Hucknall, Nottinghamshire. A memorial plaque, written in Latin, to her and her father is in the chapel attached to Horsley Towers.\nWork.\nThroughout her life, Lovelace was strongly interested in scientific developments and fads of the day, including phrenology and mesmerism. After her work with Babbage, Lovelace continued to work on other projects. In 1844, she commented to a friend Woronzow Greig about her desire to create a mathematical model for how the brain gives rise to thoughts and nerves to feelings (\"a calculus of the nervous system\"). She never achieved this, however. In part, her interest in the brain came from a long-running pre-occupation, inherited from her mother, about her \"potential\" madness. As part of her research into this project, she visited the electrical engineer Andrew Crosse in 1844 to learn how to carry out electrical experiments. In the same year, she wrote a review of a paper by Baron Karl von Reichenbach, \"Researches on Magnetism\", but this was not published and does not appear to have progressed past the first draft. In 1851, the year before her cancer struck, she wrote to her mother mentioning \"certain productions\" she was working on regarding the relation of maths and music.\nLovelace first met Charles Babbage in June 1833, through their mutual friend Mary Somerville. Later that month, Babbage invited Lovelace to see the prototype for his difference engine. She became fascinated with the machine and used her relationship with Somerville to visit Babbage as often as she could. Babbage was impressed by Lovelace's intellect and analytic skills. He called her \"The Enchantress of Number\". In 1843, he wrote to her:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDuring a nine-month period in 1842\u201343, Lovelace translated the Italian mathematician Luigi Menabrea's article on Babbage's newest proposed machine, the Analytical Engine. With the article, she appended a set of notes. Explaining the Analytical Engine's function was a difficult task; many other scientists did not grasp the concept and the British establishment had shown little interest in it. Lovelace's notes even had to explain how the Analytical Engine differed from the original Difference Engine. Her work was well received at the time; the scientist Michael Faraday described himself as a supporter of her writing.\nThe notes are around three times longer than the article itself and include (in \"Note G\"), in complete detail, a method for calculating a sequence of Bernoulli numbers using the Analytical Engine, which might have run correctly had it ever been built (only Babbage's Difference Engine has been built, completed in London in 2002). Based on this work, Lovelace is now considered by many to be the first computer programmer and her method has been called the world's first computer program. Others dispute this because some of Charles Babbage's earlier writings could be considered computer programs.\n\"Note G\" also contains Lovelace's dismissal of artificial intelligence. She wrote that \"The Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to \"originate\" anything. It can do \"whatever we know how to order it\" to perform. It can follow analysis; but it has no power of anticipating any analytical relations or truths.\" This objection has been the subject of much debate and rebuttal, for example by Alan Turing in his paper \"Computing Machinery and Intelligence\". Most modern computer scientists argue that this view is outdated and that computer software can develop in ways that cannot necessarily be anticipated by programmers.\nLovelace and Babbage had a minor falling out when the papers were published, when he tried to leave his own statement (criticising the government's treatment of his Engine) as an unsigned preface, which could have been mistakenly interpreted as a joint declaration. When Taylor's \"Scientific Memoirs\" ruled that the statement should be signed, Babbage wrote to Lovelace asking her to withdraw the paper. This was the first that she knew he was leaving it unsigned, and she wrote back refusing to withdraw the paper. The historian Benjamin Woolley theorised that \"His actions suggested he had so enthusiastically sought Ada's involvement, and so happily indulged her\u00a0... because of her 'celebrated name'.\" Their friendship recovered, and they continued to correspond. On 12 August 1851, when she was dying of cancer, Lovelace wrote to him asking him to be her executor, though this letter did not give him the necessary legal authority. Part of the terrace at Worthy Manor was known as \"Philosopher's Walk;\" it was there that Lovelace and Babbage were reputed to have walked while discussing mathematical principles.\nFirst computer program.\nIn 1840, Babbage was invited to give a seminar at the University of Turin about his Analytical Engine. Luigi Menabrea, a young Italian engineer and the future Prime Minister of Italy, transcribed Babbage's lecture into French, and this transcript was subsequently published in the \"Biblioth\u00e8que universelle de Gen\u00e8ve\" in October 1842.\nBabbage's friend Charles Wheatstone commissioned Ada Lovelace to translate Menabrea's paper into English. She then augmented the paper with notes, which were added to the translation. Ada Lovelace spent the better part of a year doing this, assisted with input from Babbage. These notes, which are more extensive than Menabrea's paper, were then published in the September 1843 edition of Taylor's \"Scientific Memoirs\" under the initialism \"AAL\".\nAda Lovelace's notes were labelled alphabetically from A to G. In note G, she describes an algorithm for the Analytical Engine to compute Bernoulli numbers. It is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer, and Ada Lovelace has often been cited as the first computer programmer for this reason. The engine was never completed and so her program was never tested.\nIn 1953, more than a century after her death, Ada Lovelace's notes on Babbage's Analytical Engine were republished as an appendix to B. V. Bowden's \"Faster than Thought: A Symposium on Digital Computing Machines\". The engine has now been recognised as an early model for a computer and her notes as a description of a computer and software.\nInsight into potential of computing devices.\nIn her notes, Ada Lovelace emphasised the difference between the Analytical Engine and previous calculating machines, particularly its ability to be programmed to solve problems of any complexity. She realised the potential of the device extended far beyond mere number crunching. In her notes, she wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The Analytical Engine] might act upon other things besides \"number\", were objects found whose mutual fundamental relations could be expressed by those of the abstract science of operations, and which should be also susceptible of adaptations to the action of the operating notation and mechanism of the engine...Supposing, for instance, that the fundamental relations of pitched sounds in the science of harmony and of musical composition were susceptible of such expression and adaptations, the engine might compose elaborate and scientific pieces of music of any degree of complexity or extent.\nThis analysis was an important development from previous ideas about the capabilities of computing devices and anticipated the implications of modern computing one hundred years before they were realised. Walter Isaacson ascribes Ada's insight regarding the application of computing to \"any\" process based on logical symbols to an observation about textiles: \"When she saw some mechanical looms that used punchcards to direct the weaving of beautiful patterns, it reminded her of how Babbage's engine used punched cards to make calculations.\" This insight is seen as significant by writers such as Betty Toole and Benjamin Woolley, as well as the programmer John Graham-Cumming, whose project Plan 28 has the aim of constructing the first complete Analytical Engine.\nAccording to the historian of computing and Babbage specialist Doron Swade:\nAda saw something that Babbage in some sense failed to see. In Babbage's world his engines were bound by number...What Lovelace saw...was that number could represent entities other than quantity. So once you had a machine for manipulating numbers, if those numbers represented other things, letters, musical notes, then the machine could manipulate symbols of which number was one instance, according to rules. It is this fundamental transition from a machine which is a number cruncher to a machine for manipulating symbols according to rules that is the fundamental transition from calculation to computation\u2014to general-purpose computation\u2014and looking back from the present high ground of modern computing, if we are looking and sifting history for that transition, then that transition was made explicitly by Ada in that 1843 paper.\nDistinction between mechanism and logical structure.\nLovelace recognized the difference between the details of the computing mechanism, as covered in a 1834 article on the Difference Engine, \nand the logical structure of the Analytical Engine, on which the article she was reviewing dwelt. She noted that different specialists might be required in each area.\nThe [1834 article] chiefly treats it under its mechanical aspect, entering but slightly into the mathematical principles of which that engine is the representative, but giving, in considerable length, many details of the mechanism and contrivances by means of which it tabulates the various orders of differences. M. Menabrea, on the contrary, exclusively developes the analytical view; taking it for granted that mechanism is able to perform certain processes, but without attempting to explain how; and devoting his whole attention to explanations and illustrations of the manner in which analytical laws can be so arranged and combined as to bring every branch of that vast subject within the grasp of the assumed powers of mechanism. It is obvious that, in the invention of a calculating engine, these two branches of the subject are equally essential fields of investigation... They are indissolubly connected, though so different in their intrinsic nature, that perhaps the same mind might not be likely to prove equally profound or successful in both.\nControversy over contribution.\nThough Lovelace is often referred to as the first computer programmer, some biographers, computer scientists and historians of computing claim otherwise.\nAllan G. Bromley, in the 1990 article \"Difference and Analytical Engines\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All but one of the programs cited in her notes had been prepared by Babbage from three to seven years earlier. The exception was prepared by Babbage for her, although she did detect a \"bug\" in it. Not only is there no evidence that Ada ever prepared a program for the Analytical Engine, but her correspondence with Babbage shows that she did not have the knowledge to do so.\nBruce Collier, who later wrote a biography of Babbage, wrote in his 1970 Harvard University PhD thesis that Lovelace \"made a considerable contribution to publicizing the Analytical Engine, but there is no evidence that she advanced the design or theory of it in any way\".\nEugene Eric Kim and Betty Alexandra Toole consider it \"incorrect\" to regard Lovelace as the first computer programmer, as Babbage wrote the initial programs for his Analytical Engine, although the majority were never published. Bromley notes several dozen sample programs prepared by Babbage between 1837 and 1840, all substantially predating Lovelace's notes. Dorothy K. Stein regards Lovelace's notes as \"more a reflection of the mathematical uncertainty of the author, the political purposes of the inventor, and, above all, of the social and cultural context in which it was written, than a blueprint for a scientific development\".\nDoron Swade, a specialist on history of computing known for his work on Babbage, discussed Lovelace during a lecture on Babbage's analytical engine. He explained that Ada was only a \"promising beginner\" instead of genius in mathematics, that she began studying basic concepts of mathematics five years after Babbage conceived the analytical engine so she could not have made important contributions to it, and that she only published the first computer program instead of actually writing it. But he agrees that Ada was the only person to see the potential of the analytical engine as a machine capable of expressing entities other than quantities.\nIn his book, \"Idea Makers\", Stephen Wolfram defends Lovelace's contributions. While acknowledging that Babbage wrote several unpublished algorithms for the Analytical Engine prior to Lovelace's notes, Wolfram argues that \"there's nothing as sophisticated\u2014or as clean\u2014as Ada's computation of the Bernoulli numbers. Babbage certainly helped and commented on Ada's work, but she was definitely the driver of it.\" Wolfram then suggests that Lovelace's main achievement was to distill from Babbage's correspondence \"a clear exposition of the abstract operation of the machine\u2014something which Babbage never did\".\nIn popular culture.\n1810s.\nLord Byron wrote the poem \"Fare Thee Well\" to his wife Lady Byron in 1816, following their separation after the birth of Ada Lovelace. In the poem he writes:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAnd when thou would'st solace gather\u2014\nWhen our child's first accents flow\u2014\nWilt thou teach her to say \"Father!\"\nThough his care she must forego?\nWhen her little hands shall press thee\u2014\nWhen her lip to thine is pressed\u2014\nThink of him whose prayer shall bless thee\u2014\nThink of him thy love \"had\" blessed!\nShould her lineaments resemble\nThose thou never more may'st see,\nThen thy heart will softly tremble\nWith a pulse yet true to me.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n1970s.\nLovelace is portrayed in Romulus Linney's 1977 play \"Childe Byron\".\n1990s.\nIn the 1990 steampunk novel \"The Difference Engine\" by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, Lovelace delivers a lecture on the \"punched cards\" programme which proves G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems decades before their actual discovery.\nIn the 1997 film \"Conceiving Ada,\" a computer scientist obsessed with Ada finds a way of communicating with her in the past by means of \"undying information waves\".\nIn Tom Stoppard's 1993 play \"Arcadia\", the precocious teenage genius Thomasina Coverly\u2014a character \"apparently based\" on Ada Lovelace (the play also involves Lord Byron)\u2014comes to understand chaos theory, and theorises the second law of thermodynamics, before either is officially recognised.\n2000s.\nLovelace features in John Crowley's 2005 novel, \"Lord Byron's Novel: The Evening Land\", as an unseen character whose personality is forcefully depicted in her annotations and anti-heroic efforts to archive her father's lost novel.\n2010s.\nThe 2015 play \"Ada and the Engine\" by Lauren Gunderson portrays Lovelace and Charles Babbage in unrequited love, and it imagines a post-death meeting between Lovelace and her father.\nLovelace and Babbage are the main characters in Sydney Padua's webcomic and graphic novel \"The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage\". The comic features extensive footnotes on the history of Ada Lovelace, and many lines of dialogue are drawn from actual correspondence.\nLovelace and Mary Shelley as teenagers are the central characters in Jordan Stratford's steampunk series, \"The Wollstonecraft Detective Agency\".\nLovelace, identified as Ada Augusta Byron, is portrayed by Lily Lesser in the second season of \"The Frankenstein Chronicles\". She is employed as an \"analyst\" to provide the workings of a life-sized humanoid automaton. The brass workings of the machine are reminiscent of Babbage's analytical engine. Her employment is described as keeping her occupied until she returns to her studies in advanced mathematics.\nLovelace and Babbage appear as characters in the second season of the ITV series \"Victoria\" (2017). Emerald Fennell portrays Lovelace in the episode, \"The Green-Eyed Monster.\"\nThe Cardano cryptocurrency platform, which was launched in 2017, uses Ada as the name for their cryptocurrency and Lovelace as the smallest sub-unit of an Ada.\n\"Lovelace\" is the name given to the operating system designed by the character Cameron Howe in \"Halt and Catch Fire\".\nLovelace is a primary character in the 2019 Big Finish Doctor Who audio play \"The Enchantress of Numbers,\" starring Tom Baker as the Fourth Doctor and Jane Slavin as his current companion, WPC Ann Kelso. Lovelace is played by Finty Williams.\nIn 2019, Lovelace is a featured character in the play STEM FEMMES by Philadelphia theater company Applied Mechanics.\n2020s.\nLovelace features as a character in \"Spyfall, Part 2\", the second episode of \"Doctor Who\", series 12, which first aired on BBC One on 5\u00a0January 2020. The character was portrayed by Sylvie Briggs, alongside characterisations of Charles Babbage and Noor Inayat Khan. \nIn 2021, Nvidia named its GPU architecture featured in the RTX 4000 Series, \"Ada Lovelace\", after her. It is also the first Nvidia architecture to feature both a first and last name.\nCommemoration.\nThe computer language Ada, created on behalf of the United States Department of Defense, was named after Lovelace. The reference manual for the language was approved on 10 December 1980 and the Department of Defense Military Standard for the language, \"MIL-STD-1815\", was given the number of the year of her birth.\nIn 1981, the Association for Women in Computing inaugurated its Ada Lovelace Award. Since 1998, the British Computer Society (BCS) has awarded the Lovelace Medal, and in 2008 initiated an annual competition for women students. BCSWomen sponsors the Lovelace Colloquium, an annual conference for women undergraduates. Ada College is a further-education college in Tottenham Hale, London, focused on digital skills.\nAda Lovelace Day is an annual event celebrated on the second Tuesday of October, which began in 2009. Its goal is to \"...\u00a0raise the profile of women in science, technology, engineering, and maths,\" and to \"create new role models for girls and women\" in these fields. Events have included Wikipedia edit-a-thons with the aim of improving the representation of women on Wikipedia in terms of articles and editors to reduce unintended gender bias on Wikipedia.\nThe Ada Initiative was a non-profit organisation dedicated to increasing the involvement of women in the free culture and open source movements.\nThe Engineering in Computer Science and Telecommunications College building in Zaragoza University is called the Ada Byron Building. The computer centre in the village of Porlock, near where Lovelace lived, is named after her. Ada Lovelace House is a council-owned building in Kirkby-in-Ashfield, Nottinghamshire, near where Lovelace spent her infancy.\nIn 2012, a Google Doodle and blog post honoured her on her birthday. \nIn 2013, Ada Developers Academy was founded and named after her. The mission of Ada Developers Academy is to diversify tech by providing women and gender diverse people the skills, experience, and community support to become professional software developers to change the face of tech.\nOn 17 September 2013, the BBC Radio 4 biography programme \"Great Lives\" devoted an episode to Ada Lovelace; she was sponsored by TV presenter Konnie Huq.\nAs of November 2015, all new British passports have included an illustration of Lovelace and Babbage.\nIn 2017, a Google Doodle honoured her with other women on International Women's Day.\nOn 2 February 2018, Satellogic, a high-resolution Earth observation imaging and analytics company, launched a \u00d1uSat type micro-satellite named in honour of Ada Lovelace.\nIn March 2018, \"The New York Times\" published a belated obituary for Ada Lovelace.\nOn 27 July 2018, Senator Ron Wyden submitted, in the United States Senate, the designation of 9 October 2018 as National Ada Lovelace Day: \"To honor the life and contributions of Ada Lovelace as a leading woman in science and mathematics\". The resolution (S.Res.592) was considered, and agreed to without amendment and with a preamble by unanimous consent.\nIn November 2020 it was announced that Trinity College Dublin whose library had previously held forty busts, all of them of men, was commissioning four new busts of women, one of whom was to be Lovelace.\nIn March 2022, a statue of Ada Lovelace was installed at the site of the former Ergon House in the City of Westminster, London, honoring its scientific history. The redevelopment was part of a complex with Imperial Chemical House. The statue was sculpted by Etienne and Mary Millner and based on the portrait by Margaret Sarah Carpenter. The sculpture was unveiled on International Women's Day, 2022. It stands on the 7th floor of Millbank Quarter overlooking the junction of Dean Bradley Street and Horseferry Road.\nIn September 2022, Nvidia announced the Ada Lovelace graphics processing unit (GPU) microarchitecture.\nBicentenary.\nThe bicentenary of Ada Lovelace's birth was celebrated with a number of events, including:\nSpecial exhibitions were displayed by the Science Museum in London, England and the Weston Library (part of the Bodleian Library) in Oxford, England.\nPublication history.\nSix copies of the 1843 first edition of \"Sketch of the Analytical Engine\" with Ada Lovelace's \"Notes\" have been located. Three are held at Harvard University, one at the University of Oklahoma, and one at the United States Air Force Academy. On 20 July 2018, the sixth copy was sold at auction to an anonymous buyer for \u00a395,000. A digital facsimile of one of the copies in the Harvard University Library is available online.\nIn December 2016, a letter written by Ada Lovelace was forfeited by Martin Shkreli to the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance for unpaid taxes owed by Shkreli.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "975", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=975", "title": "AmbientCalculiOnline", "text": ""}
{"id": "980", "revid": "12406635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=980", "title": "August Derleth", "text": "American writer\nAugust William Derleth (February 24, 1909 \u2013 July 4, 1971) was an American writer and anthologist. Though best remembered as the first book publisher of the writings of H. P. Lovecraft, and for his own contributions to the Cthulhu Mythos and the cosmic horror genre, as well as his founding of the publisher Arkham House (which did much to bring supernatural fiction into print in hardcover in the US that had only been readily available in the UK), Derleth was a leading American regional writer of his day, as well as prolific in several other genres, including historical fiction, poetry, detective fiction, science fiction, and biography.\nA 1938 Guggenheim Fellow, Derleth considered his most serious work to be the ambitious \"Sac Prairie Saga\", a series of fiction, historical fiction, poetry, and non-fiction naturalist works designed to memorialize life in the Wisconsin he knew. Derleth can also be considered a pioneering naturalist and conservationist in his writing.\nLife.\nThe son of William Julius Derleth and Rose Louise Volk, Derleth grew up in Sauk City, Wisconsin. He was educated in local parochial and public high school. Derleth wrote his first fiction at age 13. He was interested most in reading, and he made three trips to the library a week. He would save his money to buy books (his personal library exceeded 12,000 volumes later on in life). Some of his biggest influences were Ralph Waldo Emerson's essays, Walt Whitman, H. L. Mencken's \"The American Mercury\", Samuel Johnson's \"The History of Rasselas, Prince of Abissinia\", Alexandre Dumas, Edgar Allan Poe, Walter Scott, and Henry David Thoreau's Walden.\nForty rejected stories and three years later, according to anthologist Jim Stephens, he sold his first story, \"Bat's Belfry\", to \"Weird Tales\" magazine. Derleth wrote throughout his four years at the University of Wisconsin, where he received a B.A. in 1930. During this time he also served briefly as associate editor of Minneapolis-based Fawcett Publications \"Mystic Magazine\".\nReturning to Sauk City in the summer of 1931, Derleth worked in a local canning factory and collaborated with childhood friend Mark Schorer (later Chairman of the University of California, Berkeley English Department). They rented a cabin, writing Gothic and other horror stories and selling them\nto \"Weird Tales\" magazine. Derleth won a place on the O'Brien Roll of Honor for \"Five Alone\", published in \"Place of Hawks\", but was first found in \"Pagany\" magazine.\nAs a result of his early work on the \"Sac Prairie Saga\", Derleth was awarded the prestigious Guggenheim Fellowship; his sponsors were Helen C. White, Nobel Prize-winning novelist Sinclair Lewis and poet Edgar Lee Masters of \"Spoon River Anthology\" fame.\nIn the mid-1930s, Derleth organized a Ranger's Club for young people, served as clerk and president of the local school board, served as a parole officer, organized a local men's club and a parent-teacher association. He also lectured in American regional literature at the University of Wisconsin and was a contributing editor of \"Outdoors Magazine\".\nWith longtime friend Donald Wandrei, Derleth founded Arkham House in 1939. Its initial objective was to publish the works of H. P. Lovecraft, with whom Derleth had corresponded since his teenage years. At the same time, he began teaching a course in American Regional Literature at the University of Wisconsin.\nIn 1941, he became literary editor of \"The Capital Times\" newspaper in Madison, a post he held until his resignation in 1960. His hobbies included fencing, swimming, chess, philately and comic-strips (Derleth reportedly used the funding from his Guggenheim Fellowship to bind his comic book collection, most recently valued in the millions of dollars, rather than to travel abroad as the award intended.). Derleth's true avocation, however, was hiking the terrain of his native Wisconsin lands, and observing and recording nature with an expert eye.\nDerleth once wrote of his writing methods, \"I write very swiftly, from 750,000 to a million words yearly, very little of it pulp material.\"\nIn 1948, he was elected president of the Associated Fantasy Publishers at the 6th World Science Fiction Convention in Toronto.\nHe was married April 6, 1953, to Sandra Evelyn Winters. They divorced six years later. Derleth retained custody of the couple's two children, April Rose and Walden William. April earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in English from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1977. She became majority stockholder, President, and CEO of Arkham House in 1994. She remained in that capacity until her death. She was known in the community as a naturalist and humanitarian. April died on March 21, 2011.\nIn 1960, Derleth began editing and publishing a magazine called \"Hawk and Whippoorwill\", dedicated to poems of man and nature.\nDerleth died of a heart attack on July 4, 1971, and is buried in St. Aloysius Cemetery in Sauk City. The U.S. 12 bridge over the Wisconsin River is named in his honor. Derleth was Roman Catholic.\nIn Derleth's biography, Dorothy M. Grobe Litersky stated that Derleth was bisexual, and maintained long-term romantic relationships with both men and women. This assertion has not been verified, however; no names were given of these romantic partners (in the interest of privacy according to Litersky), and no evidence or acknowledgement of Derleth having a bisexual or homosexual orientation has ever been found in his personal correspondence or writings.\nCareer.\nDerleth wrote more than 150 short stories and more than 100 books during his lifetime.\nThe \"Sac Prairie Saga\".\nDerleth wrote an expansive series of novels, short stories, journals, poems, and other works about Sac Prairie. Derleth intended this series to comprise up to 50 novels telling the projected life-story of the region from the 19th century onwards, with analogies to Balzac's \"Human Comedy\" and Proust's \"Remembrance of Things Past\".\nThis, and other early work by Derleth, made him a well-known figure among the regional literary figures of his time: early Pulitzer Prize winners Hamlin Garland and Zona Gale, as well as Sinclair Lewis, the last both an admirer and critic of Derleth.\nAs Edward Wagenknecht wrote in \"Cavalcade of the American Novel\", \"What Mr. Derleth has that is lacking...in modern novelists generally, is a country. He belongs. He writes of a land and a people that are bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. In his fictional world, there is a unity much deeper and more fundamental than anything that can be conferred by an ideology. It is clear, too, that he did not get the best, and most fictionally useful, part of his background material from research in the library; like Scott, in his Border novels, he gives, rather, the impression of having drunk it in with his mother's milk.\"\nJim Stephens, editor of \"An August Derleth Reader\", (1992), argues: \"what Derleth accomplished...was to gather a Wisconsin mythos which gave respect to the ancient fundament of our contemporary life.\"\nThe author inaugurated the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" with four novellas comprising \"Place of Hawks\", published by Loring &amp; Mussey in 1935. At publication, \"The Detroit News\" wrote: \"Certainly with this book Mr. Derleth may be added to the American writers of distinction.\"\nDerleth's first novel, \"Still is the Summer Night\", was published two years later by the famous Charles Scribners' editor Maxwell Perkins, and was the second in his Sac Prairie Saga.\n\"Village Year\", the first in a series of journals \u2013 meditations on nature, Midwestern village American life, and more \u2013 was published in 1941 to praise from \"The New York Times Book Review\": \"A book of instant sensitive responsiveness...recreates its scene with acuteness and beauty, and makes an unusual contribution to the Americana of the present day.\" The \"New York Herald Tribune\" observed that \"Derleth...deepens the value of his village setting by presenting in full the enduring natural background; with the people projected against this, the writing comes to have the quality of an old Flemish picture, humanity lively and amusing and loveable in the foreground and nature magnificent beyond.\" James Grey, writing in the \"St. Louis Dispatch\" concluded, \"Derleth has achieved a kind of prose equivalent of the \"Spoon River Anthology\".\"\nIn the same year, \"Evening in Spring\" was published by Charles Scribners &amp; Sons. This work Derleth considered among his finest. What \"The Milwaukee Journal\" called \"this beautiful little love story\", is an autobiographical novel of first love beset by small-town religious bigotry. The work received critical praise: \"The New Yorker\" considered it a story told \"with tenderness and charm\", while the \"Chicago Tribune\" concluded: \"It's as though he turned back the pages of an old diary and told, with rekindled emotion, of the pangs of pain and the sharp, clear sweetness of a boy's first love.\" Helen Constance White, wrote in \"The Capital Times\" that it was \"...the best articulated, the most fully disciplined of his stories.\"\nThese were followed in 1943 with \"Shadow of Night\", a Scribners' novel of which \"The Chicago Sun\" wrote: \"Structurally it has the perfection of a carved jewel...A psychological novel of the first order, and an adventure tale that is unique and inspiriting.\"\nIn November 1945, however, Derleth's work was attacked by his one-time admirer and mentor, Sinclair Lewis. Writing in \"Esquire\", Lewis observed, \"It is a proof of Mr. Derleth's merit that he makes one want to make the journey and see his particular Avalon: The Wisconsin River shining among its islands, and the castles of Baron Pierneau and Hercules Dousman. He is a champion and a justification of regionalism. Yet he is also a burly, bounding, bustling, self-confident, opinionated, and highly-sweatered young man with faults so grievous that a melancholy perusal of them may be of more value to apprentices than a study of his serious virtues. If he could ever be persuaded that he isn't half as good as he thinks he is, if he would learn the art of sitting still and using a blue pencil, he might become twice as good as he thinks he is \u2013 which would about rank him with Homer.\" Derleth good-humoredly reprinted the criticism along with a photograph of himself sans sweater, on the back cover of his 1948 country journal: \"Village Daybook\".\nA lighter side to the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" is a series of quasi-autobiographical short stories known as the \"Gus Elker Stories\", amusing tales of country life that Peter Ruber, Derleth's last editor, said were \"...models of construction and...fused with some of the most memorable characters in American literature.\" Most were written between 1934 and the late 1940s, though the last, \"Tail of the Dog\", was published in 1959 and won the \"Scholastic Magazine\" short story award for the year. The series was collected and republished in \"Country Matters\" in 1996.\n\"Walden West\", published in 1961, is considered by many Derleth's finest work. This prose meditation is built out of the same fundamental material as the series of Sac Prairie journals, but is organized around three themes: \"the persistence of memory...the sounds and odors of the country...and Thoreau's observation that the 'mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.'\" A blend of nature writing, philosophic musings, and careful observation of the people and place of \"Sac Prairie.\" Of this work, George Vukelich, author of \"North Country Notebook\", writes: \"Derleth's \"Walden West\" is...the equal of Sherwood Anderson's \"Winesburg,Ohio\", Thornton Wilder's \"Our Town\", and Edgar Lee Masters' \"Spoon River Anthology\".\" This was followed eight years later by \"Return to Walden West\", a work of similar quality, but with a more noticeable environmentalist edge to the writing, notes critic Norbert Blei.\nA close literary relative of the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" was Derleth's \"Wisconsin Saga\", which comprises several historical novels.\nDetective and mystery fiction.\nDetective fiction represented another substantial body of Derleth's work. Most notable among this work was a series of 70 stories in affectionate pastiche of Sherlock Holmes, whose creator, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, he admired greatly. The stories feature a Holmes-styled British detective named Solar Pons, of 7B Praed Street in London. These included one published novel as well (\"Mr. Fairlie's Final Journey\"). The series was greatly admired by such notable writers and critics of mystery and detective fiction as Ellery Queen (Frederic Dannay), Anthony Boucher, Vincent Starrett, and Howard Haycraft. \nIn his 1944 volume \"The Misadventures of Sherlock Holmes\", Ellery Queen wrote of Derleth's \"The Norcross Riddle\", an early Pons story: \"How many budding authors, not even old enough to vote, could have captured the spirit and atmosphere with as much fidelity?\" Queen adds, \"his choice of the euphonic Solar Pons is an appealing addition to the fascinating lore of Sherlockian nomenclature.\" Vincent Starrett, in his foreword to the 1964 edition of \"The Casebook of Solar Pons\", wrote that the series is \"as sparkling a galaxy of Sherlockian pastiches as we have had since the canonical entertainments came to an end.\"\nDespite close similarities to Doyle's creation, Pons lived in the post-World War I era, in the decades of the 1920s and 1930s. Though Derleth never wrote a Pons novel to equal \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\", editor Peter Ruber wrote that \"Derleth\" produced more than a few Solar Pons stories almost as good as Sir Arthur's, and many that had better plot construction.\"\nAlthough these stories were a form of diversion for Derleth, Ruber, who edited \"The Original Text Solar Pons Omnibus Edition\" (2000), argued: \"Because the stories were generally of such high quality, they ought to be assessed on their own merits as a unique contribution in the annals of mystery fiction, rather than suffering comparison as one of the endless imitators of Sherlock Holmes.\"\nSome of the stories were self-published, through a new imprint called \"Mycroft &amp; Moran\", an appellation of humorous significance to Holmesian scholars. For approximately a decade, an active supporting group was the Praed Street Irregulars, patterned after the Baker Street Irregulars.\nIn 1946, Conan Doyle's two sons made some attempts to force Derleth to cease publishing the Solar Pons series, but the efforts were unsuccessful, and were eventually withdrawn.\nDerleth's mystery and detective fiction also included a series of works set in Sac Prairie and featuring Judge Peck as the central character.\nYouth and children's fiction.\nDerleth wrote many and varied children's works, including biographies meant to introduce younger readers to explorer Jacques Marquette, as well as Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. Arguably most important among his works for younger readers, however, is the Steve and Sim Mystery Series, also known as the Mill Creek Irregulars series. The ten-volume series, published between 1958 and 1970, is set in Sac Prairie of the 1920s and can thus be considered in its own right a part of the \"Sac Prairie Saga\", as well as an extension of Derleth's body of mystery fiction. Robert Hood, writing in the \"New York Times\" said: \"Steve and Sim, the major characters, are twentieth-century cousins of Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer; Derleth's minor characters, little gems of comic drawing.\" The first novel in the series, \"The Moon Tenders\", does, in fact, involve a rafting adventure down the Wisconsin River, which led regional writer Jesse Stuart to suggest the novel was one that \"older people might read to recapture the spirit and dream of youth.\" The connection to the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" was noted by the \"Chicago Tribune\": \"Once again a small midwest community in 1920s is depicted with perception, skill, and dry humor.\"\nArkham House and the \"Cthulhu Mythos\".\nDerleth was a correspondent and friend of H. P. Lovecraft \u2013 when Lovecraft wrote about \"le Comte d'Erlette\" in his fiction, it was in homage to Derleth. Derleth invented the term \"Cthulhu Mythos\" to describe the fictional universe depicted in the series of stories shared by Lovecraft and other writers in his circle.\nWhen Lovecraft died in 1937, Derleth and Donald Wandrei assembled a collection of Lovecraft's stories and tried to get them published. Existing publishers showed little interest, so Derleth and Wandrei founded Arkham House in 1939 for that purpose. The name of the company derived from Lovecraft's fictional town of Arkham, Massachusetts, which features in many of his stories. In 1939, Arkham House published \"The Outsider and Others\", a huge collection that contained most of Lovecraft's known short stories. Derleth and Wandrei soon expanded Arkham House and began a regular publishing schedule after its second book, \"Someone in the Dark\", a collection of some of Derleth's own horror stories, was published in 1941.\nFollowing Lovecraft's death, Derleth wrote a number of stories based on fragments and notes left by Lovecraft. These were published in \"Weird Tales\" and later in book form, under the byline \"H. P. Lovecraft and August Derleth\", with Derleth calling himself a \"posthumous collaborator.\" This practice has raised objections in some quarters that Derleth simply used Lovecraft's name to market what was essentially his own fiction; S. T. Joshi refers to the \"posthumous collaborations\" as marking the beginning of \"perhaps the most disreputable phase of Derleth's activities\".\nDirk W. Mosig, S. T. Joshi, and Richard L. Tierney were dissatisfied with Derleth's invention of the term \"Cthulhu Mythos\" (Lovecraft himself used \"Yog-Sothothery\") and his presentation of Lovecraft's fiction as having an overall pattern reflecting Derleth's own Christian world view, which they contrast with Lovecraft's depiction of an amoral universe. However, Robert M. Price points out that while Derleth's tales are distinct from Lovecraft's in their use of hope and his depiction of a struggle between good and evil, nevertheless the basis of Derlerth's systemization are found in Lovecraft. He also suggests that the differences can be overstated:\nDerleth \"was\" more optimistic than Lovecraft in his conception of the Mythos, but we are dealing with a difference more of degree than kind. There are indeed tales wherein Derleth's protagonists get off scot-free (like \"The Shadow in the Attic\", \"Witches' Hollow\", or \"The Shuttered Room\"), but often the hero is doomed (e.g., \"The House in the Valley\", \"The Peabody Heritage\", \"Something in Wood\"), as in Lovecraft. And it must be remembered that an occasional Lovecraftian hero does manage to overcome the odds, e.g., in \"The Horror in the Museum\", \"The Shunned House\", and 'The Case of Charles Dexter Ward'. \nDerleth also treated Lovecraft's Great Old Ones as representatives of elemental forces, creating new fictional entities to flesh out this framework.\nSuch debates aside, Derleth's founding of Arkham House and his successful effort to rescue Lovecraft from literary oblivion are widely acknowledged by practitioners in the horror field as seminal events in the field. For instance, Ramsey Campbell has acknowledged Derleth's encouragement and guidance during the early part of his own writing career, and Kirby McCauley has cited Derleth and Arkham House as an inspiration for his own anthology \"Dark Forces\". Arkham House and Derleth published \"Dark Carnival\", the first book by Ray Bradbury, as well. Brian Lumley cites the importance of Derleth to his own Lovecraftian work, and contends in a 2009 introduction to Derleth's work that he was \"...one of the first, finest, and most discerning editors and publishers of macabre fiction.\"\nImportant as was Derleth's work to rescue H.P. Lovecraft from literary obscurity at the time of Lovecraft's death, Derleth also built a body of horror and spectral fiction of his own; still frequently anthologized. The best of this work, recently reprinted in four volumes of short stories \u2013 most of which were originally published in \"Weird Tales\", illustrates Derleth's original abilities in the genre. While Derleth considered his work in this genre less important than his most serious literary efforts, the compilers of these four anthologies, including Ramsey Campbell, note that the stories still resonate after more than 50 years.\nIn 2009, The Library of America selected Derleth's story \"The Panelled Room\" for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of American Fantastic Tales.\nOther works.\nDerleth also wrote many historical novels, as part of both the \"Sac Prairie Saga\" and the \"Wisconsin Saga\". He also wrote history; arguably most notable among these was \"The Wisconsin: River of a Thousand Isles\", published in 1942. The work was one in a series entitled \"The Rivers of America\", conceived by writer Constance Lindsay Skinner in the Great Depression as a series that would connect Americans to their heritage through the history of the great rivers of the nation. Skinner wanted the series to be written by artists, not academicians. Derleth, while not a trained historian, was, according to former Wisconsin state historian William F. Thompson, \"...a very competent regional historian who based his historical writing upon research in the primary documents and who regularly sought the help of professionals... .\" In the foreword to the 1985 reissue of the work by The University of Wisconsin Press, Thompson concluded: \"No other writer, of whatever background or training, knew and understood his particular 'corner of the earth' better than August Derleth.\"\nAdditionally, Derleth wrote a number of volumes of poetry. Three of his collections \u2013 \"Rind of Earth\" (1942), \"Selected Poems\" (1944), and \"The Edge of Night\" (1945) \u2013 were published by the Decker Press, which also printed the work of other Midwestern poets such as Edgar Lee Masters.\nDerleth was also the author of several biographies of other writers, including Zona Gale, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau.\nHe also wrote introductions to several collections of classic early 20th century comics, such as \"Buster Brown\", \"Little Nemo in Slumberland\", and \"Katzenjammer Kids\", as well as a book of children's poetry entitled \"A Boy's Way\", and the foreword to \"Tales from an Indian Lodge\" by \"Phebe Jewell Nichols.\" Derleth also wrote under the pen names Stephen Grendon, Kenyon Holmes and Tally Mason.\nDerleth's papers were donated to the Wisconsin Historical Society in Madison.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "981", "revid": "2705932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=981", "title": "Alps", "text": "Major mountain range system in Central Europe\nThe Alps () are the highest and most extensive mountain range that is entirely in Europe, stretching approximately across seven Alpine countries (from west to east): France, Switzerland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Austria, Germany, and Slovenia.\nThe Alpine arch extends from Nice on the western Mediterranean to Trieste on the Adriatic and Vienna at the beginning of the Pannonian Basin. The mountains were formed over tens of millions of years as the African and Eurasian tectonic plates collided. Extreme shortening caused by the event resulted in marine sedimentary rocks rising by thrusting and folding into high mountain peaks such as Mont Blanc and the Matterhorn.\nMont Blanc spans the French\u2013Italian border, and at is the highest mountain in the Alps. The Alpine region area contains 128 peaks higher than .\nThe altitude and size of the range affect the climate in Europe; in the mountains, precipitation levels vary greatly and climatic conditions consist of distinct zones. Wildlife such as ibex live in the higher peaks to elevations of , and plants such as edelweiss grow in rocky areas in lower elevations as well as in higher elevations.\nEvidence of human habitation in the Alps goes back to the Palaeolithic era. A mummified man, determined to be 5,000 years old, was discovered on a glacier at the Austrian\u2013Italian border in 1991.\nBy the 6th century BC, the Celtic La T\u00e8ne culture was well established. Hannibal notably crossed the Alps with a herd of elephants, and the Romans had settlements in the region. In 1800, Napoleon crossed one of the mountain passes with an army of 40,000. The 18th and 19th centuries saw an influx of naturalists, writers, and artists, in particular, the Romantics, followed by the golden age of alpinism as mountaineers began to ascend the peaks.\nThe Alpine region has a strong cultural identity. The traditional culture of farming, cheesemaking, and woodworking still exists in Alpine villages, although the tourist industry began to grow early in the 20th century and expanded greatly after World War II to become the dominant industry by the end of the century.\nThe Winter Olympic Games have been hosted in the Swiss, French, Italian, Austrian and German Alps. As of 2010,[ [update]] the region is home to 14\u00a0million people and has 120\u00a0million annual visitors.\nEtymology and toponymy.\nThe English word \"Alps\" comes from the Latin \"Alpes\".\nThe Latin word \"Alpes\" could possibly come from the adjective \"albus\" (\"white\"), or could possibly come from the Greek goddess Alphito, whose name is related to \"alphita\", the \"white flour\"; \"alphos\", a dull white leprosy; and finally the Proto-Indo-European word *alb\u02b0\u00f3s. Similarly, the river god Alpheus is also supposed to derive from the Greek \"alphos\" and means whitish.\nIn his commentary on the \"Aeneid\" of Vergil, the late fourth-century grammarian Maurus Servius Honoratus says that all high mountains are called \"Alpes\" by Celts.\nAccording to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the Latin \"Alpes\" might derive from a pre-Indo-European word *\"alb\" \"hill\"; \"Albania\" is a related derivation. Albania, a name not native to the region known as the country of Albania, has been used as a name for several mountainous areas across Europe.\nIn Roman times, \"Albania\" was a name for the eastern Caucasus, while in the English languages \"Albania\" (or \"Albany\") was occasionally used as a name for Scotland, although it is more likely derived from the Latin word \"albus\", the colour white.\nIn modern languages the term \"alp\", \"alm\", \"albe\" or \"alpe\" refers to a grazing pastures in the alpine regions below the glaciers, not the peaks.\nAn \"alp\" refers to a high mountain pasture, typically near or above the tree line, where cows and other livestock are taken to be grazed during the summer months and where huts and hay barns can be found, sometimes constituting tiny hamlets. Therefore, the term \"the Alps\", as a reference to the mountains, is a misnomer. The term for the mountain peaks varies by nation and language: words such as \"Horn\", \"Kogel\", \"Kopf\", \"Gipfel\", \"Spitze\", \"Stock\", and \"Berg\" are used in German-speaking regions; \"Mont\", \"Pic\", \"T\u00eate\", \"Pointe\", \"Dent\", \"Roche\", and \"Aiguille\" in French-speaking regions; and \"Monte\", \"Picco\", \"Corno\", \"Punta\", \"Pizzo\", or \"Cima\" in Italian-speaking regions.\nGeography.\nThe Alps are a crescent shaped geographic feature of central Europe that ranges in an arc (curved line) from east to west and is in width. The mean height of the mountain peaks is . The range stretches from the Mediterranean Sea north above the Po basin, extending through France from Grenoble, and stretching eastward through mid and southern Switzerland. The range continues onward toward Vienna, Austria, and east to the Adriatic Sea and Slovenia.\nTo the south it dips into northern Italy and to the north extends to the southern border of Bavaria in Germany. In areas like Chiasso, Switzerland, and Allg\u00e4u, Bavaria, the demarcation between the mountain range and the flatlands are clear; in other places such as Geneva, the demarcation is less clear.\nThe countries with the greatest alpine territory are Austria (28.7% of the total area), Italy (27.2%), France (21.4%) and Switzerland (13.2%).\nThe highest portion of the range is divided by the glacial trough of the Rh\u00f4ne valley, from Mont Blanc to the Matterhorn and Monte Rosa on the southern side, and the Bernese Alps on the northern. The peaks in the easterly portion of the range, in Austria and Slovenia, are smaller than those in the central and western portions.\nThe variances in nomenclature in the region spanned by the Alps make classification of the mountains and subregions difficult, but a general classification is that of the Eastern Alps and Western Alps with the divide between the two occurring in eastern Switzerland according to geologist Stefan Schmid, near the Spl\u00fcgen Pass.\nThe highest peaks of the Western Alps and Eastern Alps, respectively, are Mont Blanc, at , and Piz Bernina, at . The second-highest major peaks are Monte Rosa, at , and Ortler, at , respectively.\nA series of lower mountain ranges run parallel to the main chain of the Alps, including the French Prealps in France and the Jura Mountains in Switzerland and France. The secondary chain of the Alps follows the watershed from the Mediterranean Sea to the Wienerwald, passing over many of the highest and most well-known peaks in the Alps. From the Colle di Cadibona to Col de Tende it runs westwards, before turning to the northwest and then, near the Colle della Maddalena, to the north. Upon reaching the Swiss border, the line of the main chain heads approximately east-northeast, a heading it follows until its end near Vienna.\nThe northeast end of the Alpine arc, directly on the Danube, which flows into the Black Sea, is the Leopoldsberg near Vienna. In contrast, the southeastern part of the Alps ends on the Adriatic Sea in the area around Trieste towards Duino and Barcola.\nPasses.\nThe Alps have been crossed for war and commerce, and by pilgrims, students and tourists. Crossing routes by road, train, or foot are known as \"passes\", and usually consist of depressions in the mountains in which a valley leads from the plains and hilly pre-mountainous zones.\nIn the medieval period hospices were established by religious orders at the summits of many of the main passes. The most important passes are the Col de l'Iseran (the highest), the Col Agnel, the Brenner Pass, the Mont-Cenis, the Great St. Bernard Pass, the Col de Tende, the Gotthard Pass, the Semmering Pass, the Simplon Pass, and the Stelvio Pass.\nCrossing the Italian-Austrian border, the Brenner Pass separates the \u00d6tztal Alps and Zillertal Alps and has been in use as a trading route since the 14th century. The lowest of the Alpine passes at , the Semmering crosses from Lower Austria to Styria; since the 12th century when a hospice was built there, it has seen continuous use. A railroad with a tunnel long was built along the route of the pass in the mid-19th century. With a summit of , the Great St Bernard Pass is one of the highest in the Alps, crossing the Italian-Swiss border east of the Pennine Alps along the flanks of Mont Blanc. The pass was used by Napoleon Bonaparte to cross 40,000 troops in 1800.\nThe Mont Cenis pass has been a major commercial and military road between Western Europe and Italy. The pass was crossed by many troops on their way to the Italian peninsula. From Constantine I, Pepin the Short and Charlemagne to Henry IV, Napol\u00e9on and more recently the German Gebirgsj\u00e4gers during World War II.\nNow the pass has been supplanted by the Fr\u00e9jus Highway Tunnel (opened 1980) and Rail Tunnel (opened 1871).\nThe Saint Gotthard Pass crosses from Central Switzerland to Ticino; in 1882 the Saint Gotthard Railway Tunnel was opened connecting Lucerne in Switzerland, with Milan in Italy. 98 years later followed Gotthard Road Tunnel ( long) connecting the A2 motorway in G\u00f6schenen on the north side with Airolo on the south side, exactly like the railway tunnel.\nOn 1 June 2016 the world's longest railway tunnel, the Gotthard Base Tunnel, was opened, which connects Erstfeld in canton of Uri with Bodio in canton of Ticino by two single tubes of .\nIt is the first tunnel that traverses the Alps on a flat route.\nFrom 11 December 2016, it has been part of the regular railway timetable and used hourly as standard ride between Basel/Lucerne/Zurich and Bellinzona/Lugano/Milan.\nThe highest pass in the alps is the Col de l'Iseran in Savoy (France) at , followed by the Stelvio Pass in northern Italy at ; the road was built in the 1820s.\nHighest mountains.\nThe Union Internationale des Associations d'Alpinisme (UIAA) has defined a list of 82 \"official\" Alpine summits that reach at least . The list includes not only mountains, but also subpeaks with little prominence that are considered important mountaineering objectives. Below are listed the 29 \"four-thousanders\" with at least of prominence.\nWhile Mont Blanc was first climbed in 1786 and the Jungfrau in 1811, most of the Alpine four-thousanders were climbed during the second half of the 19th century, notably Piz Bernina (1850), the Dom (1858), the Grand Combin (1859), the Weisshorn (1861) and the Barre des \u00c9crins (1864); the ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865 marked the end of the golden age of alpinism. Karl Blodig (1859\u20131956) was among the first to successfully climb all the major 4,000\u00a0m peaks. He completed his series of ascents in 1911. Many of the big Alpine three-thousanders were climbed in the early 19th century, notably the Grossglockner (1800) and the Ortler (1804), although some of them were climbed only much later, such at Mont Pelvoux (1848), Monte Viso (1861) and La Meije (1877).\nThe first British Mont Blanc ascent by a man was in 1788; the first ascent by a woman was in 1808. By the mid-1850s Swiss mountaineers had ascended most of the peaks and were eagerly sought as mountain guides. Edward Whymper reached the top of the Matterhorn in 1865 (after seven attempts), and in 1938 the last of the six great north faces of the Alps was climbed with the first ascent of the Eiger \"Nordwand\" (north face of the Eiger).\nGeology and orogeny.\nImportant geological concepts were established as naturalists began studying the rock formations of the Alps in the 18th century. In the mid-19th century, the now-defunct idea of geosynclines was used to explain the presence of \"folded\" mountain chains. This theory was replaced in the mid-20th century by the theory of plate tectonics.\nThe formation of the Alps (the Alpine orogeny) was an episodic process that began about 300\u00a0million years ago. In the Paleozoic Era the Pangaean supercontinent consisted of a single tectonic plate; it broke into separate plates during the Mesozoic Era and the Tethys sea developed between Laurasia and Gondwana during the Jurassic Period. The Tethys was later squeezed between colliding plates causing the formation of mountain ranges called the Alpide belt, from Gibraltar through the Himalayas to Indonesia\u2014a process that began at the end of the Mesozoic and continues into the present. The formation of the Alps was a segment of this orogenic process, caused by the collision between the African and the Eurasian plates that began in the late Cretaceous Period.\nUnder extreme compressive stresses and pressure, marine sedimentary rocks were uplifted, forming characteristic recumbent folds, and thrust faults. As the rising peaks underwent erosion, a layer of marine flysch sediments was deposited in the foreland basin, and the sediments became involved in younger folds as the orogeny progressed. Coarse sediments from the continual uplift and erosion were later deposited in foreland areas north of the Alps. These regions in Switzerland and Bavaria are well-developed, containing classic examples of flysch, which is sedimentary rock formed during mountain building.\nThe Alpine orogeny occurred in ongoing cycles through to the Paleogene causing differences in folded structures, with a late-stage orogeny causing the development of the Jura Mountains. A series of tectonic events in the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods caused different paleogeographic regions. The Alps are subdivided by different lithology (rock composition) and nappe structures according to the orogenic events that affected them. The geological subdivision differentiates the Western, Eastern Alps, and Southern Alps: the Helveticum in the north, the Penninicum and Austroalpine system in the centre and, south of the Periadriatic Seam, the Southern Alpine system.\nAccording to geologist Stefan Schmid, because the Western Alps underwent a metamorphic event in the Cenozoic Era while the Austroalpine peaks underwent an event in the Cretaceous Period, the two areas show distinct differences in nappe formations. Flysch deposits in the Southern Alps of Lombardy probably occurred in the Cretaceous or later.\nPeaks in France, Italy and Switzerland lie in the \"Houilli\u00e8re zone\", which consists of basement with sediments from the Mesozoic Era. High \"massifs\" with external sedimentary cover are more common in the Western Alps and were affected by Neogene Period thin-skinned thrusting whereas the Eastern Alps have comparatively few high peaked massifs. Similarly the peaks in eastern Switzerland extending to western Austria (Helvetic nappes) consist of thin-skinned sedimentary folding that detached from former basement rock.\nIn simple terms, the structure of the Alps consists of layers of rock of European, African, and oceanic (Tethyan) origin. The bottom nappe structure is of continental European origin, above which are stacked marine sediment nappes, topped off by nappes derived from the African plate. The Matterhorn is an example of the ongoing orogeny and shows evidence of great folding. The tip of the mountain consists of gneisses from the African plate; the base of the peak, below the glaciated area, consists of European basement rock. The sequence of Tethyan marine sediments and their oceanic basement is sandwiched between rock derived from the African and European plates.\nThe core regions of the Alpine orogenic belt have been folded and fractured in such a manner that erosion produced the characteristic steep vertical peaks of the Swiss Alps that rise seemingly straight out of the foreland areas. Peaks such as Mont Blanc, the Matterhorn, and high peaks in the Pennine Alps, the Brian\u00e7onnais, and Hohe Tauern consist of layers of rock from the various orogenies including exposures of basement rock.\nDue to the ever-present geologic instability, earthquakes continue in the Alps to this day. Typically, the largest earthquakes in the alps have been between magnitude 6 and 7 on the Richter scale. Geodetic measurements show ongoing topographic uplift at rates of up to about 2.5\u00a0mm per year in the North, Western and Central Alps, and at ~1\u00a0mm per year in the Eastern and South-Western Alps. The underlying mechanisms that jointly drive the present-day uplift pattern are the isostatic rebound due to the melting of the last glacial maximum ice-cap or long-term erosion, detachment of the Western Alpine subducting slab, mantle convection as well as ongoing horizontal convergence between Africa and Europe, but their relative contributions to the uplift of the Alps are difficult to quantify and likely to vary significantly in space and time.\nMinerals.\nThe Alps are a source of minerals that have been mined for thousands of years. In the 8th to 6th centuries, BC during the Hallstatt culture, Celtic tribes mined copper; later the Romans mined gold for coins in the Bad Gastein area. Erzberg in Styria furnishes high-quality iron ore for the steel industry. Crystals, such as cinnabar, amethyst, and quartz, are found throughout much of the Alpine region. The cinnabar deposits in Slovenia are a notable source of cinnabar pigments.\nAlpine crystals have been studied and collected for hundreds of years and began to be classified in the 18th century. Leonhard Euler studied the shapes of crystals, and by the 19th-century crystal hunting was common in Alpine regions. David Friedrich Wiser amassed a collection of 8000 crystals that he studied and documented. In the 20th century Robert Parker wrote a well-known work about the rock crystals of the Swiss Alps; at the same period a commission was established to control and standardize the naming of Alpine minerals.\nGlaciers.\nIn the Miocene Epoch the mountains underwent severe erosion because of glaciation, which was noted in the mid-19th century by naturalist Louis Agassiz who presented a paper proclaiming the Alps were covered in ice at various intervals\u2014a theory he formed when studying rocks near his Neuch\u00e2tel home which he believed originated to the west in the Bernese Oberland. Because of his work he came to be known as the \"father of the ice-age concept\" although other naturalists before him put forth similar ideas.\nAgassiz studied glacier movement in the 1840s at the Unteraar Glacier where he found the glacier moved per year, more rapidly in the middle than at the edges. His work was continued by other scientists and now a permanent laboratory exists inside a glacier under the Jungfraujoch, devoted exclusively to the study of Alpine glaciers.\nGlaciers pick up rocks and sediment with them as they flow. This causes erosion and the formation of valleys over time. The Inn valley is an example of a valley carved by glaciers during the ice ages with a typical terraced structure caused by erosion. Eroded rocks from the most recent ice age lie at the bottom of the valley while the top of the valley consists of erosion from earlier ice ages. Glacial valleys have characteristically steep walls (reliefs); valleys with lower reliefs and talus slopes are remnants of glacial troughs or previously infilled valleys. Moraines, piles of rock picked up during the movement of the glacier, accumulate at edges, centre, and the terminus of glaciers.\nAlpine glaciers can be straight rivers of ice, long sweeping rivers, spread in a fan-like shape (Piedmont glaciers), and curtains of ice that hang from vertical slopes of the mountain peaks. The stress of the movement causes the ice to break and crack loudly, perhaps explaining why the mountains were believed to be home to dragons in the medieval period. The cracking creates unpredictable and dangerous crevasses, often invisible under new snowfall, which causes the greatest danger to mountaineers.\nGlaciers end in ice caves (the Rh\u00f4ne Glacier), by trailing into a lake or river, or by shedding snowmelt on a meadow. Sometimes a piece of glacier will detach or break resulting in flooding, property damage, and loss of life.\nHigh levels of precipitation cause the glaciers to descend to permafrost levels in some areas whereas in other, more arid regions, glaciers remain above about the level. The of the Alps covered by glaciers in 1876 had shrunk to by 1973, resulting in decreased river run-off levels. Forty percent of the glaciation in Austria has disappeared since 1850, and 30% of that in Switzerland.\nAlthough the Alpine topography shows marked glacial morphologies, the mechanisms by which glacial reshaping occurs are unclear. Numerical modeling suggests that glacial erosion propagates from low elevations to high elevations leading to an early increase of local relief followed by lowering of the mean orogen elevation.\nRivers and lakes.\nThe Alps provide lowland Europe with drinking water, irrigation, and hydroelectric power. Although the area is only about 11% of the surface area of Europe, the Alps provide up to 90% of water to lowland Europe, particularly to arid areas and during the summer months. Cities such as Milan depend on 80% of water from Alpine runoff. Water from the rivers is used in at least 550 hydroelectricity power plants, considering only those producing at least 10MW of electricity.\nMajor European rivers flow from the Alps, such as the Rhine, the Rh\u00f4ne, the Inn, and the Po, all of which have headwaters in the Alps and flow into neighbouring countries, finally emptying into the North Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, the Adriatic Sea and the Black Sea. Other rivers such as the Danube have major tributaries flowing into them that originate in the Alps.\nThe Rh\u00f4ne is second to the Nile as a freshwater source to the Mediterranean Sea; the river begins as glacial meltwater, flows into Lake Geneva, and from there to France where one of its uses is to cool nuclear power plants. The Rhine originates in a area in Switzerland and represents almost 60% of water exported from the country. Tributary valleys, some of which are complicated, channel water to the main valleys which can experience flooding during the snowmelt season when rapid runoff causes debris torrents and swollen rivers.\nThe rivers form lakes, such as Lake Geneva, a crescent-shaped lake crossing the Swiss border with Lausanne on the Swiss side and the town of Evian-les-Bains on the French side. In Germany, the medieval St. Bartholomew's chapel was built on the south side of the K\u00f6nigssee, accessible only by boat or by climbing over the abutting peaks.\nAdditionally, the Alps have led to the creation of large lakes in Italy. For instance, the Sarca, the primary inflow of Lake Garda, originates in the Italian Alps. The Italian Lakes are a popular tourist destination since the Roman Era for their mild climate.\nScientists have been studying the impact of climate change and water use. For example, each year more water is diverted from rivers for snowmaking in the ski resorts, the effect of which is yet unknown. Furthermore, the decrease of glaciated areas combined with a succession of winters with lower-than-expected precipitation may have a future impact on the rivers in the Alps as well as an effect on the water availability to the lowlands.\nClimate.\nThe Alps are a classic example of what happens when a temperate area at lower altitude gives way to higher-elevation terrain. Elevations around the world that have cold climates similar to those of the polar regions have been called Alpine. A rise from sea level into the upper regions of the atmosphere causes the temperature to decrease (see adiabatic lapse rate). The effect of mountain chains on prevailing winds is to carry warm air belonging to the lower region into an upper zone, where it expands in volume at the cost of a proportionate loss of temperature, often accompanied by precipitation in the form of snow or rain. The height of the Alps is sufficient to divide the weather patterns in Europe into a wet north and dry south because moisture is sucked from the air as it flows over the high peaks.\nThe severe weather in the Alps has been studied since the 18th century; particularly the weather patterns such as the seasonal foehn wind. Numerous weather stations were placed in the mountains early in the early 20th century, providing continuous data for climatologists. Some of the valleys are quite arid such as the Aosta valley in Italy, the Maurienne in France, the Valais in Switzerland, and northern Tyrol.\nThe areas that are not arid and receive high precipitation experience periodic flooding from rapid snowmelt and runoff. The mean precipitation in the Alps ranges from a low of per year to per year, with the higher levels occurring at high altitudes. At altitudes between , snowfall begins in November and accumulates through to April or May when the melt begins. Snow lines vary from , above which the snow is permanent and the temperatures hover around the freezing point even during July and August. High-water levels in streams and rivers peak in June and July when the snow is still melting at the higher altitudes.\nThe Alps are split into five climatic zones, each with different vegetation. The climate, plant life, and animal life vary among the different sections or zones of the mountains. The lowest zone is the colline zone, which exists between , depending on the location. The montane zone extends from , followed by the sub-Alpine zone from . The Alpine zone, extending from tree line to the snow line, is followed by the glacial zone, which covers the glaciated areas of the mountain. Climatic conditions show variances within the same zones; for example, weather conditions at the head of a mountain valley, extending directly from the peaks, are colder and more severe than those at the mouth of a valley which tend to be less severe and receive less snowfall.\nVarious models of climate change have been projected into the 22nd century for the Alps, with an expectation that a trend toward increased temperatures will have an effect on snowfall, snowpack, glaciation, and river runoff. Significant changes, of both natural and anthropogenic origins, have already been diagnosed from observations, including a 5.6% reduction per decade in snow cover duration over the last 50\u2009years, which also highlights climate change adaptation needs due to impacts on the climate and regional socio-economic activities.&lt;ref name=\"10.1038/s41558-022-01575-3\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nEcology.\nFlora.\nThirteen thousand species of plants have been identified in the Alpine regions. Alpine plants are grouped by habitat and soil type which can be limestone or non-calcareous. The habitats range from meadows, bogs, and woodland (deciduous and coniferous) areas to soil-less scree and moraines, and rock faces and ridges. A natural vegetation limit with altitude is given by the presence of the chief deciduous trees\u2014oak, beech, ash and sycamore maple. These do not reach the same elevation, nor are they often found growing together, but their upper limit corresponds accurately enough to the change from a temperate to a colder climate that is further proved by a change in the presence of wild herbaceous vegetation. This limit usually lies about above the sea on the north side of the Alps, but on the southern slopes it often rises to , sometimes even to .\nAbove the forestry, there is often a band of short pine trees (\"Pinus mugo\"), which is in turn superseded by \"Alpenrosen\", dwarf shrubs, typically \"Rhododendron ferrugineum\" (on acid soils) or \"Rhododendron hirsutum\" (on alkaline soils). Although Alpenrose prefers acidic soil, the plants are found throughout the region. Above the tree line is the area defined as \"alpine\" where in the alpine meadow plants are found that have adapted well to harsh conditions of cold temperatures, aridity, and high altitudes. The alpine area fluctuates greatly because of regional fluctuations in tree lines.\nAlpine plants such as the Alpine gentian grow in abundance in areas such as the meadows above the Lauterbrunnental. Gentians are named after the Illyrian king Gentius, and 40 species of the early-spring blooming flower grow in the Alps, in a range of . Writing about the gentians in Switzerland D. H. Lawrence described them as \"darkening the day-time, torch-like with the smoking blueness of Pluto's gloom.\" Gentians tend to \"appear\" repeatedly as the spring blooming takes place at progressively later dates, moving from the lower altitude to the higher altitude meadows where the snow melts much later than in the valleys. On the highest rocky ledges, the spring flowers bloom in the summer.\nAt these higher altitudes, the plants tend to form isolated cushions. In the Alps, several species of flowering plants have been recorded above , including \"Ranunculus glacialis\", \"Androsace alpina\" and \"Saxifraga biflora\". \"Eritrichium nanum\", commonly known as the King of the Alps, is the most elusive of the alpine flowers, growing on rocky ridges at . Perhaps the best known of the alpine plants is Edelweiss which grows in rocky areas and can be found at altitudes as low as and as high as . The plants that grow at the highest altitudes have adapted to conditions by specialization such as growing in rock screes that give protection from winds.\nThe extreme and stressful climatic conditions give way to the growth of plant species with secondary metabolites important for medicinal purposes. Origanum vulgare, Prunella vulgaris, Solanum nigrum, and Urtica dioica are some of the more useful medicinal species found in the Alps.\nHuman interference has nearly exterminated the trees in many areas, and, except for the beech forests of the Austrian Alps, forests of deciduous trees are rarely found after the extreme deforestation between the 17th and 19th centuries. The vegetation has changed since the second half of the 20th century, as the high alpine meadows cease to be harvested for hay or used for grazing which eventually might result in a regrowth of the forest. In some areas, the modern practice of building ski runs by mechanical means has destroyed the underlying tundra from which the plant life cannot recover during the non-skiing months, whereas areas that still practice a natural \"piste\" type of ski slope building preserve the fragile underlayers.\nFauna.\nThe Alps are a habitat for 30,000 species of wildlife, ranging from the tiniest snow fleas to brown bears, many of which have made adaptations to the harsh cold conditions and high altitudes to the point that some only survive in specific micro-climates either directly above or below the snow line.\nThe largest mammal to live in the highest altitudes are the alpine ibex, which have been sighted as high as . The ibex live in caves and descend to eat the succulent alpine grasses. Classified as antelopes, chamois are smaller than ibex and found throughout the Alps, living above the tree line and are common in the entire alpine range. Areas of the eastern Alps are still home to brown bears. In Switzerland the canton of Bern was named for the bears but the last bear is recorded as having been killed in 1792 above Kleine Scheidegg by three hunters from Grindelwald.\nMany rodents such as voles live underground. Marmots live almost exclusively above the tree line as high as . They hibernate in large groups to provide warmth, and can be found in all areas of the Alps, in large colonies they build beneath the alpine pastures. Golden eagles and bearded vultures are the largest birds to be found in the Alps; they nest high on rocky ledges and can be found at altitudes of . The most common bird is the alpine chough which can be found scavenging at climber's huts or the Jungfraujoch, a high-altitude tourist destination.\nReptiles such as adders and vipers live up to the snow line; because they cannot bear the cold temperatures they hibernate underground and soak up the warmth on rocky ledges. The high-altitude Alpine salamanders have adapted to living above the snow line by giving birth to fully developed young rather than laying eggs. Brown trout can be found in the streams up to the snow line. Molluscs such as the wood snail live up the snow line. Popularly gathered as food, the snails are now protected.\nSeveral species of moths live in the Alps, some of which are believed to have evolved in the same habitat up to 120\u00a0million years ago, long before the Alps were created. Blue butterflies can commonly be seen drinking from the snowmelt; some species of blues fly as high as . The butterflies tend to be large, such as those from the swallowtail Parnassius family, with a habitat that ranges to . Twelve species of beetles have habitats up to the snow line; the most beautiful and formerly collected for its colours but now protected is \"Rosalia alpina\". Spiders, such as the large wolf spider, live above the snow line and can be seen as high as . Scorpions can be found in the Italian Alps.\nSome of the species of moths and insects show evidence of having been indigenous to the area from as long ago as the Alpine orogeny. In \u00c9mosson in Valais, Switzerland, dinosaur tracks were found in the 1970s, dating probably from the Triassic Period.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nWhen the ice melted after the W\u00fcrm glaciation, paleolithic settlements were established along the lake shores and in cave systems. Evidence of human habitation has been found in caves near the Vercors Cave System, close to Grenoble and Echirolles. In Austria, the Mondsee lake shows evidence of houses built on piles. Standing stones have been found in the Alpine areas of France and Italy. About 200,000 drawings and etchings have been documented, and are known as the Rock Drawings in Valcamonica.\nA mummy of a neolithic human, known as \u00d6tzi, was discovered on the Similaun. His clothing lets modern people assume that he was an alpine farmer. While the location and manner of his death suggests that \u00d6tzi was traveling. Analysis of the mitochondrial DNA of \u00d6tzi, has shown that he belongs to the K1 subclade.\nFrom the 13th to the 6th century BC much of the Alps was settled by the Germanic peoples, Lombards, Alemanni, Bavarii, and Franks. Celt tribes settled in modern-day Switzerland between 1500 and 1000 BC. The Raeti lived in the eastern regions, while the west was occupied by the Helvetii and the Allobroges settled in the Rh\u00f4ne valley and in Savoy. The Ligures and Adriatic Veneti lived in Northwest Italy and Triveneto respectively. The Celts mined salt in areas such as Salzburg, where evidence was found of the Hallstatt culture. By the 6th century BC the La T\u00e8ne culture was well established in the region, and became known for high quality Celtic art.\nBetween 430 and 400 BC prolonged warfare in the Alps resulted in the devastation of agricultural land and human settlements, ultimately triggering the enslavement of men, women, and children, goods had to be imported as a result. The Etruscan civilization responded to raids by the Massalia and acquired absolute control over the Alpine trade routes. Aggressors in modern-day Italy were dealt with and an alliance was formed with the Celts. The grip of the Etruscan settlements broke down, as the Roman political system expanded, so as to take control over Alpine trade routes that connected human settlements in the Alps with settlements in the Mediterranean.\nDuring the Second Punic War in 218 BC, the Carthage general Hannibal initiated one of the most celebrated achievements of any military force in ancient warfare, recorded as Hannibal crossing the Alps. The Roman people built roads along the Alpine mountain passes, which continued to be used through the medieval period. Roman road markers can still be found on the Alpine mountain passes.\nDuring the Gallic Wars in 58 BC Julius Caesar defeated the Helvetii. The Rhaetian continued to resist but their territory was eventually conquered when the Romans crossed the Danube valley and defeated the Brigantes. The Romans built settlements in the Alps. In towns such as Aosta, Martigny, Lausanne, and Partenkirchen remains of villas, arenas, and temples have been discovered.\nChristianity, feudalism, and Napoleonic wars.\nChristianity was established in the Alps by the Roman people. Monasteries and churches were constructed, even at high Alpine altitudes. The Franks expanded their Carolingian Empire, while the Baiuvarii introduced feudalism in the eastern Alps. The construction of castles in the Alps supported the growing number of dukedoms and kingdoms. Castello del Buonconsiglio in Trento, still has intricate frescoes, and excellent examples of Gothic art. The Ch\u00e2teau de Chillon is preserved as an example of medieval architecture. There are several important alpine saints and one such one is Saint Maurice. Much of the medieval period was a time of power struggles between competing dynasties such as the House of Savoy, the Visconti of Milan, and the House of Habsburg.\nThe Great St Bernard Hospice, built in the 9th or 10th centuries, at the summit of the Great Saint Bernard Pass was a shelter for humans and destination for pilgrims. In 1291, to protect themselves from incursions by the House of Habsburg, four Alpine cantons drew up the Federal Charter of 1291, which is considered to be a declaration of independence from neighboring kingdoms. After a series of battles fought in the 13th, 14th, and 15th centuries, more cantons joined the confederacy and by the 16th century, Switzerland was established as a sovereign state.\nIn the Alps, the War of the Spanish Succession fallout resulted in a 1713 treaty, part of the Peace of Utrecht, which relocated the Western Alps border along the watersheds. Historically, the Alps were used to determine the borders of political and administrative gangs, but the Peace of Utrecht was the first significant body of treaty that considered geographical conditions. The Alps were carved up and borders were agreed, so that enclaves in the Alps could be eliminated.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars in the late 18th century and early 19th century, Napoleon annexed territory formerly controlled by the House of Habsburg, and the House of Savoy. In 1798, the Helvetic Republic was established, two years later an army across the Great St Bernard Pass. In 1799 the Russian imperial military engaged the revolutionary French army in the Alps, this episode has been recorded as significant achievement in mountain warfare. In October 1799 the troops commanded by Alexander Suvorov were surrounded in the Alps by much larger French troops. The Russian troops broke out, mauled the French troops, and retreated through the Panix Pass.\nAfter the fall of Napoleon, many alpine countries developed heavy protections to prevent further invasion. Thus, Savoy built a series of fortifications to protect the major alpine passes, such as the col du Mont-Cenis, which was crossed by Charlemagne to obliterate the Lombards. The Maurienne province and its capital Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne is a massive fortification built on cliffs and steep mountains.\nIn the 19th century, the monasteries built in the Alps to shelter humans became tourist destinations. The Benedictines had built monasteries in Lucerne, and Oberammergau. The Cistercians built their temple at Lake Constance. Meanwhile, the Augustinians maintained abbeys in Savoy and one in Interlaken.\nExploration.\nRadiocarbon-dated charcoal placed around 50,000 years ago was found in the \"Drachloch\" (Dragon's Hole) cave above the village of Vattis in the canton of St. Gallen, proving that the high peaks were visited by prehistoric people. Seven bear skulls from the cave may have been buried by the same prehistoric people. The peaks, however, were mostly ignored except for a few notable examples, and long left to the exclusive attention of the people of the adjoining valleys. The mountain peaks were seen as terrifying, the abode of dragons and demons, to the point that people blindfolded themselves to cross the Alpine passes. The glaciers remained a mystery and many still believed the highest areas to be inhabited by dragons.\nCharles VII of France ordered his chamberlain to climb Mont Aiguille in 1356. The knight reached the summit of Rocciamelone where he left a bronze triptych of three crosses, a feat which he conducted with the use of ladders to traverse the ice. In 1492, Antoine de Ville climbed Mont Aiguille, without reaching the summit, an experience he described as \"horrifying and terrifying.\" Leonardo da Vinci was fascinated by variations of light in the higher altitudes, and climbed a mountain\u2014scholars are uncertain which one; some believe it may have been Monte Rosa. From his description of a \"blue like that of a gentian\" sky it is thought that he reached a significantly high altitude. In the 18th century four Chamonix men almost made the summit of Mont Blanc but were overcome by altitude sickness and snowblindness.\nConrad Gessner was the first naturalist to ascend the mountains in the 16th century, to study them, writing that in the mountains he found the \"theatre of the Lord\". By the 19th century more naturalists began to arrive to explore, study and conquer the high peaks. Two men who first explored the regions of ice and snow were Horace-B\u00e9n\u00e9dict de Saussure (1740\u20131799) in the Pennine Alps, and the Benedictine monk of Disentis Placidus a Spescha (1752\u20131833). Born in Geneva, Saussure was enamoured with the mountains from an early age; he left a law career to become a naturalist and spent many years trekking through the Bernese Oberland, the Savoy, the Piedmont and Valais, studying the glaciers and geology, as he became an early proponent of the theory of rock upheaval. Saussure, in 1787, was a member of the third ascent of Mont Blanc\u2014today the summits of all the peaks have been climbed.\nThe Romantics and Alpinists.\nAlbrecht von Haller's poem \"Die Alpen\", published in 1732 described the mountains as an area of mythical purity. Jean-Jacques Rousseau presented the Alps as a place of allure and beauty, in his novel \"Julie, or the New Heloise\", published in 1761. Later the first wave of Romanticism such as Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, and J. M. W. Turner came to admire the Alpine scenery; Wordsworth visited the area in 1790, writing of his experiences in \"The Prelude\" (1799). Schiller later wrote the play \"William Tell\" (1804), which tells the story of the legendary Swiss marksman William Tell as part of the greater Swiss struggle for independence from the Habsburg Empire in the early 14th century. At the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Alpine countries began to see an influx of poets, artists, and musicians, as visitors came to experience the sublime effects of monumental nature.\nIn 1816, Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley and his wife Mary Shelley visited Geneva and all three were inspired by the scenery in their writings. During these visits Shelley wrote the poem \"Mont Blanc\", Byron wrote \"The Prisoner of Chillon\" and the dramatic poem \"Manfred\", and Mary Shelley, who found the scenery overwhelming, conceived the idea for the novel \"Frankenstein\" in her villa on the shores of Lake Geneva amid a thunderstorm. When Coleridge travelled to Chamonix, he declaimed, in defiance of Shelley, who had signed himself \"Atheos\" in the guestbook of the Hotel de Londres near Montenvers, \"Who would be, who could be an atheist in this valley of wonders\".\nBy the mid-19th century scientists began to arrive en masse to study the geology and ecology of the region.\nFrom the beginning of the 19th century, the tourism and mountaineering development of the Alps began. In the early years of the \"golden age of alpinism\" initially scientific activities were mixed with sport, for example by the physicist John Tyndall, with the first ascent of the Matterhorn by Edward Whymper being the highlight. In the later years, the \"silver age of alpinism\", the focus was on mountain sports and climbing. The first president of the Alpine Club, John Ball, is considered the discoverer of the Dolomites, which for decades were the focus of climbers like Paul Grohmann, Michael Innerkofler and Angelo Dibona.\nThe Nazis.\nFall 1932, Adolf Hitler commissioned the first of a series of refurbishments, which eventually turned a mountain cottage, later named Berghof, into a fortified citadel. This domestic, but representative, fortification had two small bedrooms, and a full bathroom, planned by the Munich architect and NSDAP member Josef Neumaier. Guests, such as Rudolf Hess, stayed over, sleeping in tents or over the garage.\nThe Alps, Adolf Hitler, and improbable powerful organizations have been subject to crime fiction. The Alps acted as a geographical barrier to Italy, and the Alps for centuries were permeated with established smuggling routes, known as \"green line\". After World War II, members of the Schutzstaffel that feared prosecution as war criminals, known in modern English only as \"SS\", disappeared into a crowd of refugees. Massive numbers of refugees entered Italy illegally, by navigating the Alps.\nUndocumented migrants.\nSmugglers of humans claim that crossing the Alps, is less dangerous or deadly, than traveling 355\u00a0km on water between Tripoli and Lampedusa with a tramp ship (\"carretta del mare\") or a dinghy. Undocumented migrants, visa overstayers, false tourists, asylum seekers, and other clandestine humans, lose their lives crossing the Alps. The exact number of smuggled humans who die a brutal death in the Alps, can only be estimated.\nLargest Alpine cities.\nThe largest city within the Alps is the city of Grenoble in France. Other larger and important cities within the Alps with over 100,000 inhabitants are in Tyrol with Bolzano/Bozen (Italy), Trento (Italy) and Innsbruck (Austria). Larger cities outside the Alps are Milan, Verona, Turin (Italy), Munich (Germany), Graz, Vienna, Salzburg (Austria), Ljubljana, Maribor, Kranj (Slovenia), Zurich, Geneva (Switzerland), Nice and Lyon (France).\nCities with over 100,000 inhabitants in the Alps are:\nAlpine people and culture.\nThe population of the region is 14\u00a0million spread across eight countries. On the rim of the mountains, on the plateaus, and on the plains the economy consists of manufacturing and service jobs whereas in the higher altitudes and the mountains farming is still essential to the economy. Farming and forestry continue to be mainstays of Alpine culture, industries that provide for export to the cities and maintain the mountain ecology.\nThe Alpine regions are multicultural and linguistically diverse. Dialects are common and vary from valley to valley and region to region. In the Slavic Alps alone 19 dialects have been identified. Some of the Romance dialects spoken in the French, Swiss and Italian alps of Aosta Valley derive from Arpitan, while the southern part of the western range is related to Occitan; the German dialects derive from Germanic tribal languages. Romansh, spoken by two percent of the population in southeast Switzerland, is an ancient Rhaeto-Romanic language derived from Latin, remnants of ancient Celtic languages and perhaps Etruscan.\nMuch of the Alpine culture is unchanged since the medieval period when skills that guaranteed survival in the mountain valleys and the highest villages became mainstays, leading to strong traditions of carpentry, woodcarving, baking, pastry-making, and cheesemaking.\nFarming has been a traditional occupation for centuries, although it became less dominant in the 20th century with the advent of tourism. Grazing and pasture land are limited because of the steep and rocky topography of the Alps. In mid-June, cows are moved to the highest pastures close to the snowline, where they are watched by herdsmen who stay in the high altitudes often living in stone huts or wooden barns during the summers. Villagers celebrate the day the cows are herded up to the pastures and again when they return in mid-September. The Almabtrieb, Alpabzug, Alpabfahrt, D\u00e9salpes (\"coming down from the alps\") is celebrated by decorating the cows with garlands and enormous cowbells while the farmers dress in traditional costumes.\nCheesemaking is an ancient tradition in most Alpine countries. A wheel of cheese from the Emmental in Switzerland can weigh up to , and the Beaufort in Savoy can weigh up to . Owners of the cows traditionally receive from the cheesemakers a portion about the proportion of the cows' milk from the summer months in the high alps. Haymaking is an important farming activity in mountain villages that have become somewhat mechanized in recent years, although the slopes are so steep that scythes are usually necessary to cut the grass. Hay is normally brought in twice a year, often also on festival days.\nIn the high villages, people live in homes built according to medieval designs that withstand cold winters. The kitchen is separated from the living area (called the \"stube\", the area of the home heated by a stove), and second-floor bedrooms benefit from rising heat. The typical Swiss chalet originated in the Bernese Oberland. Chalets often face south or downhill and are built of solid wood, with a steeply gabled roof to allow accumulated snow to slide off easily. Stairs leading to upper levels are sometimes built on the outside, and balconies are sometimes enclosed.\nFood is passed from the kitchen to the stube, where the dining room table is placed. Some meals are communal, such as fondue, where a pot is set in the middle of the table for each person to dip into. Other meals are still served traditionally on carved wooden plates. Furniture has been traditionally elaborately carved and in many Alpine countries, carpentry skills are passed from generation to generation.\nRoofs are traditionally constructed from Alpine rocks such as pieces of schist, gneiss, or slate. Such chalets are typically found in the higher parts of the valleys, as in the Maurienne valley in Savoy, where the amount of snow during the cold months is important. The inclination of the roof cannot exceed 40%, allowing the snow to stay on top, thereby functioning as insulation from the cold. In the lower areas where the forests are widespread, wooden tiles are traditionally used. Commonly made of Norway spruce, they are called \"tavaillon\".\nIn the German-speaking parts of the Alps (Austria, Bavaria, South Tyrol, Liechtenstein and Switzerland), there is a strong tradition of Alpine folk culture. Old traditions are carefully maintained among inhabitants of Alpine areas, even though this is seldom obvious to the visitor: many people are members of cultural associations where the Alpine folk culture is cultivated. At cultural events, traditional folk costume (in German \"Tracht\") is expected: typically lederhosen for men and dirndls for women. Visitors can get a glimpse of the rich customs of the Alps at public Volksfeste. Even when large events feature only a little folk culture, all participants take part with gusto. Good opportunities to see local people celebrating the traditional culture occur at the many fairs, wine festivals, and firefighting festivals which fill weekends in the countryside from spring to autumn. Alpine festivals vary from country to country. Frequently they include music (e.g. the playing of Alpenhorns), dance (e.g. Schuhplattler), sports (e.g. wrestling marches and archery), as well as traditions with pagan roots such as the lighting of fires on Walpurgis Night and Saint John's Eve. Many areas celebrate Fastnacht in the weeks before Lent. Folk costume also continues to be worn for most weddings and festivals.\nTourism.\nThe Alps are one of the more popular tourist destinations in the world with many resorts such as Oberstdorf, in Bavaria, Saalbach in Austria, Davos in Switzerland, Chamonix in France, and Cortina d'Ampezzo in Italy recording more than a million annual visitors. With over 120\u00a0million visitors a year, tourism is integral to the Alpine economy with much of it coming from winter sports, although summer visitors are also an important component.\nThe tourism industry began in the early 19th century when foreigners visited the Alps, travelled to the bases of the mountains to enjoy the scenery, and stayed at the spa-resorts. Large hotels were built during the Belle \u00c9poque; cog-railways, built early in the 20th century, brought tourists to ever-higher elevations, with the Jungfraubahn terminating at the Jungfraujoch, well above the eternal snow-line, after going through a tunnel in Eiger. During this period winter sports were slowly introduced: in 1882 the first figure skating championship was held in St. Moritz, and downhill skiing became a popular sport with English visitors early in the 20th century, as the first ski-lift was installed in 1908 above Grindelwald.\nIn the first half of the 20th century the Olympic Winter Games were held three times in Alpine venues: the 1924 Winter Olympics in Chamonix, France; the 1928 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz, Switzerland; and the 1936 Winter Olympics in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany. During World War II the winter games were cancelled but after that time the Winter Games have been held in St. Moritz (1948), Cortina d'Ampezzo (1956), Innsbruck, Austria (1964 and 1976), Grenoble, France, (1968), Albertville, France, (1992), and Torino (2006). In 1930, the \"Lauberhorn Rennen\" (Lauberhorn Race), was run for the first time on the Lauberhorn above Wengen; the equally demanding Hahnenkamm was first run in the same year in Kitzb\u00fchl, Austria. Both races continue to be held each January on successive weekends. The Lauberhorn is the more strenuous downhill race at and poses danger to racers who reach within seconds of leaving the start gate.\nDuring the post-World War I period, ski lifts were built in Swiss and Austrian towns to accommodate winter visitors, but summer tourism continued to be important; by the mid-20th century the popularity of downhill skiing increased greatly as it became more accessible and in the 1970s several new villages were built in France devoted almost exclusively to skiing, such as Les Menuires. Until this point, Austria and Switzerland had been the traditional and more popular destinations for winter sports, but by the end of the 20th century and into the early 21st century, France, Italy, and the Tyrol began to see increases in winter visitors. From 1980 to the present, ski-lifts have been modernized and snow-making machines installed at many resorts, leading to mounting concerns regarding the loss of traditional Alpine culture and uncertainties regarding sustainable development. For instance the number of ski resorts and piste kilometres has declined since 2015, a likely result of climatic change.\nTransportation.\nThe region is serviced by of roads used by six million vehicles per year. Train travel is well established in the Alps, with, for instance of track for every in a country such as Switzerland. Most of Europe's highest railways are located there. In 2007, the new L\u00f6tschberg Base Tunnel was opened, which circumvents the 100 years older L\u00f6tschberg Tunnel. With the opening of the Gotthard Base Tunnel on June 1, 2016, it bypasses the Gotthard Tunnel built in the 19th century and realizes the first flat route through the Alps.\nSome high mountain villages are car-free either because of inaccessibility or by choice. Wengen, and Zermatt (in Switzerland) are accessible only by cable car or cog-rail trains. Avoriaz (in France), is car-free, with other Alpine villages considering becoming car-free zones or limiting the number of cars for reasons of sustainability of the fragile Alpine terrain.\nThe lower regions and larger towns of the Alps are well-served by motorways and main roads, but higher mountain passes and byroads, which are amongst the highest in Europe, can be treacherous even in summer due to steep slopes. Many passes are closed in winter. Several airports around the Alps (and some within), as well as long-distance rail links from all neighbouring countries, afford large numbers of travellers easy access.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "982", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=982", "title": "A priori and a posteriori knowledge", "text": ""}
{"id": "983", "revid": "40764242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=983", "title": "Albert Camus", "text": " French philosopher, author, and journalist (1913\u20131960)\nAlbert Camus ( , ; ] (); 7 November 1913\u00a0\u2013 4 January 1960) was a French-Algerian philosopher, author, dramatist, and journalist. He was the recipient of the 1957 Nobel Prize in Literature at the age of 44, the second-youngest recipient in history. His works include \"The Stranger\", \"The Plague\", \"The Myth of Sisyphus\", \"The Fall\", and \"The Rebel\".\nCamus was born in French Algeria to \"Pieds Noirs\" parents. He spent his childhood in a poor neighbourhood and later studied philosophy at the University of Algiers. He was in Paris when the Germans invaded France during World War II in 1940. Camus tried to flee but finally joined the French Resistance where he served as editor-in-chief at \"Combat\", an outlawed newspaper. After the war, he was a celebrity figure and gave many lectures around the world. He married twice but had many extramarital affairs. Camus was politically active; he was part of the left that opposed Joseph Stalin and the Soviet Union because of their totalitarianism. Camus was a moralist and leaned towards anarcho-syndicalism. He was part of many organisations seeking European integration. During the Algerian War (1954\u20131962), he kept a neutral stance, advocating for a multicultural and pluralistic Algeria, a position that caused controversy and was rejected by most parties.\nPhilosophically, Camus's views contributed to the rise of the philosophy known as absurdism. Some consider Camus's work to show him to be an existentialist, even though he himself firmly rejected the term throughout his lifetime.\nLife.\nEarly years and education.\nAlbert Camus was born on 7 November 1913 in a working-class neighborhood in Mondovi (present-day Dr\u00e9an), in French Algeria. His mother, Catherine H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Camus (n\u00e9e Sint\u00e8s), was French with Balearic Spanish ancestry. He never knew his father, Lucien Camus, a poor French agricultural worker killed in action while serving with Zouaves, in October 1914, during World War I. Camus, his mother and other relatives lived without many basic material possessions during his childhood in the Belcourt section of Algiers. Camus was a second-generation French inhabitant of Algeria, a French territory from 1830 until 1962. His paternal grandfather, along with many others of his generation, had moved to Algeria for a better life during the first decades of the 19th century. Hence, he was called \u2014a slang term for people of French and other European descent born in Algeria. His identity and poor background had a substantial effect on his later life. Nevertheless, Camus was a French citizen and enjoyed more rights than Arab and Berber Algerians under indig\u00e9nat. During his childhood, he developed a love for football and swimming.\nUnder the influence of his teacher Louis Germain, Camus gained a scholarship in 1924 to continue his studies at a prestigious lyceum (secondary school) near Algiers. In 1930, at the age of 17, he was diagnosed with tuberculosis. Because it is a transmitted disease, he moved out of his home and stayed with his uncle Gustave Acault, a butcher, who influenced the young Camus. It was at that time he turned to philosophy, with the mentoring of his philosophy teacher Jean Grenier. He was impressed by ancient Greek philosophers and Friedrich Nietzsche. During that time, he was only able to study part-time. To earn money, he took odd jobs: as a private tutor, car parts clerk, and assistant at the Meteorological Institute.\nIn 1933, Camus enrolled at the University of Algiers and completed his \"licence de philosophie\" (BA) in 1936; after presenting his thesis on Plotinus. Camus developed an interest in early Christian philosophers, but Nietzsche and Arthur Schopenhauer had paved the way towards pessimism and atheism. Camus also studied novelist-philosophers such as Stendhal, Herman Melville, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and Franz Kafka. In 1933, he also met Simone Hi\u00e9, then a partner of a friend of Camus, who would become his first wife.\nCamus played goalkeeper for the Racing Universitaire d'Alger junior team from 1928 to 1930. The sense of team spirit, fraternity, and common purpose appealed to him enormously. In match reports, he was often praised for playing with passion and courage. Any football ambitions, however, disappeared when he contracted tuberculosis. Camus drew parallels among football, human existence, morality, and personal identity. For him, the simplistic morality of football contradicted the complicated morality imposed by authorities such as the state and Church.\nFormative years.\nIn 1934, aged 20, Camus was in a relationship with Simone Hi\u00e9. Simone had an addiction to morphine, a drug she used to ease her menstrual pains. His uncle Gustave did not approve of the relationship, but Camus married Hi\u00e9 to help her fight her addiction. He subsequently discovered she was in a relationship with her doctor at the same time and the couple later divorced.\nCamus joined the French Communist Party (PCF) in early 1935. He saw it as a way to \"fight inequalities between Europeans and 'natives' in Algeria,\" even though he was not a Marxist. He explained: \"We might see communism as a springboard and asceticism that prepares the ground for more spiritual activities.\" Camus left the PCF a year later. In 1936, the independence-minded Algerian Communist Party (PCA) was founded, and Camus joined it after his mentor Grenier advised him to do so. Camus's main role within the PCA was to organise the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Travail\" (\"Workers' Theatre\"). Camus was also close to the \"Parti du Peuple Alg\u00e9rien\" (Algerian People's Party (PPA)), which was a moderate anti-colonialist/nationalist party. As tensions in the interwar period escalated, the Stalinist PCA and PPA broke ties. Camus was expelled from the PCA for refusing to toe the party line. This series of events sharpened his belief in human dignity. Camus's mistrust of bureaucracies that aimed for efficiency instead of justice grew. He continued his involvement with theatre and renamed his group \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'Equipe\" (\"Theatre of the Team\"). Some of his scripts were the basis for his later novels.\nIn 1938, Camus began working for the leftist newspaper \"Alger r\u00e9publicain\" (founded by Pascal Pia) as he had strong anti-fascist feelings, and the rise of fascist regimes in Europe was worrying him. By then, Camus had developed strong feelings against authoritative colonialism as he witnessed the harsh treatment of the Arabs and Berbers by French authorities. \"Alger r\u00e9publicain\" was banned in 1940 and Camus flew to Paris to take a new job at \"Paris-Soir\" as editor-in-chief. In Paris, he almost completed his \"first cycle\" of works dealing with the absurd and the meaningless\u2014the novel \"L'\u00c9tranger\" (\"The Outsider\" (UK), or \"The Stranger\" (US)), the philosophical essay \"Le Mythe de Sisyphe\" (\"The Myth of Sisyphus\") and the play \"Caligula\". Each cycle consisted of a novel, an essay and a theatrical play.\nWorld War II, Resistance and \"Combat\".\nSoon after Camus moved to Paris, the outbreak of World War II began to affect France. Camus volunteered to join the army but was not accepted because he once had tuberculosis. As the Germans were marching towards Paris, Camus fled. He was laid off from \"Paris-Soir\" and ended up in Lyon, where he married pianist and mathematician Francine Faure on 3 December 1940. Camus and Faure moved back to Algeria (Oran) where he taught in primary schools. Because of his tuberculosis, he moved to the French Alps on medical advice. There he began writing his second cycle of works, this time dealing with revolt\u2014a novel \"La Peste\" (\"The Plague\") and a play \"Le Malentendu\" (\"The Misunderstanding\"). By 1943 he was known because of his earlier work. He returned to Paris where he met and became friends with Jean-Paul Sartre. He also became part of a circle of intellectuals including Simone de Beauvoir, Andr\u00e9 Breton, and others. Among them was the actress Mar\u00eda Casares, who would later have an affair with Camus.\nCamus took an active role in the underground resistance movement against the Germans during the French Occupation. Upon his arrival in Paris, he started working as a journalist and editor of the banned newspaper \"Combat\". He continued writing for the paper after the liberation of France. Camus used a pseudonym for his \"Combat\" articles and used false ID cards to avoid being captured. During that period he composed four \"Lettres \u00e0 un Ami Allemand\" (\"Letters to a German Friend\"), explaining why resistance was necessary.\nPost\u2013World War II.\nAfter the War, Camus lived in Paris with Faure, who gave birth to twins, Catherine and Jean, in 1945. Camus was now a celebrated writer known for his role in the Resistance. He gave lectures at various universities in the United States and Latin America during two separate trips. He also visited Algeria once more, only to leave disappointed by the continued oppressive colonial policies, which he had warned about many times. During this period he completed the second cycle of his work, with the essay \"L'Homme r\u00e9volt\u00e9\" (\"The Rebel\"). Camus attacked totalitarian communism while advocating libertarian socialism and anarcho-syndicalism. Upsetting many of his colleagues and contemporaries in France with his rejection of communism, the book brought about the final split with Sartre. His relations with the Marxist Left deteriorated further during the Algerian War.\nCamus was a strong supporter of European integration in various marginal organisations working towards that end. In 1944, he founded the \"Comit\u00e9 fran\u00e7ais pour la f\u00e9deration europ\u00e9enne\"\u2014(CFFE (French Committee for the European Federation))\u2014declaring that Europe \"can only evolve along the path of economic progress, democracy, and peace if the nation-states become a federation.\" In 1947\u201348, he founded the \"Groupes de Liaison Internationale\" (GLI) a trade union movement in the context of revolutionary syndicalism (\"syndicalisme r\u00e9volutionnaire\"). His main aim was to express the positive side of surrealism and existentialism, rejecting the negativity and the nihilism of Andr\u00e9 Breton. Camus also raised his voice against the Soviet intervention in Hungary and the totalitarian tendencies of Franco's regime in Spain.\nCamus had numerous affairs, particularly an irregular and eventually public affair with the Spanish-born actress Mar\u00eda Casares, with whom he had extensive correspondence. Faure did not take this affair lightly. She had a mental breakdown and needed hospitalisation in the early 1950s. Camus, who felt guilty, withdrew from public life and was slightly depressed for some time.\nIn 1957, Camus received the news that he was to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. This came as a shock to him. He was anticipating Andr\u00e9 Malraux would win the prestigious award. At age 44, he was the second-youngest recipient of the prize, after Rudyard Kipling, who was 42. After this he began working on his autobiography \"Le Premier Homme\" (\"The First Man\") in an attempt to examine \"moral learning\". He also turned to the theatre once more. Financed by the money he received with his Nobel Prize, he adapted and directed for the stage Dostoyevsky's novel \"Demons\". The play opened in January 1959 at the Antoine Theatre in Paris and was a critical success.\nDuring these years, he published posthumously the works of the philosopher Simone Weil, in the series \"Espoir\" (\"Hope\") which he had founded for \u00c9ditions Gallimard. Weil had great influence on his philosophy, since he saw her writings as an \"antidote\" to nihilism. Camus described her as \"the only great spirit of our times\".\nDeath.\nCamus died on 4 January 1960 at the age of 46, in a car accident near Sens, in Le Grand Fossard in the small town of Villeblevin. He had spent the New Year's holiday of 1960 at his house in Lourmarin, Vaucluse with his family, and his publisher Michel Gallimard of \u00c9ditions Gallimard, along with Gallimard's wife, Janine, and daughter. Camus's wife and children went back to Paris by train on 2 January, but Camus decided to return in Gallimard's luxurious Facel Vega FV2. The car crashed into a plane tree on a long straight stretch of the Route nationale 5 (now the RN 6 or D606). Camus, who was in the passenger seat, died instantly. Gallimard died a few days later, although his wife and daughter were unharmed.\n144 pages of a handwritten manuscript entitled \"Le premier Homme\" (\"The First Man\") were found in the wreckage. Camus had predicted that this unfinished novel based on his childhood in Algeria would be his finest work. Camus was buried in the Lourmarin Cemetery, Vaucluse, France, where he had lived. His friend Sartre read a eulogy, paying tribute to Camus's heroic \"stubborn humanism\". William Faulkner wrote his obituary, saying, \"When the door shut for him, he had already written on this side of it that which every artist who also carries through life with him, that one same foreknowledge and hatred of death, is hoping to do: I was here.\"\nLiterary career.\nCamus's first publication was a play called \"R\u00e9volte dans les Asturies\" (\"Revolt in the Asturias\") written with three friends in May 1936. The subject was the 1934 revolt by Spanish miners that was brutally suppressed by the Spanish government resulting in 1,500 to 2,000 deaths. In May 1937 he wrote his first book, \"L'Envers et l'Endroit\" (\"Betwixt and Between\", also translated as \"The Wrong Side and the Right Side\"). Both were published by Edmond Charlot's small publishing house.\nCamus separated his work into three cycles. Each cycle consisted of a novel, an essay, and a play. The first was the cycle of the absurd consisting of \"L'\u00c9tranger\", \"Le Mythe de Sysiphe\", and \"Caligula\". The second was the cycle of the revolt which included \"La Peste\" (\"The Plague\"), \"L'Homme r\u00e9volt\u00e9\" (\"The Rebel\"), and \"Les Justes\" (\"The Just Assassins\"). The third, the cycle of the love, consisted of \"Nemesis\". Each cycle was an examination of a theme with the use of a pagan myth and including biblical motifs.\nThe books in the first cycle were published between 1942 and 1944, but the theme was conceived earlier, at least as far back as 1936. With this cycle, Camus aims to pose a question on the human condition, discuss the world as an absurd place, and warn humanity of the consequences of totalitarianism.\nCamus began his work on the second cycle while he was in Algeria, in the last months of 1942, just as the Germans were reaching North Africa. In the second cycle, Camus used Prometheus, who is depicted as a revolutionary humanist, to highlight the nuances between revolution and rebellion. He analyses various aspects of rebellion, its metaphysics, its connection to politics, and examines it under the lens of modernity, of historicity and the absence of a God.\nAfter receiving the Nobel Prize, Camus gathered, clarified, and published his pacifist leaning views at \"Actuelles III: Chronique alg\u00e9rienne 1939\u20131958\" (\"Algerian Chronicles\"). He then decided to distance himself from the Algerian War as he found the mental burden too heavy. He turned to theatre and the third cycle which was about love and the goddess Nemesis, the Greek and Roman goddess of Revenge.\nTwo of Camus's works were published posthumously. The first entitled \"La mort heureuse\" (\"A Happy Death\") (1970), features a character named Patrice Mersault, comparable to \"The Stranger\"'s Meursault. There is scholarly debate about the relationship between the two books. The second was an unfinished novel, \"Le Premier homme\" (\"The First Man\") (1995), which Camus was writing before he died. It was an autobiographical work about his childhood in Algeria and its publication in 1994 sparked a widespread reconsideration of Camus's allegedly unrepentant colonialism.\nPolitical stance.\nCamus was a moralist; he claimed morality should guide politics. While he did not deny that morals change over time, he rejected the classical Marxist view that historical material relations define morality.\nCamus was also strongly critical of Marxism-Leninism, especially in the case of the Soviet Union, which he considered totalitarian. Camus rebuked those sympathetic to the Soviet model and their \"decision to call total servitude freedom\". A proponent of libertarian socialism, he claimed the USSR was not socialist, and the United States was not liberal. His critique of the USSR caused him to clash with others on the political left, most notably with his on-again, off-again friend Jean-Paul Sartre.\nActive in the French Resistance to the Nazi occupation of France during World War II, Camus wrote for and edited the Resistance journal \"Combat\". Of the French collaboration with the German occupiers, he wrote: \"Now the only moral value is courage, which is useful here for judging the puppets and chatterboxes who pretend to speak in the name of the people.\" After France's liberation, Camus remarked, \"This country does not need a Talleyrand, but a Saint-Just.\" The reality of the postwar tribunals soon changed his mind: Camus publicly reversed himself and became a lifelong opponent of capital punishment.\nCamus had anarchist sympathies, which intensified in the 1950s, when he came to believe that the Soviet model was morally bankrupt. Camus was firmly against any kind of exploitation, authority, property, the State, and centralization. He, however, opposed revolution, separating the rebel from the revolutionary and believing that the belief in \"absolute truth\", most often assuming the guise of history or reason, inspires the revolutionary and leads to tragic results. He believed that rebellion is spurred by our outrage over the world's lack of transcendent significance, while political rebellion is our response to attacks against the dignity and autonomy of the individual. Camus opposed political violence, tolerating it only in rare and very narrowly defined instances, as well as revolutionary terror which he accused of sacrificing innocent lives on the altar of history.\nPhilosophy professor David Sherman considers Camus an anarcho-syndicalist. Graeme Nicholson considers Camus an existentialist anarchist.\nThe anarchist Andr\u00e9 Prudhommeaux first introduced him at a meeting of the Cercle des \u00c9tudiants Anarchistes (\"Anarchist Student Circle\") in 1948 as a sympathiser familiar with anarchist thought. Camus wrote for anarchist publications such as \"Le Libertaire\" (The Libertarian), \"La R\u00e9volution prol\u00e9tarienne\" (The Proletarian Revolution), and \"Solidaridad Obrera\" (\"Workers' Solidarity\"), the organ of the anarcho-syndicalist Confederaci\u00f3n Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) (\"National Confederation of Labor\").\nCamus kept a neutral stance during the Algerian Revolution (1954\u201362). While he was against the violence of the National Liberation Front (FLN) he acknowledged the injustice and brutalities imposed by colonialist France. He was supportive of Pierre Mend\u00e8s' Unified Socialist Party (PSU) and its approach to the crisis; Mendes advocated reconciliation. Camus also supported a like-minded Algerian militant, Aziz Kessous. Camus traveled to Algeria to negotiate a truce between the two belligerents but was met with distrust by all parties. In one, often misquoted incident, Camus confronted an Algerian critic during his 1957 Nobel Prize acceptance speech in Stockholm, rejecting the false equivalence of justice with revolutionary terrorism: \"People are now planting bombs in the tramways of Algiers. My mother might be on one of those tramways. If that is justice, then I prefer my mother.\" Camus's critics have labelled the response as reactionary and a result of a colonialist attitude.\nHe was sharply critical of the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. In the 1950s, Camus devoted his efforts to human rights. In 1952, he resigned from his work for UNESCO when the UN accepted Spain, under the leadership of the caudillo General Francisco Franco, as a member. Camus maintained his pacifism and resisted capital punishment anywhere in the world. He wrote an essay against capital punishment in collaboration with Arthur Koestler, the writer, intellectual, and founder of the League Against Capital Punishment entitled \"R\u00e9flexions sur la peine capitale\" (Reflections on capital punishment), published by Calmann-Levy in 1957.\nRole in Algeria.\nBorn in Algeria to French parents, Camus was familiar with the institutional racism of France against Arabs and Berbers, but he was not part of a rich elite. He lived in very poor conditions as a child but was a citizen of France and as such was entitled to citizens' rights; members of the country's Arab and Berber majority were not.\nCamus was a vocal advocate of the \"new Mediterranean Culture\". This was his vision of embracing the multi-ethnicity of the Algerian people, in opposition to \"Latiny\", a popular pro-fascist and antisemitic ideology among other \"Pieds-Noirs\"\u2014or French or Europeans born in Algeria. For Camus, this vision encapsulated the Hellenic humanism which survived among ordinary people around the Mediterranean Sea. His 1938 address on \"The New Mediterranean Culture\" represents Camus's most systematic statement of his views at this time. Camus also supported the Blum\u2013Viollette proposal to grant Algerians full French citizenship in a manifesto with arguments defending this assimilative proposal on radical egalitarian grounds. In 1939, Camus wrote a stinging series of articles for the \"Alger r\u00e9publicain\" on the atrocious living conditions of the inhabitants of the Kabylie highlands. He advocated for economic, educational and political reforms as a matter of emergency.\nIn 1945, following the S\u00e9tif and Guelma massacre after Arab revolts against French mistreatment, Camus was one of only a few mainland journalists to visit the colony. He wrote a series of articles reporting on conditions, and advocating for French reforms and concessions to the demands of the Algerian people.\nWhen the Algerian War began in 1954, Camus was confronted with a moral dilemma. He identified with the \"Pieds-Noirs\" such as his own parents and defended the French government's actions against the revolt. He argued the Algerian uprising was an integral part of the \"new Arab imperialism\" led by Egypt, and an \"anti-Western\" offensive orchestrated by Russia to \"encircle Europe\" and \"isolate the United States\". Although favoring greater Algerian autonomy or even federation, though not full-scale independence, he believed the \"Pieds-Noirs\" and Arabs could co-exist. During the war, he advocated a civil truce that would spare the civilians. It was rejected by both sides who regarded it as foolish. Behind the scenes, he began working for imprisoned Algerians who faced the death penalty. His position drew much criticism from the left and later postcolonial literary critics, such as Edward Said, who were opposed to European imperialism, and charged that Camus's novels and short stories are plagued with colonial depictions - or conscious erasures - of Algeria's Arab population. In their eyes, Camus was no longer the defender of the oppressed.\nCamus once said that the troubles in Algeria \"affected him as others feel pain in their lungs.\"\nPhilosophy.\nExistentialism.\nEven though Camus is mostly connected to absurdism, he is routinely categorized as an existentialist, a term he rejected on several occasions.\nCamus himself said his philosophical origins lay in ancient Greek philosophy, Nietzsche, and 17th-century moralists whereas existentialism arises from 19th- and early 20th-century philosophy such as Kierkegaard, Karl Jaspers, and Heidegger. He also said his work, \"The Myth of Sisyphus\", was a criticism of various aspects of existentialism. Camus was rejecting existentialism as a philosophy, but his critique was mostly focused on Sartrean existentialism, and to a lesser extent on religious existentialism. He thought that the importance of history held by Marx and Sartre was incompatible with his belief in human freedom. David Sherman and others also suggest the rivalry between Sartre and Camus also played a part in his rejection of existentialism. David Simpson argues further that his humanism and belief in human nature set him apart from the existentialist doctrine that existence precedes essence.\nOn the other hand, Camus focused most of his philosophy around existential questions. The absurdity of life, the inevitable ending (death) is highlighted in his acts. His belief was that the absurd\u2014life being void of meaning, or man's inability to know that meaning if it were to exist\u2014was something that man should embrace. His anti-Christianity, his commitment to individual moral freedom and responsibility are only a few of the similarities with other existential writers. More importantly, Camus addressed one of the fundamental questions of existentialism: the problem of suicide. He wrote: \"There is only one really serious philosophical question, and that is suicide.\" Camus viewed the question of suicide as arising naturally as a solution to the absurdity of life.\nAbsurdism.\nMany existentialist writers have addressed the Absurd, each with their own interpretation of what it is and what makes it important. Kierkegaard explains that the absurdity of religious truths prevents us from reaching God rationally. Sartre recognizes the absurdity of individual experience. Camus's thoughts on the Absurd begin with his first cycle of books and the literary essay \"The Myth of Sisyphus\", (\"Le Mythe de Sisyphe\"), his major work on the subject. In 1942, he published the story of a man living an absurd life in \"The Stranger\". He also wrote a play about the Roman emperor Caligula, pursuing an absurd logic, which was not performed until 1945. His early thoughts appeared in his first collection of essays, \"L'Envers et l'endroit\" (\"Betwixt and Between\") in 1937. Absurd themes were expressed with more sophistication in his second collection of essays, \"Noces\" (\"Nuptials\") in 1938. In these essays, Camus reflects on the experience of the Absurd. Aspects of the notion of the Absurd can be found in \"The Plague\".\nCamus follows Sartre's definition of the Absurd: \"That which is meaningless. Thus man's existence is absurd because his contingency finds no external justification\". The Absurd is created because man, who is placed in an unintelligent universe, realises that human values are not founded on a solid external component; or as Camus himself explains, the Absurd is the result of the \"confrontation between human need and the unreasonable silence of the world.\" Even though absurdity is inescapable, Camus does not drift towards nihilism. But the realization of absurdity leads to the question: Why should someone continue to live? Suicide is an option that Camus firmly dismisses as the renunciation of human values and freedom. Rather, he proposes we accept that absurdity is a part of our lives and live with it.\nThe turning point in Camus's attitude to the Absurd occurs in a collection of four letters to an anonymous German friend, written between July 1943 and July 1944. The first was published in the \"Revue Libre\" in 1943, the second in the \"Cahiers de Lib\u00e9ration\" in 1944, and the third in the newspaper \"Libert\u00e9s\", in 1945. The four letters were published as \"Lettres \u00e0 un ami allemand\" (\"Letters to a German Friend\") in 1945, and were included in the collection \"Resistance, Rebellion, and Death\".\nCamus regretted the continued reference to himself as a \"philosopher of the absurd\". He showed less interest in the Absurd shortly after publishing \"Le Mythe de Sisyphe\". To distinguish his ideas, scholars sometimes refer to the Paradox of the Absurd, when referring to \"Camus's Absurd\".\nRevolt.\nCamus is known for articulating the case for revolting against any kind of oppression, injustice, or whatever disrespects the human condition. He is cautious enough, however, to set the limits on the rebellion. \"L'Homme r\u00e9volt\u00e9\" (\"The Rebel\") explains in detail his thoughts on the issue. There, he builds upon the absurd (described in \"The Myth of Sisyphus\") but goes further. In the introduction, where he examines the metaphysics of rebellion, he concludes with the phrase \"I revolt, therefore we exist\" implying the recognition of a common human condition. Camus also delineates the difference between revolution and rebellion and notices that history has shown that the rebel's revolution might easily end up as an oppressive regime; he therefore places importance on the morals accompanying the revolution. Camus poses a crucial question: Is it possible for humans to act in an ethical and meaningful manner, in a silent universe? According to him the answer is yes, as the experience and awareness of the Absurd creates the moral values and also sets the limits of our actions. Camus separates the modern form of rebellion into two modes. First, there is the metaphysical rebellion, which is \"the movement by which man protests against his condition and against the whole of creation.\" The other mode, historical rebellion, is the attempt to materialize the abstract spirit of metaphysical rebellion and change the world. In this attempt, the rebel must balance between the evil of the world and the intrinsic evil which every revolt carries, and not cause any unjustifiable suffering.\nLegacy.\nCamus's novels and philosophical essays are still influential. After his death, interest in Camus followed the rise (and diminution) of the New Left. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, interest in his alternative road to communism resurfaced. He is remembered for his skeptical humanism and his support for political tolerance, dialogue, and civil rights.\nAlthough Camus has been linked to anti-Soviet communism, reaching as far as anarcho-syndicalism, some neo-liberals have tried to associate him with their policies; for instance, the French President Nicolas Sarkozy suggested that his remains be moved to the Panth\u00e9on, an idea that was criticised by Camus's surviving family and angered many on the Left.\nAmerican heavy metal band Avenged Sevenfold has stated their album Life Is But A Dream... is inspired by the work of Camus.\nWorks.\nThe works of Albert Camus include:\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "984", "revid": "40234806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=984", "title": "Agatha Christie", "text": "English mystery and detective writer (1890\u20131976)\nDame Agatha Mary Clarissa Christie, Lady Mallowan, (n\u00e9e\u00a0Miller; 15\u00a0September 1890\u00a0\u2013 12\u00a0January 1976) was an English writer known for her 66 detective novels and 14 short story collections, particularly those revolving around fictional detectives Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple. She also wrote the world's longest-running play, the murder mystery \"The Mousetrap\", which has been performed in the West End since 1952. A writer during the \"Golden Age of Detective Fiction\", Christie has been called the \"Queen of Crime\". She also wrote six novels under the pseudonym Mary Westmacott. In 1971, she was made a Dame (DBE) by Queen Elizabeth II for her contributions to literature. \"Guinness World Records\" lists Christie as the best-selling fiction writer of all time, her novels having sold more than two billion copies. \nChristie was born into a wealthy upper middle class family in Torquay, Devon, and was largely home-schooled. She was initially an unsuccessful writer with six consecutive rejections, but this changed in 1920 when \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", featuring detective Hercule Poirot, was published. Her first husband was Archibald Christie; they married in 1914 and had one child before divorcing in 1928. Following the breakdown of her marriage and the death of her mother in 1926 she made international headlines by going missing for eleven days. During both World Wars, she served in hospital dispensaries, acquiring a thorough knowledge of the poisons that featured in many of her novels, short stories, and plays. Following her marriage to archaeologist Max Mallowan in 1930, she spent several months each year on digs in the Middle East and used her first-hand knowledge of this profession in her fiction.\nAccording to UNESCO's Index Translationum, she remains the most-translated individual author. Her novel \"And Then There Were None\" is one of the top-selling books of all time, with approximately 100 million copies sold. Christie's stage play \"The Mousetrap\" holds the world record for the longest initial run. It opened at the Ambassadors Theatre in the West End on 25\u00a0November 1952, and by September 2018 there had been more than 27,500 performances. The play was temporarily closed in March 2020 because of COVID-19 lockdowns in London before it reopened in May 2021.\nIn 1955, Christie was the first recipient of the Mystery Writers of America's Grand Master Award. Later that year, \"Witness for the Prosecution\" received an Edgar Award for best play. In 2013, she was voted the best crime writer and \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\" the best crime novel ever by 600 professional novelists of the Crime Writers' Association. In September 2015, \"And Then There Were None\" was named the \"World's Favourite Christie\" in a vote sponsored by the author's estate. Many of Christie's books and short stories have been adapted for television, radio, video games, and graphic novels. More than 30 feature films are based on her work.\nLife and career.\nChildhood and adolescence: 1890\u20131907.\nAgatha Mary Clarissa Miller was born on 15\u00a0September 1890, into a wealthy upper middle class family in Torquay, Devon. She was the youngest of three children born to Frederick Alvah Miller, \"a gentleman of substance\", and his wife Clarissa Margaret \"Clara\" Miller, n\u00e9e Boehmer.\nChristie's mother Clara was born in Dublin in 1854 to British Army officer Frederick Boehmer and his wife Mary Ann Boehmer n\u00e9e West. Boehmer died in Jersey in 1863, leaving his widow to raise Clara and her brothers on a meagre income. Two weeks after Boehmer's death, Mary's sister Margaret West married widowed dry goods merchant Nathaniel Frary Miller, a US citizen. To assist Mary financially, they agreed to foster nine-year-old Clara; the family settled in Timperley, Cheshire. Margaret and Nathaniel had no children together, but Nathaniel had a 17-year-old son, Fred Miller, from his previous marriage. Fred was born in New York City and travelled extensively after leaving his Swiss boarding school. He and Clara were married in London in 1878. Their first child, Margaret Frary (\"Madge\"), was born in Torquay in 1879. The second, Louis Montant (\"Monty\"), was born in Morristown, New Jersey, in 1880, while the family was on an extended visit to the United States.\nWhen Fred's father died in 1869, he left Clara \u00a32,000 (approximately ); in 1881 they used this to buy the leasehold of a villa in Torquay named Ashfield. It was here that their third and last child, Agatha, was born in 1890. She described her childhood as \"very happy\". The Millers lived mainly in Devon but often visited her step-grandmother/great-aunt Margaret Miller in Ealing and maternal grandmother Mary Boehmer in Bayswater. A year was spent abroad with her family, in the French Pyrenees, Paris, Dinard, and Guernsey. Because her siblings were so much older, and there were few children in their neighbourhood, Christie spent much of her time playing alone with her pets and imaginary companions. She eventually made friends with other girls in Torquay, noting that \"one of the highlights of my existence\" was her appearance with them in a youth production of Gilbert and Sullivan's \"The Yeomen of the Guard\", in which she played the hero, Colonel Fairfax.\nAccording to Christie, Clara believed she should not learn to read until she was eight; thanks to her curiosity, she was reading by the age of four. Her sister had been sent to a boarding school, but their mother insisted that Christie receive her education at home. As a result, her parents and sister supervised her studies in reading, writing and basic arithmetic, a subject she particularly enjoyed. They also taught her music, and she learned to play the piano and the mandolin.\nChristie was a voracious reader from an early age. Among her earliest memories were of reading children's books by Mrs Molesworth and Edith Nesbit. When a little older, she moved on to the surreal verse of Edward Lear and Lewis Carroll. As an adolescent, she enjoyed works by Anthony Hope, Walter Scott, Charles Dickens, and Alexandre Dumas. In April 1901, aged 10, she wrote her first poem, \"The Cow Slip\".\nBy 1901, her father's health had deteriorated, because of what he believed were heart problems. Fred died in November 1901 from pneumonia and chronic kidney disease. Christie later said that her father's death when she was 11 marked the end of her childhood.\nThe family's financial situation had, by this time, worsened. Madge married the year after their father's death and moved to Cheadle, Cheshire; Monty was overseas, serving in a British regiment. Christie now lived alone at Ashfield with her mother. In 1902, she began attending Miss Guyer's Girls' School in Torquay but found it difficult to adjust to the disciplined atmosphere. In 1905, her mother sent her to Paris, where she was educated in a series of (boarding schools), focusing on voice training and piano playing. Deciding she lacked the temperament and talent, she gave up her goal of performing professionally as a concert pianist or an opera singer.\nEarly literary attempts, marriage, literary success: 1907\u20131926.\nAfter completing her education, Christie returned to England to find her mother ailing. They decided to spend the northern winter of 1907\u20131908 in the warm climate of Egypt, which was then a regular tourist destination for wealthy Britons. They stayed for three months at the Gezirah Palace Hotel in Cairo. Christie attended many dances and other social functions; she particularly enjoyed watching amateur polo matches. While they visited some ancient Egyptian monuments such as the Great Pyramid of Giza, she did not exhibit the great interest in archaeology and Egyptology that developed in her later years. Returning to Britain, she continued her social activities, writing and performing in amateur theatrics. She also helped put on a play called \"The Blue Beard of Unhappiness\" with female friends.\nAt 18, Christie wrote her first short story, \"The House of Beauty\", while recovering in bed from an illness. It consisted of about 6,000 words about \"madness and dreams\", subjects of fascination for her. Her biographer Janet Morgan has commented that, despite \"infelicities of style\", the story was \"compelling\". (The story became an early version of her story \"The House of Dreams\".) Other stories followed, most of them illustrating her interest in spiritualism and the paranormal. These included \"The Call of Wings\" and \"The Little Lonely God\". Magazines rejected all her early submissions, made under pseudonyms (including Mac Miller, Nathaniel Miller, and Sydney West); some submissions were later revised and published under her real name, often with new titles.\nAround the same time, Christie began work on her first novel, \"Snow Upon the Desert\". Writing under the pseudonym Monosyllaba, she set the book in Cairo and drew upon her recent experiences there. She was disappointed when the six publishers she contacted declined the work. Clara suggested that her daughter ask for advice from the successful novelist Eden Phillpotts, a family friend and neighbour, who responded to her enquiry, encouraged her writing, and sent her an introduction to his own literary agent, Hughes Massie, who also rejected \"Snow Upon the Desert\" but suggested a second novel.\nMeanwhile, Christie's social activities expanded, with country house parties, riding, hunting, dances, and roller skating. She had short-lived relationships with four men and an engagement to another. In October 1912, she was introduced to Archibald \"Archie\" Christie at a dance given by Lord and Lady Clifford at Ugbrooke, about from Torquay. The son of a barrister in the Indian Civil Service, Archie was a Royal Artillery officer who was seconded to the Royal Flying Corps in April 1913. The couple quickly fell in love. Three months after their first meeting, Archie proposed marriage, and Agatha accepted.\nWith the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, Archie was sent to France to fight. They married on Christmas Eve 1914 at Emmanuel Church, Clifton, Bristol, close to the home of his mother and stepfather, when Archie was on home leave. Rising through the ranks, he was posted back to Britain in September 1918 as a colonel in the Air Ministry. Christie involved herself in the war effort as a member of the Voluntary Aid Detachment of the British Red Cross. From October 1914 to May 1915, then from June 1916 to September 1918, she worked 3,400 hours in the Town Hall Red Cross Hospital, Torquay, first as a nurse (unpaid) then as a dispenser at \u00a316 (approximately ) a year from 1917 after qualifying as an apothecary's assistant. Her war service ended in September 1918 when Archie was reassigned to London, and they rented a flat in St. John's Wood.\nChristie had long been a fan of detective novels, having enjoyed Wilkie Collins's \"The Woman in White\" and \"The Moonstone\", and Arthur Conan Doyle's early Sherlock Holmes stories. She wrote her first detective novel, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", in 1916. It featured Hercule Poirot, a former Belgian police officer with \"magnificent moustaches\" and a head \"exactly the shape of an egg\", who had taken refuge in Britain after Germany invaded Belgium. Christie's inspiration for the character came from Belgian refugees living in Torquay, and the Belgian soldiers she helped to treat as a volunteer nurse during the First World War. Her original manuscript was rejected by Hodder &amp; Stoughton and Methuen. After keeping the submission for several months, John Lane at The Bodley Head offered to accept it, provided that Christie change how the solution was revealed. She did so, and signed a contract committing her next five books to The Bodley Head, which she later felt was exploitative. It was published in 1920.\nChristie settled into married life, giving birth to her only child, Rosalind Margaret Clarissa (later Hicks), in August 1919 at Ashfield. Archie left the Air Force at the end of the war and began working in the City financial sector on a relatively low salary. They still employed a maid. Her second novel, \"The Secret Adversary\" (1922), featured a new detective couple Tommy and Tuppence, again published by The Bodley Head. It earned her \u00a350 (approximately ). A third novel, \"Murder on the Links\", again featured Poirot, as did the short stories commissioned by Bruce Ingram, editor of \"The Sketch\" magazine, from 1923. She now had no difficulty selling her work.\nIn 1922, the Christies joined an around-the-world promotional tour for the British Empire Exhibition, led by Major Ernest Belcher. Leaving their daughter with Agatha's mother and sister, in 10 months they travelled to South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, and Canada. They learned to surf prone in South Africa; then, in Waikiki, they were among the first Britons to surf standing up, and extended their time there by three months to practise. She is remembered at the British Surfing Museum as having said about surfing, \"\"Oh it was heaven! Nothing like rushing through the water at what seems to you a speed of about two hundred miles an hour. It is one of the most perfect physical pleasures I have known\".\"\nWhen they returned to England, Archie resumed work in the city, and Christie continued to work hard at her writing. After living in a series of apartments in London, they bought a house in Sunningdale, Berkshire, which they renamed Styles after the mansion in Christie's first detective novel.\nChristie's mother, Clarissa Miller, died in April 1926. They had been exceptionally close, and the loss sent Christie into a deep depression. In August 1926, reports appeared in the press that Christie had gone to a village near Biarritz to recuperate from a \"breakdown\" caused by \"overwork\".\nDisappearance: 1926.\nIn August 1926, Archie asked Agatha for a divorce. He had fallen in love with Nancy Neele, a friend of Major Belcher. On 3December 1926, the pair quarrelled after Archie announced his plan to spend the weekend with friends, unaccompanied by his wife. Late that evening, Christie disappeared from their home in Sunningdale. The following morning, her car, a Morris Cowley, was discovered at Newlands Corner in Surrey, parked above a chalk quarry with an expired driving licence and clothes inside. It was feared that she may have drowned herself in the Silent Pool, a nearby beauty spot.\nThe disappearance quickly became a news story, as the press sought to satisfy their readers' \"hunger for sensation, disaster, and scandal\". Home Secretary William Joynson-Hicks pressured police, and a newspaper offered a \u00a3100 reward (approximately ). More than a thousand police officers, 15,000 volunteers, and several aeroplanes searched the rural landscape. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle gave a spirit medium one of Christie's gloves to find her. Christie's disappearance made international headlines, including featuring on the front page of \"The New York Times\". Despite the extensive manhunt, she was not found for another 10 days. On 14\u00a0December 1926, she was located at the Swan Hydropathic Hotel in Harrogate, Yorkshire, north of her home in Sunningdale, registered as \"Mrs Tressa Neele\" (the surname of her husband's lover) from \"Capetown [\"sic\"] S.A.\" (South Africa). The next day, Christie left for her sister's residence at Abney Hall, Cheadle, where she was sequestered \"in guarded hall, gates locked, telephone cut off, and callers turned away\".\nChristie's autobiography makes no reference to the disappearance. Two doctors diagnosed her with \"an unquestionable genuine loss of memory\", yet opinion remains divided over the reason for her disappearance. Some, including her biographer Morgan, believe she disappeared during a fugue state. The author Jared Cade concluded that Christie planned the event to embarrass her husband but did not anticipate the resulting public melodrama. Christie biographer Laura Thompson provides an alternative view that Christie disappeared during a nervous breakdown, conscious of her actions but not in emotional control of herself. Public reaction at the time was largely negative, supposing a publicity stunt or an attempt to frame her husband for murder.\nSecond marriage and later life: 1927\u20131976.\nIn January 1927, Christie, looking \"very pale\", sailed with her daughter and secretary to Las Palmas, Canary Islands, to \"complete her convalescence\", returning three months later. Christie petitioned for divorce and was granted a decree nisi against her husband in April 1928, which was made absolute in October 1928. Archie married Nancy Neele a week later. Christie retained custody of their daughter, Rosalind, and kept the Christie surname for her writing.\nReflecting on the period in her autobiography, Christie wrote, \"So, after illness, came sorrow, despair and heartbreak. There is no need to dwell on it.\"\nIn 1928, Christie left England and took the (Simplon) Orient Express to Istanbul and then to Baghdad. In Iraq, she became friends with archaeologist Leonard Woolley and his wife, who invited her to return to their dig in February 1930. On that second trip, she met archaeologist Max Mallowan, 13 years her junior. In a 1977 interview, Mallowan recounted his first meeting with Christie, when he took her and a group of tourists on a tour of his expedition site in Iraq. Christie and Mallowan married in Edinburgh in September 1930. Their marriage lasted until Christie's death in 1976. She accompanied Mallowan on his archaeological expeditions, and her travels with him contributed background to several of her novels set in the Middle East. Other novels (such as \"Peril at End House\") were set in and around Torquay, where she was raised. Christie drew on her experience of international train travel when writing her 1934 novel \"Murder on the Orient Express\". The Pera Palace Hotel in Istanbul, the eastern terminus of the railway, claims the book was written there and maintains Christie's room as a memorial to the author.\nChristie and Mallowan first lived in Cresswell Place in Chelsea, and later in Sheffield Terrace in Kensington. Both properties are now marked by blue plaques. In 1934, they bought Winterbrook House in Winterbrook, a hamlet near Wallingford. This was their main residence for the rest of their lives and the place where Christie did much of her writing. This house also bears a blue plaque. Christie led a quiet life despite being known in Wallingford; from 1951 to 1976 she served as president of the local amateur dramatic society.\nThe couple acquired the Greenway Estate in Devon as a summer residence in 1938; it was given to the National Trust in 2000. Christie frequently stayed at Abney Hall, Cheshire, which was owned by her brother-in-law, James Watts, and based at least two stories there: a short story, \"The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding\", in the story collection of the same name and the novel \"After the Funeral\". One Christie compendium notes that \"Abney became Agatha's greatest inspiration for country house life, with all its servants and grandeur being woven into her plots. The descriptions of the fictional Chimneys, Stonygates, and other houses in her stories are mostly Abney Hall in various forms.\"\nDuring World War II, Christie moved to London and lived in a flat at the Isokon in Hampstead, whilst working in the pharmacy at University College Hospital (UCH), London, where she updated her knowledge of poisons. Her later novel \"The Pale Horse\" was based on a suggestion from Harold Davis, the chief pharmacist at UCH. In 1977, a thallium poisoning case was solved by British medical personnel who had read Christie's book and recognised the symptoms she described.\nThe British intelligence agency MI5 investigated Christie after a character called Major Bletchley appeared in her 1941 thriller \"N or M?\", which was about a hunt for a pair of deadly fifth columnists in wartime England. MI5 was concerned that Christie had a spy in Britain's top-secret codebreaking centre, Bletchley Park. The agency's fears were allayed when Christie told her friend, the codebreaker Dilly Knox, \"I was stuck there on my way by train from Oxford to London and took revenge by giving the name to one of my least lovable characters.\"\nChristie was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1950. In honour of her many literary works, Christie was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1956 New Year Honours. She was co-president of the Detection Club from 1958 to her death in 1976. In 1961, she was awarded an honorary Doctor of Literature degree by the University of Exeter. In the 1971 New Year Honours, she was promoted to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE), three years after her husband had been knighted for his archaeological work. After her husband's knighthood, Christie could also be styled Lady Mallowan.\nFrom 1971 to 1974, Christie's health began to fail, but she continued to write. Her last novel was \"Postern of Fate\" in 1973. Textual analysis suggested that Christie may have begun to develop Alzheimer's disease or other dementia at about this time.\nPersonal qualities.\nIn 1946, Christie said of herself: \"My chief dislikes are crowds, loud noises, gramophones and cinemas. I dislike the taste of alcohol and do not like smoking. I \"do\" like sun, sea, flowers, travelling, strange foods, sports, concerts, theatres, pianos, and doing embroidery.\"\nChristie was a lifelong, \"quietly devout\" member of the Church of England, attended church regularly, and kept her mother's copy of \"The Imitation of Christ\" by her bedside. After her divorce, she stopped taking the sacrament of communion.\nThe Agatha Christie Trust For Children was established in 1969, and shortly after Christie's death a charitable memorial fund was set up to \"help two causes that she favoured: old people and young children\".\nChristie's obituary in \"The Times\" notes that \"she never cared much for the cinema, or for wireless and television.\" Further,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dame Agatha's private pleasures were gardening\u00a0\u2013 she won local prizes for horticulture\u00a0\u2013 and buying furniture for her various houses. She was a shy person: she disliked public appearances; but she was friendly and sharp-witted to meet. By inclination as well as breeding, she belonged to the English upper middle class. She wrote about, and for, people like herself. That was an essential part of her charm.\nDeath and estate.\nDeath and burial.\nChristie died peacefully on 12\u00a0January 1976 at age 85 from natural causes at her home at Winterbrook House. When her death was announced, two West End theatres\u00a0\u2013 the St. Martin's, where \"The Mousetrap\" was playing, and the Savoy, which was home to a revival of \"Murder at the Vicarage\"\u00a0\u2013 dimmed their outside lights in her honour. She was buried in the nearby churchyard of St Mary's, Cholsey, in a plot she had chosen with her husband 10 years previously. The simple funeral service was attended by about 20 newspaper and TV reporters, some having travelled from as far away as South America. Thirty wreaths adorned Christie's grave, including one from the cast of her long-running play \"The Mousetrap\" and one sent \"on behalf of the multitude of grateful readers\" by the Ulverscroft Large Print Book Publishers.\nMallowan, who remarried in 1977, died in 1978 and was buried next to Christie.\nEstate and subsequent ownership of works.\nChristie was unhappy about becoming \"an employed wage slave\", and for tax reasons set up a private company in 1955, Agatha Christie Limited, to hold the rights to her works. In about 1959 she transferred her 278-acre home, Greenway Estate, to her daughter, Rosalind Hicks. In 1968, when Christie was almost 80, she sold a 51% stake in Agatha Christie Limited (and the works it owned) to Booker Books (better known as Booker Author's Division), which by 1977 had increased its stake to 64%. Agatha Christie Limited still owns the worldwide rights for more than 80 of Christie's novels and short stories, 19 plays, and nearly 40 TV films.\nIn the late 1950s, Christie had reputedly been earning around \u00a3100,000 (approximately ) per year. Christie sold an estimated 300 million books during her lifetime. At the time of her death in 1976, \"she was the best-selling novelist in history.\"\nOne estimate of her total earnings from more than a half-century of writing is $20\u00a0million (approximately $\u00a0million in 2022). As a result of her tax planning, her will left only \u00a3106,683 (approximately ) net, which went mostly to her husband and daughter along with some smaller bequests. Her remaining 36% share of Agatha Christie Limited was inherited by Hicks, who passionately preserved her mother's works, image, and legacy until her own death 28 years later. The family's share of the company allowed them to appoint 50% of the board and the chairman, and retain a veto over new treatments, updated versions, and republications of her works.\nIn 2004, Hicks' obituary in \"The Telegraph\" noted that she had been \"determined to remain true to her mother's vision and to protect the integrity of her creations\" and disapproved of \"merchandising\" activities. Upon her death on 28\u00a0October 2004, the Greenway Estate passed to her son Mathew Prichard. After his stepfather's death in 2005, Prichard donated Greenway and its contents to the National Trust.\nChristie's family and family trusts, including great-grandson James Prichard, continue to own the 36% stake in Agatha Christie Limited, and remain associated with the company. In 2020, James Prichard was the company's chairman. Mathew Prichard also holds the copyright to some of his grandmother's later literary works including \"The Mousetrap\". Christie's work continues to be developed in a range of adaptations.\nIn 1998, Booker sold its shares in Agatha Christie Limited (at the time earning \u00a32,100,000, approximately annual revenue) for \u00a310,000,000 (approximately ) to Chorion, whose portfolio of authors' works included the literary estates of Enid Blyton and Dennis Wheatley. In February 2012, after a management buyout, Chorion began to sell off its literary assets. This included the sale of Chorion's 64% stake in Agatha Christie Limited to Acorn Media UK. In 2014, RLJ Entertainment Inc. (RLJE) acquired Acorn Media UK, renamed it Acorn Media Enterprises, and incorporated it as the RLJE UK development arm.\nIn late February 2014, media reports stated that the BBC had acquired exclusive TV rights to Christie's works in the UK (previously associated with ITV) and made plans with Acorn's co-operation to air new productions for the 125th anniversary of Christie's birth in 2015. As part of that deal, the BBC broadcast \"Partners in Crime\" and \"And Then There Were None\", both in 2015. Subsequent productions have included \"The Witness for the Prosecution\" but plans to televise \"Ordeal by Innocence\" at Christmas 2017 were delayed because of controversy surrounding one of the cast members. The three-part adaptation aired in April 2018. A three-part adaptation of \"The A.B.C. Murders\" starring John Malkovich and Rupert Grint began filming in June 2018 and was first broadcast in December 2018. A two-part adaptation of \"The Pale Horse\" was broadcast on BBC1 in February 2020. \"Death Comes as the End\" will be the next BBC adaptation.\nSince 2020, reissues of Christie's Miss Marple and Hercule Poirot novels by HarperCollins have removed \"passages containing descriptions, insults or references to ethnicity\".\nWorks.\nWorks of fiction.\nHercule Poirot and Miss Marple.\nChristie's first published book, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", was released in 1920 and introduced the detective Hercule Poirot, who appeared in 33 of her novels and more than 50 short stories.\nOver the years, Christie grew tired of Poirot, much as Doyle did with Sherlock Holmes. By the end of the 1930s, Christie wrote in her diary that she was finding Poirot \"insufferable\", and by the 1960s she felt he was \"an egocentric creep\". Thompson believes Christie's occasional antipathy to her creation is overstated, and points out that \"in later life she sought to protect him against misrepresentation as powerfully as if he were her own flesh and blood.\" Unlike Doyle, she resisted the temptation to kill her detective off while he was still popular. She married off Poirot's \"Watson\", Captain Arthur Hastings, in an attempt to trim her cast commitments.\nMiss Jane Marple was introduced in a series of short stories that began publication in December 1927 and were subsequently collected under the title \"The Thirteen Problems\". Marple was a genteel, elderly spinster who solved crimes using analogies to English village life. Christie said, \"Miss Marple was not in any way a picture of my grandmother; she was far more fussy and spinsterish than my grandmother ever was,\" but her autobiography establishes a firm connection between the fictional character and Christie's step-grandmother Margaret Miller (\"Auntie-Grannie\") and her \"Ealing cronies\". Both Marple and Miller \"always expected the worst of everyone and everything, and were, with almost frightening accuracy, usually proved right\". Marple appeared in 12 novels and 20 stories.\nDuring the Second World War, Christie wrote two novels, \"Curtain\" and \"Sleeping Murder\", featuring Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple, respectively. Both books were sealed in a bank vault, and she made over the copyrights by deed of gift to her daughter and her husband to provide each with a kind of insurance policy. Christie had a heart attack and a serious fall in 1974, after which she was unable to write. Her daughter authorised the publication of \"Curtain\" in 1975, and \"Sleeping Murder\" was published posthumously in 1976. These publications followed the success of the 1974 film version of \"Murder on the Orient Express\".\nShortly before the publication of \"Curtain\", Poirot became the first fictional character to have an obituary in \"The New York Times\", which was printed on page one on 6August 1975.\nChristie never wrote a novel or short story featuring both Poirot and Miss Marple. In a recording discovered and released in 2008, Christie revealed the reason for this: \"Hercule Poirot, a complete egoist, would not like being taught his business or having suggestions made to him by an elderly spinster lady. Hercule Poirot\u00a0\u2013 a professional sleuth\u00a0\u2013 would not be at home at all in Miss Marple's world.\"\nIn 2013, the Christie family supported the release of a new Poirot story, \"The Monogram Murders\", written by British author Sophie Hannah. Hannah later published three more Poirot mysteries, \"Closed Casket\" in 2016, \"The Mystery of Three Quarters\" in 2018., and \"The Killings at Kingfisher Hill\" in 2020.\nFormula and plot devices.\nChristie has been called the \"Duchess of Death\", the \"Mistress of Mystery\", and the \"Queen of Crime\". Early in her career, a reporter noted that \"her plots are possible, logical, and always new.\" According to Hannah, \"At the start of each novel, she shows us an apparently impossible situation and we go mad wondering 'How can this be happening?' Then, slowly, she reveals how the impossible is not only possible but the only thing that could have happened.\"\nChristie developed her storytelling techniques during what has been called the \"Golden Age\" of detective fiction. Author Dilys Winn called Christie \"the doyenne of Coziness\", a sub-genre which \"featured a small village setting, a hero with faintly aristocratic family connections, a plethora of red herrings and a tendency to commit homicide with sterling silver letter openers and poisons imported from Paraguay\". At the end, in a Christie hallmark, the detective usually gathers the surviving suspects into one room, explains the course of their deductive reasoning, and reveals the guilty party; but there are exceptions where it is left to the guilty party to explain all (such as \"And Then There Were None\" and \"Endless Night\").\nChristie did not limit herself to quaint English villages\u00a0\u2013 the action might take place on a small island (\"And Then There Were None\"), an aeroplane (\"Death in the Clouds\"), a train (\"Murder on the Orient Express\"), a steamship (\"Death on the Nile\"), a smart London flat (\"Cards on the Table\"), a resort in the West Indies (\"A Caribbean Mystery\"), or an archaeological dig (\"Murder in Mesopotamia\")\u00a0\u2013 but the circle of potential suspects is usually closed and intimate: family members, friends, servants, business associates, fellow travellers. Stereotyped characters abound (the , the stolid policeman, the devoted servant, the dull colonel), but these may be subverted to stymie the reader; impersonations and secret alliances are always possible. There is always a motive\u00a0\u2013 most often, money: \"There are very few killers in Christie who enjoy murder for its own sake.\"\nProfessor of Pharmacology Michael C. Gerald noted that \"in over half her novels, one or more victims are poisoned, albeit not always to the full satisfaction of the perpetrator.\" Guns, knives, garrottes, tripwires, blunt instruments, and even a hatchet were also used, but \"Christie never resorted to elaborate mechanical or scientific means to explain her ingenuity,\" according to John Curran, author and literary adviser to the Christie estate. Many of her clues are mundane objects: a calendar, a coffee cup, wax flowers, a beer bottle, a fireplace used during a heat wave.\nAccording to crime writer P. D. James, Christie was prone to making the unlikeliest character the guilty party. Alert readers could sometimes identify the culprit by identifying the least likely suspect. Christie mocked this insight in her foreword to \"Cards on the Table\": \"Spot the person least likely to have committed the crime and in nine times out of ten your task is finished. Since I do not want my faithful readers to fling away this book in disgust, I prefer to warn them beforehand \"that this is not that kind of book\".\"\nOn BBC Radio 4's \"Desert Island Discs\" in 2007, Brian Aldiss said Christie had told him she wrote her books up to the last chapter, then decided who the most unlikely suspect was, after which she would go back and make the necessary changes to \"frame\" that person. Based upon a study of her working notebooks, Curran describes how Christie would first create a cast of characters, choose a setting, and then produce a list of scenes in which specific clues would be revealed; the order of scenes would be revised as she developed her plot. Of necessity, the murderer had to be known to the author before the sequence could be finalised and she began to type or dictate the first draft of her novel. Much of the work, particularly dialogue, was done in her head before she put it on paper.\nIn 2013, the 600 members of the Crime Writers' Association chose \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\" as \"the best whodunit... ever written\". Author Julian Symons observed, \"In an obvious sense, the book fits within the conventions... The setting is a village deep within the English countryside, Roger Ackroyd dies in his study; there is a butler who behaves suspiciously... Every successful detective story in this period involved a deceit practised upon the reader, and here the trick is the highly original one of making the murderer the local doctor, who tells the story and acts as Poirot's Watson.\" Critic Sutherland Scott stated, \"If Agatha Christie had made no other contribution to the literature of detective fiction she would still deserve our grateful thanks\" for writing this novel.\nIn September 2015, to mark her 125th birthday, \"And Then There Were None\" was named the \"World's Favourite Christie\" in a vote sponsored by the author's estate. The novel is emblematic of both her use of formula and her willingness to discard it. \"\"And Then There Were None\" carries the 'closed society' type of murder mystery to extreme lengths,\" according to author Charles Osborne. It begins with the classic set-up of potential victim(s) and killer(s) isolated from the outside world, but then violates conventions. There is no detective involved in the action, no interviews of suspects, no careful search for clues, and no suspects gathered together in the last chapter to be confronted with the solution. As Christie herself said, \"Ten people had to die without it becoming ridiculous or the murderer being obvious.\" Critics agreed she had succeeded: \"The arrogant Mrs. Christie this time set herself a fearsome test of her own ingenuity... the reviews, not surprisingly, were without exception wildly adulatory.\"\nCharacter stereotypes and perceived racism.\nChristie included stereotyped descriptions of characters in her work, especially before 1945 (when such attitudes were more commonly expressed publicly), particularly in regard to Italians, Jews, and non-Europeans. For example, she described \"men of Hebraic extraction, sallow men with hooked noses, wearing rather flamboyant jewellery\" in the short story \"The Soul of the Croupier\" from the collection \"The Mysterious Mr Quin\". In 1947, the Anti-Defamation League in the US sent an official letter of complaint to Christie's American publishers, Dodd, Mead and Company, regarding perceived antisemitism in her works. Christie's British literary agent later wrote to her US representative, authorising American publishers to \"omit the word 'Jew' when it refers to an unpleasant character in future books.\"\nIn \"The Hollow\", published in 1946, one of the characters is described by another as \"a Whitechapel Jewess with dyed hair and a voice like a corncrake\u00a0... a small woman with a thick nose, henna red and a disagreeable voice\". To contrast with the more stereotyped descriptions, Christie portrayed some \"foreign\" characters as victims, or potential victims, at the hands of English malefactors, such as, respectively, Olga Seminoff (\"Hallowe'en Party\") and Katrina Reiger (in the short story \"How Does Your Garden Grow?\"). Jewish characters are often seen as un-English (such as Oliver Manders in \"Three Act Tragedy\"), but they are rarely the culprits.\nIn 2023, the \"Telegraph\" reported that several Agatha Christie novels have been edited to remove potentially offensive language, including insults and references to ethnicity. Poirot and Miss Marple mysteries written between 1920 and 1976 have had passages reworked or removed in new editions published by HarperCollins, in order to strip them of language and descriptions that modern audiences find offensive, especially those involving the characters Christie\u2019s protagonists encounter outside the UK. Sensitivity readers had made the edits, which were evident in digital versions of the new editions, including the entire Miss Marple run and selected Poirot novels set to be released or that have been released since 2020.\nOther detectives.\nIn addition to Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple, Christie also created amateur detectives Thomas (Tommy) Beresford and his wife, Prudence \"Tuppence\" \"n\u00e9e\" Cowley, who appear in four novels and one collection of short stories published between 1922 and 1974. Unlike her other sleuths, the Beresfords were only in their early twenties when introduced in \"The Secret Adversary\", and were allowed to age alongside their creator. She treated their stories with a lighter touch, giving them a \"dash and verve\" which was not universally admired by critics. Their last adventure, \"Postern of Fate\", was Christie's last novel.\nHarley Quin was \"easily the most unorthodox\" of Christie's fictional detectives. Inspired by Christie's affection for the figures from the Harlequinade, the semi-supernatural Quin always works with an elderly, conventional man called Satterthwaite. The pair appear in 14 short stories, 12 of which were collected in 1930 as \"The Mysterious Mr. Quin\". Mallowan described these tales as \"detection in a fanciful vein, touching on the fairy story, a natural product of Agatha's peculiar imagination\". Satterthwaite also appears in a novel, \"Three Act Tragedy\", and a short story, \"Dead Man's Mirror\", both of which feature Poirot.\nAnother of her lesser-known characters is Parker Pyne, a retired civil servant who assists unhappy people in an unconventional manner. The 12 short stories which introduced him, \"Parker Pyne Investigates\" (1934), are best remembered for \"The Case of the Discontented Soldier\", which features Ariadne Oliver, \"an amusing and satirical self-portrait of Agatha Christie\". Over the ensuing decades, Oliver reappeared in seven novels. In most of them she assists Poirot.\nPlays.\nIn 1928, Michael Morton adapted \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\" for the stage under the name of \"Alibi\". The play enjoyed a respectable run, but Christie disliked the changes made to her work and, in future, preferred to write for the theatre herself. The first of her own stage works was \"Black Coffee\", which received good reviews when it opened in the West End in late 1930. She followed this up with adaptations of her detective novels: \"And Then There Were None\" in 1943, \"Appointment with Death\" in 1945, and \"The Hollow\" in 1951.\nIn the 1950s, \"the theatre\u00a0... engaged much of Agatha's attention.\" She next adapted her short radio play into \"The Mousetrap\", which premiered in the West End in 1952, produced by Peter Saunders and starring Richard Attenborough as the original Detective Sergeant Trotter. Her expectations for the play were not high; she believed it would run no more than eight months. \"The Mousetrap\" has long since made theatrical history as the world's longest-running play, staging its 27,500th performance in September 2018. The play temporarily closed in March 2020, when all UK theatres shut due to the coronavirus pandemic, before it re-opened on 17 May 2021.\nIn 1953, she followed this with \"Witness for the Prosecution\", whose Broadway production won the New York Drama Critics' Circle award for best foreign play of 1954 and earned Christie an Edgar Award from the Mystery Writers of America. \"Spider's Web\", an original work written for actress Margaret Lockwood at her request, premiered in the West End in 1954 and was also a hit. Christie became the first female playwright to have three plays running simultaneously in London: \"The Mousetrap\", \"Witness for the Prosecution\" and \"Spider's Web\". She said, \"Plays are much easier to \"write\" than books, because you can \"see\" them in your mind's eye, you are not hampered by all that description which clogs you so terribly in a book and stops you from getting on with what's happening.\" In a letter to her daughter, Christie said being a playwright was \"a lot of fun!\"\nAs Mary Westmacott.\nChristie published six mainstream novels under the name Mary Westmacott, a pseudonym which gave her the freedom to explore \"her most private and precious imaginative garden\". These books typically received better reviews than her detective and thriller fiction. Of the first, \"Giant's Bread\" published in 1930, a reviewer for \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"...her book is far above the average of current fiction, in fact, comes well under the classification of a 'good book'. And it is only a satisfying novel that can claim that appellation.\" It was publicized from the very beginning that \"Mary Westmacott\" was a pen name of a well-known author, although the identity behind the pen name was kept secret; the dust jacket of \"Giant's Bread\" mentions that the author had previously written \"under her real name...half a dozen books that have each passed the thirty thousand mark in sales.\" (In fact, though this was technically true, it disguised Christie's identity through understatement. By the publication of \"Giant's Bread\", Christie had published 10 novels and two short story collections, all of which had sold considerably more than 30,000 copies.) After Christie's authorship of the first four Westmacott novels was revealed by a journalist in 1949, she wrote two more, the last in 1956.\nThe other Westmacott titles are: \"Unfinished Portrait\" (1934), \"Absent in the Spring\" (1944), \"The Rose and the Yew Tree\" (1948), \"A Daughter's a Daughter\" (1952), and \"The Burden\" (1956).\nNon-fiction works.\nChristie published few non-fiction works. \"Come, Tell Me How You Live\", about working on an archaeological dig, was drawn from her life with Mallowan. \"The Grand Tour: Around the World with the Queen of Mystery\" is a collection of correspondence from her 1922 Grand Tour of the British Empire, including South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. \"\" was published posthumously in 1977 and adjudged the Best Critical/Biographical Work at the 1978 Edgar Awards.\nTitles.\nMany of Christie's works from 1940 onward have titles drawn from literature, with the original context of the title typically printed as an epigraph.\nThe inspirations for some of Christie's titles include:\nChristie biographer Gillian Gill said, \"Christie's writing has the sparseness, the directness, the narrative pace, and the universal appeal of the fairy story, and it is perhaps as modern fairy stories for grown-up children that Christie's novels succeed.\" Reflecting a juxtaposition of innocence and horror, numerous Christie titles were drawn from well-known children's nursery rhymes: \"And Then There Were None\" (from \"Ten Little Niggers\", a rhyme also published as \"Ten Little Indians\", both of which were also used for the book's title in some printings), \"One, Two, Buckle My Shoe\" (from \"One, Two, Buckle My Shoe\"), \"Five Little Pigs\" (from \"This Little Piggy\"), \"Crooked House\" (from \"There Was a Crooked Man\"), \"A Pocket Full of Rye\" (from \"Sing a Song of Sixpence\"), \"Hickory Dickory Dock\" (from \"Hickory Dickory Dock\"), and \"Three Blind Mice\" (from \"Three Blind Mice\").\nCritical reception.\nChristie is regularly referred to as the \"Queen of Crime\"\u2014which is now trademarked by the Christie estate\u2014or \"Queen of Mystery\", and is considered a master of suspense, plotting, and characterisation. In 1955, she became the first recipient of the Mystery Writers of America's Grand Master Award. She was named \"Best Writer of the Century\" and the Hercule Poirot series of books was named \"Best Series of the Century\" at the 2000 Bouchercon World Mystery Convention. In 2013, she was voted \"best crime writer\" in a survey of 600 members of the Crime Writers' Association of professional novelists. However, the writer Raymond Chandler criticised the artificiality of her books, as did writer Julian Symons. The literary critic Edmund Wilson described her prose as banal and her characterisations as superficial.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"With Christie\u00a0... we are dealing not so much with a literary figure as with a broad cultural phenomenon, like Barbie or the Beatles.\"\n \u2014Joan Acocella writing in \"The New Yorker\".\nIn 2011, Christie was named by digital crime drama TV channel Alibi as the second most financially successful crime writer of all time in the United Kingdom, after James Bond author Ian Fleming, with total earnings around \u00a3100\u00a0million. In 2012, Christie was among the people selected by the artist Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous work, the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" album cover, \"to celebrate the British cultural figures he most admires\". On the record-breaking longevity of Christie's \"The Mousetrap\" which had marked its 60th anniversary in 2012, Stephen Moss in \"The Guardian\" wrote, \"the play and its author are the stars\".\nIn 2015, marking the 125th anniversary of her birth date, 25 contemporary mystery writers and one publisher gave their views on Christie's works. Many of the authors had read Christie's novels first, before other mystery writers, in English or in their native language, influencing their own writing, and nearly all still viewed her as the \"Queen of Crime\" and creator of the plot twists used by mystery authors. Nearly all had one or more favourites among Christie's mysteries and found her books still good to read nearly 100 years after her first novel was published. Just one of the 25 authors held with Wilson's views.\nBook sales.\nIn her prime, Christie was rarely out of the bestseller list. She was the first crime writer to have 100,000 copies of 10 of her titles published by Penguin on the same day in 1948. As of 2018[ [update]], \"Guinness World Records\" listed Christie as the best-selling fiction writer of all time. As of 2020[ [update]], her novels had sold more than two billion copies in 44 languages. Half the sales are of English-language editions, and half are translations. According to Index Translationum, as of 2020[ [update]], she was the most-translated individual author. Christie is one of the most-borrowed authors in UK libraries. She is also the UK's best-selling spoken-book author. In 2002, 117,696 Christie audiobooks were sold, in comparison to 97,755 for J. K. Rowling, 78,770 for Roald Dahl and 75,841 for J. R. R. Tolkien. In 2015, the Christie estate claimed \"And Then There Were None\" was \"the best-selling crime novel of all time\", with approximately 100 million sales, also making it one of the highest-selling books of all time. More than two million copies of her books were sold in English in 2020.\nLegacy.\nIn 2016, the Royal Mail marked the centenary of Christie's first detective story by issuing six first class postage stamps of her works: \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\", \"Murder on the Orient Express\", \"And Then There Were None\", \"The Body in the Library\", and \"A Murder is Announced\". \"The Guardian\" reported that, \"Each design incorporates microtext, UV ink and thermochromic ink. These concealed clues can be revealed using either a magnifying glass, UV light or body heat and provide pointers to the mysteries' solutions.\" \nHer characters and her face appeared on the stamps of many countries like Dominica and the Somali Republic. In 2020, Christie was commemorated on a \u00a32 coin by the Royal Mint for the first time to mark the centenary of her first novel, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\".\nAdaptations.\nChristie's works have been adapted for cinema and television. The first was the 1928 British film \"The Passing of Mr. Quin\". Poirot's first film appearance was in 1931 in \"Alibi\", which starred Austin Trevor as Christie's sleuth. Margaret Rutherford played Marple in a series of films released in the 1960s. Christie liked her acting, but considered the first film \"pretty poor\" and thought no better of the rest.\nShe felt differently about the 1974 film \"Murder on the Orient Express\", directed by Sidney Lumet, which featured major stars and high production values; her attendance at the London premiere was one of her last public outings. In 2017, a new film version was released, directed by Kenneth Branagh, who also starred, wearing \"the most extravagant mustache moviegoers have ever seen\".\nThe television adaptation \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\" (1989\u20132013), with David Suchet in the title role, ran for 70 episodes over 13 series. It received nine BAFTA award nominations and won four BAFTA awards in 1990\u20131992. The television series \"Miss Marple\" (1984\u20131992), with Joan Hickson as \"the BBC's peerless Miss Marple\", adapted all 12 Marple novels. The French television series (2009\u20132012, 2013\u20132020), adapted 36 of Christie's stories.\nChristie's books have also been adapted for BBC Radio, a video game series, and graphic novels.\nInterests and influences.\nPharmacology.\nDuring the First World War, Christie took a break from nursing to train for the Apothecaries Hall Examination. While she subsequently found dispensing in the hospital pharmacy monotonous, and thus less enjoyable than nursing, her new knowledge provided her with a background in potentially toxic drugs. Early in the Second World War, she brought her skills up to date at Torquay Hospital.\nAs Michael C. Gerald puts it, her \"activities as a hospital dispenser during both World Wars not only supported the war effort but also provided her with an appreciation of drugs as therapeutic agents and poisons... These hospital experiences were also likely responsible for the prominent role physicians, nurses, and pharmacists play in her stories.\" There were to be many medical practitioners, pharmacists, and scientists, na\u00efve or suspicious, in Christie's cast of characters; featuring in \"Murder in Mesopotamia\", \"Cards on the Table\", \"The Pale Horse\", and \"Mrs. McGinty's Dead\", among many others.\nGillian Gill notes that the murder method in Christie's first detective novel, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", \"comes right out of Agatha Christie's work in the hospital dispensary\". In an interview with journalist Marcelle Bernstein, Christie stated, \"I don't like messy deaths... I'm more interested in peaceful people who die in their own beds and no one knows why.\" With her expert knowledge, Christie had no need of poisons unknown to science, which were forbidden under Ronald Knox's \"Ten Rules for Detective Fiction\". Arsenic, aconite, strychnine, digitalis, thallium, and other substances were used to dispatch victims in the ensuing decades.\nArchaeology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe lure of the past came up to grab me. To see a dagger slowly appearing, with its gold glint, through the sand was romantic. The carefulness of lifting pots and objects from the soil filled me with a longing to be an archaeologist myself.\nAgatha Christie\nIn her youth, Christie showed little interest in antiquities. After her marriage to Mallowan in 1930, she accompanied him on annual expeditions, spending three to four months at a time in Syria and Iraq at excavation sites at Ur, Nineveh, Tell Arpachiyah, Chagar Bazar, Tell Brak, and Nimrud. The Mallowans also took side trips whilst travelling to and from expedition sites, visiting Italy, Greece, Egypt, Iran, and the Soviet Union, among other places. Their experiences travelling and living abroad are reflected in novels such as \"Murder on the Orient Express\", \"Death on the Nile\", and \"Appointment with Death\".\nFor the 1931 digging season at Nineveh, Christie bought a writing table to continue her own work; in the early 1950s, she paid to add a small writing room to the team's house at Nimrud. She also devoted time and effort each season in \"making herself useful by photographing, cleaning, and recording finds; and restoring ceramics, which she especially enjoyed\". She also provided funds for the expeditions.\nMany of the settings for Christie's books were inspired by her archaeological fieldwork in the Middle East; this is reflected in the detail with which she describes them\u00a0\u2013 for instance, the temple of Abu Simbel as depicted in \"Death on the Nile\"\u00a0\u2013 while the settings for \"They Came to Baghdad\" were places she and Mallowan had recently stayed. Similarly, she drew upon her knowledge of daily life on a dig throughout \"Murder in Mesopotamia\". Archaeologists and experts in Middle Eastern cultures and artefacts featured in her works include Dr Eric Leidner in \"Murder in Mesopotamia\" and Signor Richetti in \"Death on the Nile\".\nAfter the Second World War, Christie chronicled her time in Syria in \"Come, Tell Me How You Live\", which she described as \"small beer\u00a0\u2013 a very little book, full of everyday doings and happenings\". From 8November 2001 to March 2002, The British Museum presented a \"colourful and episodic exhibition\" called \"Agatha Christie and Archaeology: Mystery in Mesopotamia\" which illustrated how her activities as a writer and as the wife of an archaeologist intertwined.\nIn popular culture.\nSome of Christie's fictional portrayals have explored and offered accounts of her disappearance in 1926. The film \"Agatha\" (1979), with Vanessa Redgrave, has Christie sneaking away to plan revenge against her husband; Christie's heirs sued unsuccessfully to prevent the film's distribution. The \"Doctor Who\" episode \"The Unicorn and the Wasp\" (17 May 2008) stars Fenella Woolgar as Christie, and explains her disappearance as being connected to aliens. The film \"Agatha and the Truth of Murder\" (2018) sends her under cover to solve the murder of Florence Nightingale's goddaughter, Florence Nightingale Shore. A fictionalised account of Christie's disappearance is also the central theme of a Korean musical, \"Agatha\". \"The Christie Affair\", a Christie-like mystery story of love and revenge by author Nina de Gramont, was a 2022 novel loosely based on Christie's disappearance.\nOther portrayals, such as the Hungarian film \"Kojak Budapesten\" (1980), create their own scenarios involving Christie's criminal skill. In the TV play \"Murder by the Book\" (1986), Christie (Dame Peggy Ashcroft) murders one of her fictional-turned-real characters, Poirot. Christie features as a character in Gaylord Larsen's \"Dorothy and Agatha\" and \"The London Blitz Murders\" by Max Allan Collins. The American television program \"Unsolved Mysteries\" devoted a segment to her famous disappearance, with Agatha portrayed by actress Tessa Pritchard. A young Agatha is depicted in the Spanish historical television series \"Gran Hotel\" (2011) in which she finds inspiration to write her new novel while aiding local detectives. In the alternative history television film \"Agatha and the Curse of Ishtar\" (2018), Christie becomes involved in a murder case at an archaeological dig in Iraq. In 2019, Honeysuckle Weeks portrayed Christie in an episode, \"No Friends Like Old Friends\", in a Canadian drama, \"Frankie Drake Mysteries.\" \nIn 2020, Heather Terrell, under the pseudonym of Marie Benedict, published \"The Mystery of Mrs. Christie\", a fictional reconstruction of Christie's December 1926 disappearance. The novel was a \"New York Times\" and \"USA Today\" bestseller. In December 2020, Library Reads named Terrell a Hall of Fame author for the book.\nAndrew Wilson has written four novels featuring Agatha Christie as a detective: \"A Talent For Murder\" (2017), \"A Different Kind of Evil\" (2018), \"Death In A Desert Land\" (2019) and \"I Saw Him Die\" (2020). Christie was portrayed by Shirley Henderson in the 2022 comedy/mystery film \"See How They Run\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "986", "revid": "1154470528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=986", "title": "The Plague (novel)", "text": "1947 novel by Albert Camus\nThe Plague () is a novel by Albert Camus. Published in 1947, it tells the story from the point of view of a narrator of a plague sweeping the French Algerian city of Oran. The narrator remains unknown until the start of the last chapter, chapter 5 of part 5. The novel presents a snapshot of life in Oran as seen through the author's distinctive absurdist point of view.\nCamus used as source material the cholera epidemic that killed a large proportion of Oran's population in 1849, but situated the novel in the 1940s. Oran and its surroundings were struck by disease several times before Camus published his novel. According to an academic study, Oran was decimated by the bubonic plague in 1556 and 1678, but all later outbreaks (in 1921: 185 cases; 1931: 76 cases; and 1944: 95 cases) were very far from the scale of the epidemic described in the novel.\n\"The Plague\" is considered an existentialist classic despite Camus' objection to the label. The novel stresses the powerlessness of the individual characters to affect their destinies. The narrative tone is similar to Kafka's, especially in \"The Trial\", whose individual sentences potentially have multiple meanings; the material often pointedly resonating as stark allegory of phenomenal consciousness and the human condition.\nPlot summary.\nThe book begins with an epigraph quoting Daniel Defoe, author of \"A Journal of the Plague Year\".\nPart one.\nIn the town of Oran, thousands of rats, initially unnoticed by the populace, begin to die in the streets. Hysteria develops soon afterward, causing the local newspapers to report the incident. Authorities responding to public pressure order the collection and cremation of the rats, unaware that the collection itself was the catalyst for the spread of the bubonic plague.\nThe main character, Dr. Bernard Rieux, lives comfortably in an apartment building when strangely the building's concierge, M. Michel, a confidante, dies from a fever. Dr. Rieux consults his colleague, Dr. Castel, about the illness until they come to the conclusion that a plague is sweeping the town. They both approach fellow doctors and town authorities about their theory but are eventually dismissed on the basis of one death. However, as more deaths quickly ensue, it becomes apparent that there is an epidemic. Meanwhile, Rieux's wife has been sent to a sanatorium in another city, to be treated for an unrelated chronic illness.\nAuthorities, including the Prefect, are slow to accept that the situation is serious and quibble over the appropriate action to take. Official notices enacting control measures are posted, but the language used is optimistic and downplays the seriousness of the situation. A \"special ward\" is opened at the hospital, but its 80 beds are filled within three days. As the death toll begins to rise, more desperate measures are taken. Homes are quarantined; corpses and burials are strictly supervised. A supply of plague serum finally arrives, but there is enough to treat only existing cases, and the country's emergency reserves are depleted. When the daily number of deaths jumps to 30, the town is sealed, and an outbreak of plague is officially declared.\nPart two.\nThe town is sealed off. The town gates are shut, rail travel is prohibited, and all mail service is suspended. The use of telephone lines is restricted only to \"urgent\" calls, leaving short telegrams as the only means of communicating with friends or family outside the town. The separation affects daily activity and depresses the spirit of the townspeople, who begin to feel isolated and introverted, and the plague begins to affect various characters.\nOne character, Raymond Rambert, devises a plan to escape the city to join his wife in Paris after city officials refused his request to leave. He befriends some underground criminals so that they may smuggle him out of the city. Another character, Father Paneloux, uses the plague as an opportunity to advance his stature in the town by suggesting that the plague was an act of God punishing the citizens' sinful nature. His diatribe falls on the ears of many citizens of the town, who turned to religion in droves, but would not have done so under normal circumstances. Cottard, a criminal remorseful enough to attempt suicide but fearful of being arrested, becomes wealthy as a major smuggler. Meanwhile, Jean Tarrou, a vacationer; Joseph Grand, a civil engineer; and Dr. Rieux, exhaustively treat patients in their homes and in the hospital.\nRambert informs Tarrou of his escape plan, but when Tarrou tells him that there are others in the city, including Dr. Rieux, who have loved ones outside the city whom they are not allowed to see, Rambert becomes sympathetic and offers to help Rieux fight the epidemic until he leaves town.\nPart three.\nIn mid-August, the situation continues to worsen. People try to escape the town, but some are shot by armed sentries. Violence and looting break out on a small scale, and the authorities respond by declaring martial law and imposing a curfew. Funerals are conducted with more speed, no ceremony and little concern for the feelings of the families of the deceased. The inhabitants passively endure their increasing feelings of exile and separation. Despondent, they waste away emotionally as well as physically.\nPart four.\nIn September and October, the town remains at the mercy of the plague. Rieux hears from the sanatorium that his wife's condition is worsening. He also hardens his heart regarding the plague victims so that he can continue to do his work. Cottard, on the other hand, seems to flourish during the plague because it gives him a sense of being connected to others, since everybody faces the same danger. Cottard and Tarrou attend a performance of Gluck's opera \"Orpheus and Eurydice\", but the actor portraying Orpheus collapses with plague symptoms during the performance.\nAfter extended negotiations with guards, Rambert finally has a chance to escape, but he decides to stay, saying that he would feel ashamed of himself if he left.\nTowards the end of October, Castel's new antiplague serum is tried for the first time, but it cannot save the life of Othon's young son, who suffers greatly, as Paneloux, Rieux, and Tarrou tend to his bedside in horror.\nPaneloux, who has joined the group of volunteers fighting the plague, gives a second sermon. He addresses the problem of an innocent child's suffering and says it is a test of a Christian's faith since it requires him either to deny everything or believe everything. He urges the congregation not to give up the struggle but to do everything possible to fight the plague.\nA few days after the sermon, Paneloux is taken ill. His symptoms do not conform to those of the plague, but the disease still proves fatal.\nTarrou and Rambert visit one of the isolation camps, where they meet Othon. When Othon's period of quarantine ends, he chooses to stay in the camp as a volunteer because this will make him feel less separated from his dead son. Tarrou tells Rieux the story of his life and, to take their mind off the epidemic, the two men go swimming together in the sea. Grand catches the plague and instructs Rieux to burn all his papers. However, Grand makes an unexpected recovery, and deaths from the plague start to decline.\nPart five.\nBy late January the plague is in full retreat, and the townspeople begin to celebrate the imminent opening of the town gates. Othon, however, does not escape death from the disease. Cottard is distressed by the ending of the epidemic from which he has profited by shady dealings. Two government employees approach him, and he flees. Despite the epidemic's ending, Tarrou contracts the plague and dies after a heroic struggle. Rieux is later informed via telegram that his wife has also died.\nIn February, the town gates open and people are reunited with their loved ones from other cities. Rambert is reunited with his wife. Cottard goes mad and shoots at people from his home, and is soon arrested after a brief skirmish with the police. Grand begins working on his novel again. The narrator of the chronicle says that he is Dr. Rieux and states that he tried to present an objective view of the events. He reflects on the epidemic and declares he wrote the chronicle \"to simply say what we learn in the midst of plagues: there are more things to admire in men than to despise\".\nCritical analysis.\nGermaine Br\u00e9e has characterised the struggle of the characters against the plague as \"undramatic and stubborn\", and in contrast to the ideology of \"glorification of power\" in the novels of Andr\u00e9 Malraux, whereas Camus' characters \"are obscurely engaged in saving, not destroying, and this in the name of no ideology\". Lulu Haroutunian has discussed Camus' own medical history, including a bout with tuberculosis, and how it informs the novel. Marina Warner notes its larger philosophical themes of \"engagement\", \"paltriness and generosity\", \"small heroism and large cowardice\", and \"all kinds of profoundly humanist problems, such as love and goodness, happiness and mutual connection\".\nThomas L Hanna and John Loose have separately discussed themes related to Christianity in the novel, with particular respect to Father Paneloux and Dr Rieux. Louis R Rossi briefly discusses the role of Tarrou in the novel, and the sense of philosophical guilt behind his character. Elwyn Sterling has analysed the role of Cottard and his final actions at the end of the novel. Father Paneloux has been subject to several literary analyses in the context of faith faced with great suffering.\nDr Rieux has been described as a classic example of an idealist doctor. He has also been an inspiration to the life and career of the French doctor R\u00e9jean Thomas, and also to the fictional character of Jeanne Dion, starring in the movie trilogy directed by Bernard \u00c9mond (beginning with \"The Novena\").\nMedically trained readers are sometimes upset that Dr. Rieux and Dr. Castel make no effort to get their patients sulfa drugs, which were available and known to be effective against plague. Instead the doctors waste time and effort attempting to obtain plague antiserum, which was much less effective and, in fact, was rapidly being abandoned during the 1940s.\nIn the popular press.\nThe novel has been read as an allegorical treatment of the French resistance to Nazi occupation during World War II.\nThe novel became a bestseller during the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 to the point that its British publisher Penguin Classics reported struggling to keep up with demand. The prescience of the fictional cordon sanitaire of Oran with real-life COVID-19 lockdowns worldwide brought revived popular attention. Sales in Italy tripled and it became a top-ten bestseller during its nationwide lockdown. Penguin Classics' editorial director said \"it couldn\u2019t be more relevant to the current moment\" and Camus' daughter Catherine said that the message of the novel had newfound relevance in that \"we are not responsible for coronavirus but we can be responsible in the way we respond to it\".\nPublication history.\nAs early as April 1941, Camus had been working on the novel, as evidenced in his diaries in which he wrote down a few ideas on \"the redeeming plague\". On 13 March 1942, he informed Andr\u00e9 Malraux that he was writing \"a novel on the plague\", adding \"Said like that it might sound strange, [\u2026] but this subject seems so natural to me.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "988", "revid": "1150114512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=988", "title": "Applied ethics", "text": "Practical application of moral considerations\nApplied ethics refers to the practical aspect of moral considerations. It is ethics with respect to real-world actions and their moral considerations in the areas of private and public life, the professions, health, technology, law, and leadership. For example, the bioethics community is concerned with identifying the correct approach to moral issues in the life sciences, such as euthanasia, the allocation of scarce health resources, or the use of human embryos in research. Environmental ethics is concerned with ecological issues such as the responsibility of government and corporations to clean up pollution. Business ethics includes questions regarding the duties or duty of 'whistleblowers' to the general public or their loyalty to their employers.\nHistory.\nApplied ethics has expanded the study of ethics beyond the realms of academic philosophical discourse. The field of applied ethics, as it appears today, emerged from debate surrounding rapid medical and technological advances in the early 1970s and is now established as a subdiscipline of moral philosophy. However, applied ethics is, by its very nature, a multi-professional subject because it requires specialist understanding of the potential ethical issues in fields like medicine, business or information technology. Nowadays, ethical codes of conduct exist in almost every profession.\nAn applied ethics approach to the examination of moral dilemmas can take many different forms but one of the most influential and most widely utilised approaches in bioethics and health care ethics is the four-principle approach developed by Tom Beauchamp and James Childress. The four-principle approach, commonly termed principlism, entails consideration and application of four prima facie ethical principles: autonomy, non-maleficence, beneficence, and justice.\nUnderpinning theory.\nApplied ethics is distinguished from normative ethics, which concerns standards for right and wrong behavior, and from meta-ethics, which concerns the nature of ethical properties, statements, attitudes, and judgments.\nWhilst these three areas of ethics appear to be distinct, they are also interrelated. The use of an applied ethics approach often draws upon these normative ethical theories:\nNormative ethical theories can clash when trying to resolve real-world ethical dilemmas. One approach attempting to overcome the divide between consequentialism and deontology is case-based reasoning, also known as casuistry. Casuistry does not begin with theory, rather it starts with the immediate facts of a real and concrete case. While casuistry makes use of ethical theory, it does not view ethical theory as the most important feature of moral reasoning. Casuists, like Albert Jonsen and Stephen Toulmin (\"The Abuse of Casuistry\", 1988), challenge the traditional paradigm of applied ethics. Instead of starting from theory and applying theory to a particular case, casuists start with the particular case itself and then ask what morally significant features (including both theory and practical considerations) ought to be considered for that particular case. In their observations of medical ethics committees, Jonsen and Toulmin note that a consensus on particularly problematic moral cases often emerges when participants focus on the facts of the case, rather than on ideology or theory. Thus, a Rabbi, a Catholic priest, and an agnostic might agree that, in this particular case, the best approach is to withhold extraordinary medical care, while disagreeing on the reasons that support their individual positions. By focusing on cases and not on theory, those engaged in moral debate increase the possibility of agreement.\nApplied ethics was later distinguished from the nascent applied epistemology, which is also under the umbrella of applied philosophy. While the former was concerned with the practical application of moral considerations, the latter focuses on the application of epistemology in solving practical problems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "991", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=991", "title": "Absolute value", "text": "Distance from zero to a number\nIn mathematics, the absolute value or modulus of a real number formula_1, denoted &lt;math&gt; is the non-negative value of formula_1 without regard to its sign. Namely, formula_3 if formula_1 is a positive number, and formula_5 if formula_1 is negative (in which case negating formula_1 makes formula_8 positive), and formula_9, although double vertical bars with subscripts (&lt;math&gt;\\ and &lt;math&gt;\\ respectively) are a more common and less ambiguous notation.\nDefinition and properties.\nReal numbers.\nFor any real number formula_1, the absolute value or modulus of formula_1 is denoted by formula_12\nThe absolute value of formula_1 is thus always either a positive number or zero, but never negative. When formula_1 itself is negative (formula_15), then its absolute value is necessarily positive (formula_16\nThis is equivalent to the definition above, and may be used as an alternative definition of the absolute value of real numbers.\nThe absolute value has the following four fundamental properties (\"a\", \"b\" are real numbers), that are used for generalization of this notion to other domains:\nNon-negativity, positive definiteness, and multiplicativity are readily apparent from the definition. To see that subadditivity holds, first note that formula_17 with its sign chosen to make the result positive. Now, since formula_18 and formula_19 is the value of formula_20, one has formula_21 for all real formula_1. Consequently, formula_23, as desired.\nSome additional useful properties are given below. These are either immediate consequences of the definition or implied by the four fundamental properties above.\nTwo other useful properties concerning inequalities are:\nThese relations may be used to solve inequalities involving absolute values. For example:\nThe absolute value, as \"distance from zero\", is used to define the absolute difference between arbitrary real numbers, the standard metric on the real numbers.\nComplex numbers.\nSince the complex numbers are not ordered, the definition given at the top for the real absolute value cannot be directly applied to complex numbers. However, the geometric interpretation of the absolute value of a real number as its distance from 0 can be generalised. The absolute value of a complex number is defined by the Euclidean distance of its corresponding point in the complex plane from the origin. This can be computed using the Pythagorean theorem: for any complex number\nformula_24\nwhere formula_1 and formula_26 are real numbers, the absolute value or modulus of formula_27 is denoted formula_28\nthe Pythagorean addition of formula_1 and formula_26, where formula_31 and formula_32 denote the real and imaginary parts of formula_27, respectively. When the imaginary part formula_26 is zero, this coincides with the definition of the absolute value of the real number formula_1.\nWhen a complex number formula_27 is expressed in its polar form its absolute value is &lt;math&gt;\nSince the product of any complex number formula_27 and its with the same absolute value, is always the non-negative real number formula_38, the absolute value of a complex number formula_27 is the square root of formula_40 which is therefore called the absolute square or \"squared modulus\" of formula_27:\nformula_42\nThis generalizes the alternative definition for reals: x\nThe complex absolute value shares the four fundamental properties given above for the real absolute value. The identity formula_43 is a special case of multiplicativity that is often useful by itself.\nAbsolute value function.\nThe real absolute value function is continuous everywhere. It is differentiable everywhere except for \"x\" = 0. It is monotonically decreasing on the interval (\u2212\u221e, 0] and monotonically increasing on the interval [0, +\u221e). Since a real number and its opposite have the same absolute value, it is an even function, and is hence not invertible. The real absolute value function is a piecewise linear, convex function.\nFor both real and complex numbers the absolute value function is idempotent (meaning that the absolute value of any absolute value is itself).\nRelationship to the sign function.\nThe absolute value function of a real number returns its value irrespective of its sign, whereas the sign (or signum) function returns a number's sign irrespective of its value. The following equations show the relationship between these two functions:\nformula_44\nor\nformula_45\nand for \"x\" \u2260 0,\nformula_46\nDerivative.\nThe real absolute value function has a derivative for every \"x\" \u2260 0, but is not differentiable at \"x\" = 0. Its derivative for \"x\" \u2260 0 is given by the step function:\nformula_47\nThe real absolute value function is an example of a continuous function that achieves a global minimum where the derivative does not exist.\nThe subdifferential of\u00a0 at\u00a0\"x\" = 0 is the interval\u00a0[\u22121, 1].\nThe complex absolute value function is continuous everywhere but complex differentiable \"nowhere\" because it violates the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations.\nThe second derivative of\u00a0 with respect to\u00a0x is zero everywhere except zero, where it does not exist. As a generalised function, the second derivative may be taken as two times the Dirac delta function.\nAntiderivative.\nThe antiderivative (indefinite integral) of the real absolute value function is\nformula_48\nwhere C is an arbitrary constant of integration. This is not a complex antiderivative because complex antiderivatives can only exist for complex-differentiable (holomorphic) functions, which the complex absolute value function is not.\nDistance.\nThe absolute value is closely related to the idea of distance. As noted above, the absolute value of a real or complex number is the distance from that number to the origin, along the real number line, for real numbers, or in the complex plane, for complex numbers, and more generally, the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers is the distance between them.\nThe standard Euclidean distance between two points\nformula_49\nand\nformula_50\nin Euclidean n-space is defined as:\nformula_51\nThis can be seen as a generalisation, since for formula_52 and formula_53 real, i.e. in a 1-space, according to the alternative definition of the absolute value,\nformula_54\nand for formula_55 and formula_56 complex numbers, i.e. in a 2-space,\n\nThe above shows that the \"absolute value\"-distance, for real and complex numbers, agrees with the standard Euclidean distance, which they inherit as a result of considering them as one and two-dimensional Euclidean spaces, respectively.\nThe properties of the absolute value of the difference of two real or complex numbers: non-negativity, identity of indiscernibles, symmetry and the triangle inequality given above, can be seen to motivate the more general notion of a distance function as follows:\nA real valued function d on a set \"X\"\u2009\u00d7\u2009\"X\" is called a metric (or a \"distance function\") on\u00a0X, if it satisfies the following four axioms:\nGeneralizations.\nOrdered rings.\nThe definition of absolute value given for real numbers above can be extended to any ordered ring. That is, if\u00a0a is an element of an ordered ring\u00a0\"R\", then the absolute value of\u00a0a, denoted by , is defined to be:\nformula_57\nwhere \u2212\"a\" is the additive inverse of\u00a0a, 0 is the additive identity, and &lt; and \u2265 have the usual meaning with respect to the ordering in the ring.\nFields.\nThe four fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers can be used to generalise the notion of absolute value to an arbitrary field, as follows.\nA real-valued function\u00a0v on a field\u00a0F is called an \"absolute value\" (also a \"modulus\", \"magnitude\", \"value\", or \"valuation\") if it satisfies the following four axioms:\nWhere 0 denotes the additive identity of\u00a0F. It follows from positive-definiteness and multiplicativity that \"v\"(1) = 1, where 1 denotes the multiplicative identity of\u00a0F. The real and complex absolute values defined above are examples of absolute values for an arbitrary field.\nIf v is an absolute value on\u00a0F, then the function\u00a0d on \"F\"\u2009\u00d7\u2009\"F\", defined by \"d\"(\"a\",\u2009\"b\") = \"v\"(\"a\" \u2212 \"b\"), is a metric and the following are equivalent:\nAn absolute value which satisfies any (hence all) of the above conditions is said to be non-Archimedean, otherwise it is said to be Archimedean.\nVector spaces.\nAgain the fundamental properties of the absolute value for real numbers can be used, with a slight modification, to generalise the notion to an arbitrary vector space.\nA real-valued function on a vector space\u00a0V over a field\u00a0F, represented as \u2016\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0\u2016, is called an absolute value, but more usually a norm, if it satisfies the following axioms:\nFor all\u00a0a in\u00a0F, and v, u in\u00a0V,\nThe norm of a vector is also called its \"length\" or \"magnitude\".\nIn the case of Euclidean space formula_66, the function defined by\nformula_67\nis a norm called the Euclidean norm. When the real numbers formula_68 are considered as the one-dimensional vector space formula_69, the absolute value is a norm, and is the p-norm (see Lp space) for any\u00a0p. In fact the absolute value is the \"only\" norm on formula_69, in the sense that, for every norm \u2016\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0\u2016 on formula_69, \u2016\"x\"\u2016 = \u20161\u2016\u2009\u22c5\u2009|\"x\"|.\nThe complex absolute value is a special case of the norm in an inner product space, which is identical to the Euclidean norm when the complex plane is identified as the Euclidean plane\u00a0formula_72.\nComposition algebras.\nEvery composition algebra \"A\" has an involution \"x\" \u2192 \"x\"* called its conjugation. The product in \"A\" of an element \"x\" and its conjugate \"x\"* is written \"N\"(\"x\") = \"x x\"* and called the norm of x.\nThe real numbers formula_68, complex numbers formula_74, and quaternions formula_75 are all composition algebras with norms given by definite quadratic forms. The absolute value in these division algebras is given by the square root of the composition algebra norm.\nIn general the norm of a composition algebra may be a quadratic form that is not definite and has null vectors. However, as in the case of division algebras, when an element \"x\" has a non-zero norm, then \"x\" has a multiplicative inverse given by \"x\"*/\"N\"(\"x\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "993", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=993", "title": "Analog signal", "text": "Continuous time-varying signal\nAn analog signal is any continuous-time signal representing some other quantity, i.e., \"analogous\" to another quantity. For example, in an analog audio signal, the instantaneous signal voltage varies continuously with the pressure of the sound waves.\nIn contrast, a digital signal represents the original time-varying quantity as a sampled sequence of quantized values. Digital sampling imposes some bandwidth and dynamic range constraints on the representation and adds quantization error.\nThe term \"analog signal\" usually refers to electrical signals; however, mechanical, pneumatic, hydraulic and other systems may also convey or be considered analog signals.\nRepresentation.\nAn analog signal uses some property of the medium to convey the signal's information. For example, an aneroid barometer uses rotary position as the signal to convey pressure information. In an electrical signal, the voltage, current, or frequency of the signal may be varied to represent the information.\nAny information may be conveyed by an analog signal; such a signal may be a measured response to changes in a physical variable, such as sound, light, temperature, position, or pressure. The physical variable is converted to an analog signal by a transducer. For example, sound striking the diaphragm of a microphone induces corresponding fluctuations in the current produced by a coil in an electromagnetic microphone or the voltage produced by a condenser microphone. The voltage or the current is said to be an \"analog\" of the sound.\nNoise.\nAn analog signal is subject to electronic noise and distortion introduced by communication channels, recording and signal processing operations, which can progressively degrade the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). As the signal is transmitted, copied, or processed, the unavoidable noise introduced in the signal path will accumulate as a generation loss, progressively and irreversibly degrading the SNR, until in extreme cases, the signal can be overwhelmed. Noise can show up as hiss and intermodulation distortion in audio signals, or snow in video signals. Generation loss is irreversible as there is no reliable method to distinguish the noise from the signal.\nIn contrast, although converting an analog signal to digital form introduces a low-level quantization noise into the signal due to finite resolution of digital systems, once in digital form, the signal can be transmitted, stored, or processed without introducing significant additional noise or distortion.\nNoise accumulation in analog systems can be minimized by electromagnetic shielding, balanced lines, low-noise amplifiers and high-quality electrical components.\nIn analog systems, it is difficult to detect when such degradation occurs. However, in digital systems, degradation can not only be detected but corrected as well.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "994", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=994", "title": "Arecales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nArecales is an order of flowering plants. The order has been widely recognised only for the past few decades; until then, the accepted name for the order including these plants was Principes.\nTaxonomy.\nThe APG IV system of 2016 places Dasypogonaceae in this order, after studies showing Dasypogonaceae as sister to Arecaceae. However, this decision has been called into question.\nHistorical taxonomical systems.\nThe Cronquist system of 1981 assigned the order to the subclass Arecidae in the class Liliopsida (= monocotyledons).\nThe Thorne system (1992) and the Dahlgren system assigned the order to the superorder Areciflorae, also called Arecanae in the subclass Liliidae (= monocotyledons), with the single family Arecaceae.\nThe APG II system of 2003 recognised the order and placed it in the clade commelinids in the monocots and uses this circumscription:\nThis was unchanged from the APG system of 1998, although it used the spelling \"commelinoids\" instead of commelinids.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1000", "revid": "1159878606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1000", "title": "Hercule Poirot", "text": "Fictional detective character created by Agatha Christie\nHercule Poirot (, ) is a fictional Belgian detective created by British writer Agatha Christie. Poirot is one of Christie's most famous and long-running characters, appearing in 33 novels, two plays (\"Black Coffee\" and \"Alibi\"), and 51 short stories published between 1920 and 1975.\nPoirot has been portrayed on radio, in film and on television by various actors, including Austin Trevor, John Moffatt, Albert Finney, Peter Ustinov, Ian Holm, Tony Randall, Alfred Molina, Orson Welles, David Suchet, Kenneth Branagh, and John Malkovich.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOverview.\nInfluences.\nPoirot's name was derived from two other fictional detectives of the time: Marie Belloc Lowndes' Hercule Popeau and Frank Howel Evans' Monsieur Poiret, a retired French police officer living in London. Evans' Jules Poiret \"was small and rather heavyset, hardly more than five feet, but moved with his head held high. The most remarkable features of his head were the stiff military moustache. His apparel was neat to perfection, a little quaint and frankly dandified.\" He was accompanied by Captain Harry Haven, who had returned to London from a Colombian business venture ended by a civil war. \nA more obvious influence on the early Poirot stories is that of Arthur Conan Doyle. In \"An Autobiography\", Christie states, \"I was still writing in the Sherlock Holmes tradition \u2013 eccentric detective, stooge assistant, with a Lestrade-type Scotland Yard detective, Inspector Japp\". For his part, Conan Doyle acknowledged basing his detective stories on the model of Edgar Allan Poe's C. Auguste Dupin and his anonymous narrator, and basing his character Sherlock Holmes on Joseph Bell, who in his use of \"ratiocination\" prefigured Poirot's reliance on his \"little grey cells\".\nPoirot also bears a striking resemblance to A. E. W. Mason's fictional detective Inspector Hanaud of the French S\u00fbret\u00e9, who first appeared in the 1910 novel \"At the Villa Rose\" and predates the first Poirot novel by 10 years.\nChristie's Poirot was clearly the result of her early development of the detective in her first book, written in 1916 and published in 1920. Belgium's occupation by Germany during World War I provided a plausible explanation of why such a skilled detective would be available to solve mysteries at an English country house. At the time of Christie's writing, it was considered patriotic to express sympathy towards the Belgians, since the invasion of their country had constituted Britain's \"casus belli\" for entering World War I, and British wartime propaganda emphasised the \"Rape of Belgium\".\nPopularity.\nPoirot first appeared in \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\" (published in 1920) and exited in \"Curtain\" (published in 1975). Following the latter, Poirot was the only fictional character to receive an obituary on the front page of \"The New York Times\".\nBy 1930, Agatha Christie found Poirot \"insufferable\", and by 1960 she felt that he was a \"detestable, bombastic, tiresome, ego-centric little creep\". Despite this, Poirot remained an exceedingly popular character with the general public. Christie later stated that she refused to kill him off, claiming that it was her duty to produce what the public liked.\nAppearance and proclivities.\nCaptain Arthur Hastings's first description of Poirot:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was hardly more than five feet four inches but carried himself with great dignity. His head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. Even if everything on his face was covered, the tips of moustache and the pink-tipped nose would be visible.\nThe neatness of his attire was almost incredible; I believe a speck of dust would have caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police.\nAgatha Christie's initial description of Poirot in \"The Murder on the Orient Express\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By the step leading up into the sleeping-car stood a young French lieutenant, resplendent in uniform, conversing with a small man [Hercule Poirot] muffled up to the ears of whom nothing was visible but a pink-tipped nose and the two points of an upward-curled moustache.\nIn the later books, his limp is not mentioned, suggesting it may have been a temporary wartime injury. (In \"\", Poirot admits he was wounded when he first came to England.) Poirot has green eyes that are repeatedly described as shining \"like a cat's\" when he is struck by a clever idea, and dark hair, which he dyes later in life. In \"Curtain\", he admits to Hastings that he wears a wig and a false moustache. However, in many of his screen incarnations, he is bald or balding.\nFrequent mention is made of his patent leather shoes, damage to which is frequently a source of misery for him, but comical for the reader. Poirot's appearance, regarded as fastidious during his early career, later falls hopelessly out of fashion.\nAmong Poirot's most significant personal attributes is the sensitivity of his stomach:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The plane dropped slightly. \"Mon estomac,\" thought Hercule Poirot, and closed his eyes determinedly.\nHe suffers from sea sickness, and, in \"Death in the Clouds\", he states that his air sickness prevents him from being more alert at the time of the murder. Later in his life, we are told:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Always a man who had taken his stomach seriously, he was reaping his reward in old age. Eating was not only a physical pleasure, it was also an intellectual research.\nPoirot is extremely punctual and carries a pocket watch almost to the end of his career. He is also particular about his personal finances, preferring to keep a bank balance of 444 pounds, 4 shillings, and 4 pence. Actor David Suchet, who portrayed Poirot on television, said \"there's no question he's obsessive-compulsive\". Film portrayer Kenneth Branagh said that he \"enjoyed finding the sort of obsessive-compulsive\" in Poirot.\nAs mentioned in \"Curtain\" and \"The Clocks\", he is fond of classical music, particularly Mozart and Bach.\nMethods.\nIn \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\", Poirot operates as a fairly conventional, clue-based and logical detective; reflected in his vocabulary by two common phrases: his use of \"the little grey cells\" and \"order and method\". Hastings is irritated by the fact that Poirot sometimes conceals important details of his plans, as in \"The Big Four\". In this novel, Hastings is kept in the dark throughout the climax. This aspect of Poirot is less evident in the later novels, partly because there is rarely a narrator to mislead.\nIn \"Murder on the Links,\" still largely dependent on clues himself, Poirot mocks a rival \"bloodhound\" detective who focuses on the traditional trail of clues established in detective fiction (e.g., Sherlock Holmes depending on footprints, fingerprints, and cigar ash). From this point on, Poirot establishes his psychological bona fides. Rather than painstakingly examining crime scenes, he enquires into the nature of the victim or the psychology of the murderer. He predicates his actions in the later novels on his underlying assumption that particular crimes are committed by particular types of people.\nPoirot focuses on getting people to talk. In the early novels, he casts himself in the role of \"Papa Poirot\", a benign confessor, especially to young women. In later works, Christie made a point of having Poirot supply false or misleading information about himself or his background to assist him in obtaining information. In \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\", Poirot speaks of a non-existent mentally disabled nephew to uncover information about homes for the mentally unfit. In \"Dumb Witness\", Poirot invents an elderly invalid mother as a pretence to investigate local nurses. In \"The Big Four\", Poirot pretends to have (and poses as) an identical twin brother named Achille: however, this brother was mentioned again in \"The Labours of Hercules\".\n\"If I remember rightly \u2013 though my memory isn't what it was \u2013 you also had a brother called Achille, did you not?\" Poirot's mind raced back over the details of Achille Poirot's career. Had all that really happened? \"Only for a short space of time,\" he replied.\nPoirot is also willing to appear more foreign or vain in an effort to make people underestimate him. He admits as much:\nIt is true that I can speak the exact, the idiomatic English. But, my friend, to speak the broken English is an enormous asset. It leads people to despise you. They say \u2013 a foreigner \u2013 he can't even speak English properly. ... Also I boast! An Englishman he says often, \"A fellow who thinks as much of himself as that cannot be worth much.\" ... And so, you see, I put people off their guard.\nHe also has a tendency to refer to himself in the third person.\nIn later novels, Christie often uses the word \"mountebank\" when characters describe Poirot, showing that he has successfully passed himself off as a charlatan or fraud.\nPoirot's investigating techniques assist him solving cases; \"For in the long run, either through a lie, or through truth, people were bound to give themselves away...\" At the end, Poirot usually reveals his description of the sequence of events and his deductions to a room of suspects, often leading to the culprit's apprehension.\nLife.\nOrigins.\nChristie was purposely vague about Poirot's origins, as he is thought to be an elderly man even in the early novels. In \"An Autobiography,\" she admitted that she already imagined him to be an old man in 1920. At the time, however, she did not know that she would write works featuring him for decades to come.\nA brief passage in \"The Big Four\" provides original information about Poirot's birth or at least childhood in or near the town of Spa, Belgium: \"But we did not go into Spa itself. We left the main road and wound into the leafy fastnesses of the hills, till we reached a little hamlet and an isolated white villa high on the hillside.\" Christie strongly implies that this \"quiet retreat in the Ardennes\" near Spa is the location of the Poirot family home.\nAn alternative tradition holds that Poirot was born in the village of Ellezelles (province of Hainaut, Belgium). A few memorials dedicated to Hercule Poirot can be seen in the centre of this village. There appears to be no reference to this in Christie's writings, but the town of Ellezelles cherishes a copy of Poirot's birth certificate in a local memorial 'attesting' Poirot's birth, naming his father and mother as Jules-Louis Poirot and Godelieve Poirot.\nChristie wrote that Poirot is a Catholic by birth, but not much is described about his later religious convictions, except sporadic references to his \"going to church\". Christie provides little information regarding Poirot's childhood, only mentioning in \"Three Act Tragedy\" that he comes from a large family with little wealth, and has at least one younger sister. Apart from French and English, Poirot is also fluent in German.\nPoliceman.\nGustave ... was not a policeman. I have dealt with policemen all my life and I \"know\". He could pass as a detective to an outsider but not to a man who was a policeman himself.\n \u2014 Hercule Poirot \nHercule Poirot was active in the Brussels police force by 1893. Very little mention is made about this part of his life, but in \"The Nemean Lion\" (1939) Poirot refers to a Belgian case of his in which \"a wealthy soap manufacturer ... poisoned his wife in order to be free to marry his secretary\". As Poirot was often misleading about his past to gain information, the truthfulness of that statement is unknown; it does, however, scare off a would-be wife-killer.\nIn the short story \"The Chocolate Box\" (1923), Poirot reveals to Captain Arthur Hastings an account of what he considers to be his only failure. Poirot admits that he has failed to solve a crime \"innumerable\" times:\nI have been called in too late. Very often another, working towards the same goal, has arrived there first. Twice I have been struck down with illness just as I was on the point of success.\nNevertheless, he regards the 1893 case in \"The Chocolate Box\", as his only failure through his fault only. Again, Poirot is not reliable as a narrator of his personal history and there is no evidence that Christie sketched it out in any depth. During his police career, Poirot shot a man who was firing from a roof into the public below. In \"Lord Edgware Dies\", Poirot reveals that he learned to read writing upside down during his police career. Around that time he met Xavier Bouc, director of the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits.\nInspector Japp offers some insight into Poirot's career with the Belgian police when introducing him to a colleague:\nYou've heard me speak of Mr Poirot? It was in 1904 he and I worked together \u2013 the Abercrombie forgery case \u2013 you remember he was run down in Brussels. Ah, those were the days Moosier. Then, do you remember \"Baron\" Altara? There was a pretty rogue for you! He eluded the clutches of half the police in Europe. But we nailed him in Antwerp \u2013 thanks to Mr. Poirot here.\nIn \"The Double Clue,\" Poirot mentions that he was Chief of Police of Brussels, until \"the Great War\" (World War I) forced him to leave for England.\nPrivate detective.\nI had called in at my friend Poirot's rooms to find him sadly overworked. So much had he become the rage that every rich woman who had mislaid a bracelet or lost a pet kitten rushed to secure the services of the great Hercule Poirot. \nDuring World War I, Poirot left Belgium for England as a refugee, although he returned a few times. On 16 July 1916 he again met his lifelong friend, Captain Arthur Hastings, and solved the first of his cases to be published, \"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\". It is clear that Hastings and Poirot are already friends when they meet in Chapter 2 of the novel, as Hastings tells Cynthia that he has not seen him for \"some years\" (\"Agatha Christie's Poirot\" has Hastings reveal that they met on a shooting case where Hastings was a suspect). Particulars such as the date of 1916 for the case and that Hastings had met Poirot in Belgium, are given in \"Curtain: Poirot's Last Case\", Chapter 1. After that case, Poirot apparently came to the attention of the British secret service and undertook cases for the British government, including foiling the attempted abduction of the Prime Minister. Readers were told that the British authorities had learned of Poirot's keen investigative ability from certain members of Belgium's royal family.\nAfter the war, Poirot became a private detective and began undertaking civilian cases. He moved into what became both his home and work address, Flat 203 at 56B Whitehaven Mansions. Hastings first visits the flat when he returns to England in June 1935 from Argentina in \"The A.B.C. Murders\", Chapter 1. The TV programmes place this in Florin Court, Charterhouse Square, in the wrong part of London. According to Hastings, it was chosen by Poirot \"entirely on account of its strict geometrical appearance and proportion\" and described as the \"newest type of service flat\". (The Florin Court building was actually built in 1936, decades after Poirot fictionally moved in.) His first case in this period was \"The Affair at the Victory Ball\", which allowed Poirot to enter high society and begin his career as a private detective.\nBetween the world wars, Poirot travelled all over Europe and the Middle East investigating crimes and solving murders. Most of his cases occurred during this time and he was at the height of his powers at this point in his life. In \"The Murder on the Links\", the Belgian pits his grey cells against a French murderer. In the Middle East, he solved the cases \"Death on the Nile\" and \"Murder in Mesopotamia\" with ease and even survived \"An Appointment with Death\". As he passed through Eastern Europe on his return trip, he solved \"The Murder on the Orient Express\". However, he did not travel to Africa or Asia, probably to avoid seasickness.\nIt is this villainous sea that troubles me! The \"mal de mer\" \u2013 it is horrible suffering!\nIt was during this time he met the Countess Vera Rossakoff, a glamorous jewel thief. The history of the countess is, like Poirot's, steeped in mystery. She claims to have been a member of the Russian aristocracy before the Russian Revolution and suffered greatly as a result, but how much of that story is true is an open question. Even Poirot acknowledges that Rossakoff offered wildly varying accounts of her early life. Poirot later became smitten with the woman and allowed her to escape justice.\nIt is the misfortune of small, precise men always to hanker after large and flamboyant women. Poirot had never been able to rid himself of the fatal fascination that the countess held for him.\nAlthough letting the countess escape was morally questionable, it was not uncommon. In \"The Nemean Lion\", Poirot sided with the criminal, Miss Amy Carnaby, allowing her to evade prosecution by blackmailing his client Sir Joseph Hoggins, who, Poirot discovered, had plans to commit murder. Poirot even sent Miss Carnaby two hundred pounds as a final payoff prior to the conclusion of her dog kidnapping campaign. In \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\", Poirot allowed the murderer to escape justice through suicide and then withheld the truth to spare the feelings of the murderer's relatives. In \"The Augean Stables\", he helped the government to cover up vast corruption. In \"Murder on the Orient Express\", Poirot allowed the murderers to go free after discovering that twelve different people participated in the murder, each one stabbing the victim in a darkened carriage after drugging him into unconsciousness so that there was no way for anyone to definitively determine which of them actually delivered the killing blow. The victim had committed a disgusting crime which led to the deaths of at least five people, and there was no question of his guilt, but he had been acquitted in America in a miscarriage of justice. Considering it poetic justice that twelve jurors had acquitted him and twelve people had stabbed him, Poirot produced an alternative sequence of events to explain the death involving an unknown additional passenger on the train, with the medical examiner agreeing to doctor his own report to support this theory.\nAfter his cases in the Middle East, Poirot returned to Britain. Apart from some of the so-called Labours of Hercules (see next section) he very rarely went abroad during his later career. He moved into Styles Court towards the end of his life.\nWhile Poirot was usually paid handsomely by clients, he was also known to take on cases that piqued his curiosity, although they did not pay well.\nPoirot shows a love of steam trains, which Christie contrasts with Hastings' love of autos: this is shown in \"The Plymouth Express\", \"The Mystery of the Blue Train\", \"Murder on the Orient Express\", and \"The ABC Murders\" (in the TV series, steam trains are seen in nearly all of the episodes).\nRetirement.\nThat's the way of it. Just a case or two, just one case more \u2013 the Prima Donna's farewell performance won't be in it with yours, Poirot.\nConfusion surrounds Poirot's retirement. Most of the cases covered by Poirot's private detective agency take place before his retirement to attempt to grow larger marrows, at which time he solves \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\". It has been said that the twelve cases related in \"The Labours of Hercules\" (1947) must refer to a different retirement, but the fact that Poirot specifically says that he intends to grow marrows indicates that these stories also take place before \"Roger Ackroyd\", and presumably Poirot closed his agency once he had completed them. There is specific mention in \"The Capture of Cerberus\" of the twenty-year gap between Poirot's previous meeting with Countess Rossakoff and this one. If the \"Labours\" precede the events in \"Roger Ackroyd\", then the Ackroyd case must have taken place around twenty years \"later\" than it was published, and so must any of the cases that refer to it. One alternative would be that having failed to grow marrows once, Poirot is determined to have another go, but this is specifically denied by Poirot himself. Also, in \"The Erymanthian Boar\", a character is said to have been turned out of Austria by the Nazis, implying that the events of \"The Labours of Hercules\" took place after 1937. Another alternative would be to suggest that the Preface to the \"Labours\" takes place at one date but that the labours are completed over a matter of twenty years. None of the explanations is especially attractive.\nIn terms of a rudimentary chronology, Poirot speaks of retiring to grow marrows in Chapter 18 of \"The Big Four\" (1927) which places that novel out of published order before \"Roger Ackroyd\". He declines to solve a case for the Home Secretary because he is retired in Chapter One of \"Peril at End House\" (1932). He has certainly retired at the time of \"Three Act Tragedy\" (1935) but he does not enjoy his retirement and repeatedly takes cases thereafter when his curiosity is engaged. He continues to employ his secretary, Miss Lemon, at the time of the cases retold in \"Hickory Dickory Dock\" and \"Dead Man's Folly\", which take place in the mid-1950s. It is, therefore, better to assume that Christie provided no authoritative chronology for Poirot's retirement but assumed that he could either be an active detective, a consulting detective, or a retired detective as the needs of the immediate case required.\nOne consistent element about Poirot's retirement is that his fame declines during it so that in the later novels he is often disappointed when characters (especially younger characters) recognise neither him nor his name:\n\"I should, perhaps, Madame, tell you a little more about myself. I am \"Hercule Poirot\".\"\nThe revelation left Mrs Summerhayes unmoved.\n\"What a lovely name,\" she said kindly. \"Greek, isn't it?\"\nPost\u2013World War II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He, I knew, was not likely to be far from his headquarters. The time when cases had drawn him from one end of England to the other was past.\nPoirot is less active during the cases that take place at the end of his career. Beginning with \"Three Act Tragedy\" (1934), Christie had perfected during the inter-war years a subgenre of Poirot novel in which the detective himself spent much of the first third of the novel on the periphery of events. In novels such as \"Taken at the Flood\", \"After the Funeral\", and \"Hickory Dickory Dock\", he is even less in evidence, frequently passing the duties of main interviewing detective to a subsidiary character. In \"Cat Among the Pigeons\", Poirot's entrance is so late as to be almost an afterthought. Whether this was a reflection of his age or of Christie's distaste for him, is impossible to assess. \"Crooked House\" (1949) and \"Ordeal by Innocence\" (1957), which could easily have been Poirot novels, represent a logical endpoint of the general diminution of his presence in such works.\nTowards the end of his career, it becomes clear that Poirot's retirement is no longer a convenient fiction. He assumes a genuinely inactive lifestyle during which he concerns himself with studying famous unsolved cases of the past and reading detective novels. He even writes a book about mystery fiction in which he deals sternly with Edgar Allan Poe and Wilkie Collins. In the absence of a more appropriate puzzle, he solves such inconsequential domestic riddles as the presence of three pieces of orange peel in his umbrella stand. \nPoirot (and, it is reasonable to suppose, his creator) becomes increasingly bemused by the vulgarism of the up-and-coming generation's young people. In \"Hickory Dickory Dock\", he investigates the strange goings-on in a student hostel, while in \"Third Girl\" (1966) he is forced into contact with the smart set of Chelsea youths. In the growing drug and pop culture of the sixties, he proves himself once again but has become heavily reliant on other investigators (especially the private investigator, Mr. Goby) who provide him with the clues that he can no longer gather for himself.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"You're too old\". Nobody told me you were so old. I really don't want to be rude but \u2013 there it is. \"You're too old\". I'm really very sorry.\nNotably, during this time his physical characteristics also change dramatically, and by the time Arthur Hastings meets Poirot again in \"Curtain\", he looks very different from his previous appearances, having become thin with age and with obviously dyed hair.\nDeath.\nOn the ITV television series, Poirot died in October 1949 from complications of a heart condition at the end of \"Curtain: Poirot's Last Case\". This took place at Styles Court, the scene of his first English case in 1916. In Christie's novels, he lived into the early 1970s, perhaps even until 1975 when \"Curtain\" was published. In both the novel and the television adaptation, he had moved his amyl nitrite pills out of his own reach, possibly because of guilt. He thereby became the murderer in \"Curtain\", although it was for the benefit of others. Poirot himself noted that he wanted to kill his victim shortly before his own death so that he could avoid succumbing to the arrogance of the murderer, concerned that he might come to view himself as entitled to kill those whom he deemed necessary to eliminate.\nThe \"murderer\" that he was hunting had never actually killed anyone, but he had manipulated others to kill for him, subtly and psychologically manipulating the moments where others desire to commit murder so that they carry out the crime when they might otherwise dismiss their thoughts as nothing more than a momentary passion. Poirot thus was forced to kill the man himself, as otherwise he would have continued his actions and never been officially convicted, as he did not legally do anything wrong. It is revealed at the end of \"Curtain\" that he fakes his need for a wheelchair to fool people into believing that he is suffering from arthritis, to give the impression that he is more infirm than he is. His last recorded words are \"Cher ami!\", spoken to Hastings as the Captain left his room. (The TV adaptation adds that as Poirot is dying alone, he whispers out his final prayer to God in these words: \"Forgive me... forgive...\") Poirot was buried at Styles, and his funeral was arranged by his best friend Hastings and Hastings' daughter Judith. Hastings reasoned, \"Here was the spot where he had lived when he first came to this country. He was to lie here at the last.\"\nPoirot's actual death and funeral occurred in \"Curtain\", years after his retirement from the active investigation, but it was not the first time that Hastings attended the funeral of his best friend. In \"The Big Four\" (1927), Poirot feigned his death and subsequent funeral to launch a surprise attack on the Big Four.\nRecurring characters.\nCaptain Arthur Hastings.\nHastings, a former British Army officer, meets Poirot during Poirot's years as a police officer in Belgium and almost immediately after they both arrive in England. He becomes Poirot's lifelong friend and appears in many cases. Poirot regards Hastings as a poor private detective, not particularly intelligent, yet helpful in his way of being fooled by the criminal or seeing things the way the average man would see them and for his tendency to unknowingly \"stumble\" onto the truth. Hastings marries and has four children \u2013 two sons and two daughters. As a loyal, albeit somewhat na\u00efve companion, Hastings is to Poirot what Watson is to Sherlock Holmes.\nHastings is capable of great bravery and courage, facing death unflinchingly when confronted by \"The Big Four\" and displaying unwavering loyalty towards Poirot. However, when forced to choose between Poirot and his wife in that novel, he initially chooses to betray Poirot to protect his wife. Later, though, he tells Poirot to draw back and escape the trap.\nThe two are an airtight team until Hastings meets and marries Dulcie Duveen, a beautiful music hall performer half his age, after investigating the \"Murder on the Links\". They later emigrated to Argentina, leaving Poirot behind as a \"very unhappy old man\". However, Poirot and Hastings reunite during the novels \"The Big Four\", \"Peril at End House\", \"The ABC Murders\", \"Lord Edgware Dies\", and \"Dumb Witness,\" when Hastings arrives in England for business, with Poirot noting in \"ABC Murders\" that he enjoys having Hastings over because he feels that he always has his most interesting cases with Hastings. The two collaborate for the final time in \"Curtain: Poirot's Last Case\" when the seemingly-crippled Poirot asks Hastings to assist him in his final case. When the killer they are tracking nearly manipulates Hastings into committing murder, Poirot describes this in his final farewell letter to Hastings as the catalyst that prompted him to eliminate the man himself, as Poirot \"knew\" that his friend was not a murderer and refused to let a man capable of manipulating Hastings in such a manner go on.\nMrs Ariadne Oliver.\nDetective novelist Ariadne Oliver is Agatha Christie's humorous self-caricature. Like Christie, she is not overly fond of the detective whom she is most famous for creating\u2013in Ariadne's case, Finnish sleuth Sven Hjerson. We never learn anything about her husband, but we do know that she hates alcohol and public appearances and has a great fondness for apples until she is put off them by the events of \"Hallowe'en Party\". She also has a habit of constantly changing her hairstyle, and in every appearance by her much is made of her clothes and hats. Her maid Maria prevents the public adoration from becoming too much of a burden on her employer but does nothing to prevent her from becoming too much of a burden on others.\nShe has authored more than 56 novels and greatly dislikes people modifying her characters. She is the only one in Poirot's universe to have noted that \"It's not natural for five or six people to be on the spot when B is murdered and all have a motive for killing B.\" She first met Poirot in the story \"Cards on the Table\" and has bothered him ever since.\nMiss Felicity Lemon.\nPoirot's secretary, Miss Felicity Lemon, has few human weaknesses. The only mistakes she makes within the series are a typing error during the events of \"Hickory Dickory Dock\" and the mis-mailing of an electricity bill, although she was worried about strange events surrounding her sister who worked at a student hostel at the time. Poirot described her as being \"Unbelievably ugly and incredibly efficient. Anything that she mentioned as worth consideration usually was worth consideration.\" She is an expert on nearly everything and plans to create the perfect filing system. She also worked for the government statistician-turned-philanthropist Parker Pyne. Whether this was during one of Poirot's numerous retirements or before she entered his employment is unknown. In \"The Agatha Christie Hour\", she was portrayed by Angela Easterling, while in \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\" she was portrayed by Pauline Moran (where she was shown to be efficient, prim and modest, but not remotely \"unbelievably ugly\".) On a number of occasions, she joins Poirot in his inquiries or seeks out answers alone at his request.\nChief Inspector James Harold Japp.\nJapp is a Scotland Yard Inspector and appears in many of the stories trying to solve cases that Poirot is working on. Japp is outgoing, loud, and sometimes inconsiderate by nature, and his relationship with the refined Belgian is one of the stranger aspects of Poirot's world. He first met Poirot in Belgium in 1904, during the Abercrombie Forgery. Later that year they joined forces again to hunt down a criminal known as Baron Altara. They also meet in England where Poirot often helps Japp and lets him take credit in return for special favours. These favours usually entail Poirot being supplied with other interesting cases. In \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\", Japp was portrayed by Philip Jackson. In the film, \"Thirteen at Dinner\" (1985), adapted from \"Lord Edgware Dies\", the role of Japp was taken by the actor David Suchet, who would later star as Poirot in the ITV adaptations.\nMajor novels.\nThe Poirot books take readers through the whole of his life in England, from the first book (\"The Mysterious Affair at Styles\"), where he is a refugee staying at Styles, to the last Poirot book (\"Curtain\"), where he visits Styles before his death. In between, Poirot solves cases outside England as well, including his most famous case, \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1934).\nHercule Poirot became famous in 1926 with the publication of \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\", whose surprising solution proved controversial. The novel is still among the most famous of all detective novels: Edmund Wilson alludes to it in the title of his well-known attack on detective fiction, \"Who Cares Who Killed Roger Ackroyd?\" Aside from \"Roger Ackroyd\", the most critically acclaimed Poirot novels appeared from 1932 to 1942, including \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1934); \"The ABC Murders\" (1935)\"; Cards on the Table\" (1936); and \"Death on the Nile\" (1937), a tale of multiple murders upon a Nile steamer. \"Death on the Nile\" was judged by the famed detective novelist John Dickson Carr to be among the ten greatest mystery novels of all time.\nThe 1942 novel \"Five Little Pigs\" (a.k.a. \"Murder in Retrospect\"), in which Poirot investigates a murder committed sixteen years before by analysing various accounts of the tragedy, has been called \"the best Christie of all\" by critic and mystery novelist Robert Barnard.\nIn 2014, the Poirot canon was added to by Sophie Hannah, the first author to be commissioned by the Christie estate to write an original story. The novel was called \"The Monogram Murders\", and was set in the late 1920s, placing it chronologically between \"The Mystery of the Blue Train\" and \"Peril at End House\". A second Hannah-penned Poirot came out in 2016, called \"Closed Casket\", and a third, \"The Mystery of Three Quarters\", in 2018.\nPortrayals.\nStage.\nThe first actor to portray Poirot was Charles Laughton. He appeared on the West End in 1928 in the play \"Alibi\" which had been adapted by Michael Morton from the novel \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\". \nIn 1932, the play was performed as \"The Fatal Alibi\" on Broadway. Another Poirot play, \"Black Coffee\" opened in London at the Embassy Theatre on 8 December 1930 and starred Francis L. Sullivan as Poirot. Another production of \"Black Coffee\" ran in Dublin, Ireland from 23 to 28 June 1931, starring Robert Powell. American playwright Ken Ludwig adapted \"Murder on the Orient Express\" into a play, which premiered at the McCarter Theatre in Princeton, New Jersey on 14 March 2017. It starred Allan Corduner in the role of Hercule Poirot.\nFilm.\nAustin Trevor.\nAustin Trevor debuted the role of Poirot on screen in the 1931 British film \"Alibi\". The film was based on the stage play. Trevor reprised the role of Poirot twice, in \"Black Coffee\" and \"Lord Edgware Dies\". Trevor said once that he was probably cast as Poirot simply because he could do a French accent. Notably, Trevor's Poirot did not have a moustache. Leslie S. Hiscott directed the first two films, and Henry Edwards took over for the third.\nTony Randall.\nTony Randall portrayed Poirot in \"The Alphabet Murders\", a 1965 film also known as \"The ABC Murders\". This was more a satire of Poirot than a straightforward adaptation and was greatly changed from the original. Much of the story, set in modern times, was played for comedy, with Poirot investigating the murders while evading the attempts by Hastings (Robert Morley) and the police to get him out of England and back to Belgium.\nAlbert Finney.\nAlbert Finney played Poirot in 1974 in the cinematic version of \"Murder on the Orient Express\". As of now, Finney is the only actor to receive an Academy Award nomination for playing Poirot, though he did not win.\nPeter Ustinov.\nPeter Ustinov played Poirot six times, starting with \"Death on the Nile\" (1978). He reprised the role in \"Evil Under the Sun\" (1982) and \"Appointment with Death\" (1988).\nChristie's daughter Rosalind Hicks observed Ustinov during a rehearsal and said, \"That's not Poirot! He isn't at all like that!\" Ustinov overheard and remarked \"He is \"now!\"\"\nHe appeared again as Poirot in three television films: \"Thirteen at Dinner\" (1985), \"Dead Man's Folly\" (1986), and \"Murder in Three Acts\" (1986). Earlier adaptations were set during the time in which the novels were written, but these television films were set in the contemporary era. The first of these was based on \"Lord Edgware Dies\" and was made by Warner Bros. It also starred Faye Dunaway, with David Suchet as Inspector Japp, just before Suchet began to play Poirot. David Suchet considers his performance as Japp to be \"possibly the worst performance of [his] career\".\nKenneth Branagh.\nKenneth Branagh played Poirot in film adaptations of \"Murder on the Orient Express\" in 2017 and \"Death on the Nile\" in 2022, both of which he also directed. He is currently set to return for a third film.\nTelevision.\nDavid Suchet.\nDavid Suchet starred as Poirot in the ITV series \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\" from 1989 until June 2013, when he announced that he was bidding farewell to the role. \"No one could've guessed then that the series would span a quarter-century or that the classically trained Suchet would complete the entire catalogue of whodunits featuring the eccentric Belgian investigator, including 33 novels and dozens of short stories.\" His final appearance in the show was in an adaptation of \"Curtain: Poirot's Last Case\", aired on 13 November 2013.\nThe writers of the \"Binge!\" article of \"Entertainment Weekly\" Issue #1343\u201344 (26 December 2014 \u2013 3 January 2015) picked Suchet as \"Best Poirot\" in the \"Hercule Poirot &amp; Miss Marple\" timeline.\nThe episodes were shot in various locations in the UK and abroad (for example \"Triangle at Rhodes\" and \"Problem at Sea\"), whilst other scenes were shot at Twickenham Studios.\nAnime.\nIn 2004, NHK (Japanese public TV network) produced a 39-episode anime series titled \"Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple\", as well as a manga series under the same title released in 2005. The series, adapting several of the best-known Poirot and Marple stories, ran from 4 July 2004 through 15 May 2005, and in repeated reruns on NHK and other networks in Japan. Poirot was voiced by K\u014dtar\u014d Satomi and Miss Marple was voiced by Kaoru Yachigusa.\nRadio.\nFrom 1985 to 2007, BBC Radio 4 produced a series of twenty-seven adaptations of Poirot novels and short stories, adapted by Michael Bakewell and directed by Enyd Williams. Twenty five starred John Moffatt as Poirot; Maurice Denham and Peter Sallis played Poirot on BBC Radio 4 in the first two adaptations, \"The Mystery of the Blue Train\" and in \"Hercule Poirot's Christmas\" respectively.\nIn 1939, Orson Welles and the Mercury Players dramatised \"Roger Ackroyd\" on CBS's \"Campbell Playhouse\".\nOn 6 October 1942, the Mutual radio series \"Murder Clinic\" broadcast \"The Tragedy at Marsden Manor\" starring Maurice Tarplin as Poirot.\nA 1945 radio series of at least 13 original half-hour episodes (none of which apparently adapt any Christie stories) transferred Poirot from London to New York and starred character actor Harold Huber, perhaps better known for his appearances as a police officer in various Charlie Chan films. On 22 February 1945, \"speaking from London, Agatha Christie introduced the initial broadcast of the Poirot series via shortwave\".\nAn adaptation of \"Murder in the Mews\" was broadcast on the BBC Light Programme in March 1955 starring Richard Bebb as Poirot; this program was thought lost, but was discovered in the BBC archives in 2015.\nOther audio.\nIn 2017, Audible released an original audio adaptation of \"Murder on the Orient Express\" starring Tom Conti as Poirot. The cast included Jane Asher as Mrs. Hubbard, Jay Benedict as Monsieur Bouc, Ruta Gedmintas as Countess Andrenyi, Sophie Okonedo as Mary Debenham, Eddie Marsan as Ratchett, Walles Hamonde as Hector MacQueen, Paterson Joseph as Colonel Arbuthnot, Rula Lenska as Princess Dragimiroff and Art Malik as the Narrator. According to the Publisher's Summary on Audible.com, \"sound effects [were] recorded on the Orient Express itself.\"\nIn 2021, L.A. Theatre Works produced an adaptation of \"The Murder on the Links\", dramatised by Kate McAll. Alfred Molina starred as Poirot, with Simon Helberg as Hastings.\nVideo games.\nThe video game \"Agatha Christie - Hercule Poirot: The First Cases\" has Poirot voice acted by Will De Renzy-Martin.\nParodies and references.\nParodies of Hercule Poirot have appeared in a number of movies, including \"Revenge of the Pink Panther\", where Poirot makes a cameo appearance in a mental asylum, portrayed by Andrew Sachs and claiming to be \"the greatest detective in all of France, the greatest in all the world\"; Neil Simon's \"Murder by Death\", where \"Milo Perrier\" is played by American actor James Coco; the 1977 film \"The Strange Case of the End of Civilization as We Know It\" (1977); the film \"Spice World\", where Hugh Laurie plays Poirot; and in \"\", Poirot appears as a young boy on the train transporting Holmes and Watson. Holmes helps the boy in opening a puzzle-box, with Watson giving the boy advice about using his \"little grey cells\".\nIn the book series \"Geronimo Stilton\", the character Hercule Poirat is inspired by Hercule Poirot.\nThe Belgian brewery Brasserie Ellezelloise makes a stout called \"Hercule\" with a moustachioed caricature of Hercule Poirot on the label.\nIn season 2, episode 4 of TVFPlay's Indian web series \"Permanent Roommates\", one of the characters refers to Hercule Poirot as her inspiration while she attempts to solve the mystery of the cheating spouse. Throughout the episode, she is mocked as Hercule Poirot and Agatha Christie by the suspects. TVFPlay also telecasted a spoof of Indian TV suspense drama \"CID\" as \"Qissa Missing Dimaag Ka: C.I.D Qtiyapa\". In the first episode, when Ujjwal is shown to browse for the best detectives of the world, David Suchet appears as Poirot in his search.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1002", "revid": "1224312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1002", "title": "Miss Marple", "text": "Fictional character in Agatha Christie's crime novels\nMiss Jane Marple is a fictional character in Agatha Christie's crime novels and short stories. Miss Marple lives in the village of St. Mary Mead and acts as an amateur consulting detective. Often characterized as an elderly spinster, she is one of Christie's best-known characters and has been portrayed numerous times on screen. Her first appearance was in a short story published in \"The Royal Magazine\" in December 1927, \"The Tuesday Night Club\", which later became the first chapter of \"The Thirteen Problems\" (1932). Her first appearance in a full-length novel was in \"The Murder at the Vicarage\" in 1930, and her last appearance was in \"Sleeping Murder\" in 1976.\nOrigins.\nThe character of Miss Marple is based on friends of Christie's step grandmother/aunt (Margaret Miller, n\u00e9e West). Christie attributed the inspiration for the character to multiple sources, stating that Miss Marple was \"the sort of old lady who would have been rather like some of my step grandmother's Ealing cronies \u2013 old ladies whom I have met in so many villages where I have gone to stay as a girl\". Christie also used material from her fictional creation, spinster Caroline Sheppard, who appeared in \"The Murder of Roger Ackroyd\". When Michael Morton adapted the novel for the stage, he replaced the character of Caroline with a young girl. This change saddened Christie and she determined to give old maids a voice: Miss Marple was born.\nChristie is popularly believed to have taken the name from Marple railway station, through which she passed, though a letter she wrote to a fan appears to prove that the name was inspired by a visit to a sale at Marple Hall in the same town, near her sister Margaret Watts' home at Abney Hall.\nCharacter.\nThe character of Jane Marple in the first Miss Marple book, \"The Murder at the Vicarage\", is quite different from how she appears in later books. This early version of Miss Marple is a gleeful gossip and not an especially nice woman. The citizens of St. Mary Mead like her but are often tired of her nosy nature and the fact she seems to expect the worst of everyone. In later books, she becomes a kinder and more modern person.\nMiss Marple solves difficult crimes thanks to her shrewd intelligence, and St. Mary Mead, over her lifetime, has given her seemingly infinite examples of the negative side of human nature. Crimes always remind her of a previous incident, although acquaintances may be bored by analogies that often lead her to a deeper realisation about the true nature of a crime. She also has a remarkable ability to latch onto a casual comment and connect it to the case at hand. In several stories, she is able to rely on her acquaintance with Sir Henry Clithering, a retired commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, for official information when required.\nMiss Marple never married and has no close living relatives. Her nephew, the \"well-known author\" Raymond West who appears in some stories, including \"The Thirteen Problems\", \"Sleeping Murder\", and \"Ingots of Gold\" (which also feature his wife, Joyce Lempri\u00e8re). Raymond overestimates himself and underestimates his aunt's mental acuity. Miss Marple employs young women (including Clara, Emily, Alice, Esther, Gwenda, and Amy) from a nearby orphanage, whom she trains for service as general housemaids after the retirement of her long-time maid-housekeeper, faithful Florence. She was briefly looked after by her irritating companion, Miss Knight. In her later years, companion Cherry Baker, first introduced in \"The Mirror Crack'd From Side to Side\", lives in.\nMiss Marple has never worked for her living and is of independent means, although she benefits in her old age from the financial support of her nephew Raymond. She is not from the aristocracy or landed gentry, but is quite at home among them; as a gentlewoman, Miss Marple may thus be considered a female version of the gentleman detective, a staple of British detective fiction. She demonstrates a remarkably thorough education, including some art courses that involved the study of human anatomy using human cadavers. In \"They Do It with Mirrors\" (1952), it is revealed that Miss Marple grew up in a cathedral close, and that she studied at an Italian finishing school with American sisters Ruth Van Rydock and Caroline \"Carrie\" Louise Serrocold.\nWhile Miss Marple is described as \"an old lady\" in many of the stories, her age is rarely mentioned and is not consistently presented. In \"At Bertram's Hotel\", published in 1965, it is said she visited the hotel when she was 14 and almost 60 years have passed since then, implying that she is nearly 75 years old; but in \"4:50 from Paddington\", published almost a decade earlier in 1957, she says she will be \"90 next year.\"\nExcluding \"Sleeping Murder\", 41 years passed between the first and last-written novels, and many characters grow and age. An example would be the Vicar's nephew: in \"The Murder at the Vicarage\", the Reverend Mr Clement's nephew Dennis is a teenager; in \"The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side\", it is mentioned that the nephew is now an adult and has a successful career. The effects of ageing are seen on Miss Marple, such as needing a holiday after illness in \"A Caribbean Mystery\", but she is if anything more agile in \"Nemesis\", set only 16 months later.\nMiss Marple's background is described in some detail, albeit in glimpses across the novels and short stories in which she appears. She has a very large family, including a sister, the mother of Raymond, and Mabel Denham, a young woman who was accused of poisoning her husband Geoffrey (\"The Thumb Mark of St. Peter\").\nBibliography.\nAgatha Christie wrote 12 novels and 20 short stories featuring Miss Marple.\nMiss Marple short story collections.\nMiss Marple also appears in \"Greenshaw's Folly\", a short story included as part of the Poirot collection \"The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding\" (1960). Four stories in the \"Three Blind Mice\" collection (1950) feature Miss Marple: \"Strange Jest\", \"Tape-Measure Murder\", \"The Case of the Caretaker\", and \"The Case of the Perfect Maid\".\nThe Autograph edition of \"Miss Marple's Final Cases\" includes the eight in the original plus \"Greenshaw's Folly\".\nStage.\nA stage adaptation of \"Murder at the Vicarage\", by Moie Charles and Barbara Toy, was first seen at Northampton on 17 October 1949; it was directed by Reginald Tate, starred the 35-year-old Barbara Mullen as Miss Marple, and after touring, reached the Playhouse Theatre in London's West End on 14 December. Having run till late March 1950, it then went on tour again.\nIn July 1974, Mullen (by then 60) returned to the role in another national tour of the same play, culminating 12 months later when the show opened at London's Savoy Theatre on 28 July 1975. At the end of March 1976, the Miss Marple role was taken over by Avril Angers, after which the production transferred to the Fortune Theatre on 5 July. The role then passed to Muriel Pavlow in June 1977 and to Gabrielle Hamilton late the following year; the production finally closed in October 1979.\nOn 21 September 1977, while \"Murder at the Vicarage\" was still running at the Fortune, a stage adaptation by Leslie Darbon of \"A Murder Is Announced\" opened at the Vaudeville Theatre, with Dulcie Gray as Miss Marple. The show ran to the end of September 1978 and then toured.\nFilms.\nMargaret Rutherford.\nMargaret Rutherford played Miss Marple in four films directed by George Pollock between 1961 and 1964. These were successful light comedies, but Christie herself was disappointed with them. Nevertheless, Agatha Christie dedicated the novel \"The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side\" to Rutherford.\nRutherford presented the character as a bold and eccentric old lady, different from the prim and birdlike character Christie created in her novels. As penned by Christie, Miss Marple has never worked for a living, but the character as portrayed by Margaret Rutherford briefly works as a cook-housekeeper, a stage actress, a sailor and criminal reformer, and is offered the chance to run a riding establishment-cum-hotel. Her education and genteel background are hinted at when she mentions her awards at marksmanship, fencing, and equestrianism (although these hints are played for comedic value).\n\"Murder, She Said\" (1961) was the first of the four British MGM productions starring Rutherford. This film was based on the 1957 novel \"4:50 from Paddington\" (U.S. title, \"What Mrs. McGillicuddy Saw!\"), and the changes made in the plot were typical of the series. In the film, Mrs. McGillicuddy is cut from the plot. Miss Marple herself sees an apparent murder committed on a train running alongside hers. Actress Joan Hickson, who played Marple in the 1984\u20131992 television adaptations, has a role as a housekeeper in this movie.\n\"Murder at the Gallop\" (1963), based on the 1953 Hercule Poirot novel \"After the Funeral\" (in this film, she is identified as Miss JTV Marple, though there was no indication as to what the extra initials might stand for).\n\"Murder Most Foul\" (1964), based on the 1952 Poirot novel \"Mrs McGinty's Dead\".\n\"Murder Ahoy!\" (1964). The last film is not based on any Christie work but displays a few plot elements from \"They Do It With Mirrors\" (viz., the ship is used as a reform school for wayward boys and one of the teachers uses them as a crime force), and there is a kind of salute to \"The Mousetrap\".\nThe music to all four films was composed and conducted by Ron Goodwin. The same theme is used on all four films with slight variations in each. The score was written within a couple of weeks by Goodwin who was approached by Pollock after Pollock had heard about him from Stanley Black. Black had worked with Pollock on \"Stranger in Town\" in 1957 and had previously hired Goodwin as his orchestrator.\nRutherford, who was 68 years old when the first film was shot in February 1961, insisted that she wear her own clothes during the filming of the movie, as well as having her husband, Stringer Davis, appear alongside her as the character Mr Stringer. The Rutherford films are frequently repeated on television in Germany, and in that country Miss Marple is generally identified with Rutherford's quirky portrayal.\nRutherford also appeared briefly as Miss Marple in the parodic Hercule Poirot adventure \"The Alphabet Murders\" (1965).\nAngela Lansbury.\nIn 1980, Angela Lansbury played Miss Marple in \"The Mirror Crack'd\" (EMI, directed by Guy Hamilton), based on Christie's 1962 novel. The film featured an all-star cast that included Elizabeth Taylor, Rock Hudson, Geraldine Chaplin, Tony Curtis, and Kim Novak. Edward Fox appeared as Inspector Craddock, who did Miss Marple's legwork. Lansbury's Marple was a crisp, intelligent woman who moved stiffly and spoke in clipped tones. Unlike most incarnations of Miss Marple, this one smoked cigarettes. Lansbury was later cast as Jessica Fletcher in \"Murder, She Wrote\", a similar role.\nIta Ever.\nIn 1983, Estonian stage and film actress Ita Ever starred in the Russian language Mosfilm adaptation of Agatha Christie's novel \"A Pocket Full of Rye\" (using the Russian edition's translated title, \"The Secret of the Blackbirds\") as the character of Miss Marple. Ever has also portrayed the character of Miss Marple in the Eesti Televisioon (ETV) series \"Miss Marple Stories\" in 1990, and onstage at the Tallinn City Theatre in a production of \"The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side\" in 2005.\nTelevision.\nAmerican TV was the setting for the first screen portrayal of Miss Marple with Gracie Fields, the British actress and singer, playing her in a 1956 episode of \"Goodyear TV Playhouse\" based on \"A Murder Is Announced\", the 1950 Christie novel.\nIn 1970, the character of Miss Marple was portrayed by Inge Langen in a West German television adaptation of \"The Murder at the Vicarage \" (\"Mord im Pfarrhaus\").\nHelen Hayes.\nAmerican stage and screen actress Helen Hayes portrayed Miss Marple in two American television films near the end of her decades-long acting career, both for CBS: \"A Caribbean Mystery\" (1983) and \"Murder with Mirrors\" (1985). Sue Grafton contributed to the screenplay of the former. Hayes's Marple was benign and chirpy. She had earlier appeared in a television film adaptation of the non-Marple Christie story \"Murder Is Easy\", playing an elderly lady somewhat similar to Miss Marple.\nJoan Hickson.\nFrom 1984 to 1992, the BBC adapted all of the original Miss Marple novels as a series titled \"Miss Marple\". Joan Hickson played the lead role. In the 1940s, she had appeared on stage in an Agatha Christie play, \"Appointment with Death\", which was seen by Christie who wrote in a note to her, \"I hope one day you will play my dear Miss Marple\". She portrayed a maid in the 1937 film, \"Love from a Stranger\", which starred Ann Harding and Basil Rathbone, another Agatha Christie play adaptation. As well as portraying Miss Marple on television, Hickson narrated Miss Marple stories for audio books. In the \"Binge!\" article of \"Entertainment Weekly\" Issue #1343\u20131344 (26 December 2014 \u2013 3 January 2015), the writers picked Hickson as \"Best Marple\" in the \"Hercule Poirot &amp; Miss Marple\" timeline.\nListing of the TV series featuring Joan Hickson:\nGeraldine McEwan (2004\u20132008)/Julia McKenzie (2009\u20132013).\nBeginning in 2004, ITV broadcast a series of adaptations of Agatha Christie's books under the title \"Agatha Christie's Marple\", usually referred to as \"Marple.\" Geraldine McEwan starred in the first three series. Julia McKenzie took over the role in the fourth season.\nThe adaptations change the plots and characters of the original books (e.g. incorporating lesbian affairs, changing the identities of some killers, renaming or removing significant characters, and even using stories from other books in which Miss Marple did not originally feature). In the Geraldine McEwan series it is revealed that when she was young (portrayed by Julie Cox in a flashback), Miss Marple had an affair with a married soldier, Captain Ainsworth, who was killed in action in World War I, in December 1915. It is also said (in \"A Murder Is Announced\") that she served as an ambulance driver during World War I.\nListing of the TV series featuring Geraldine McEwan and Julia McKenzie:\nIn 2015, CBS planned a \"much younger\" version of the character, a granddaughter who takes over a California bookstore.\nIn 2018, Miss Marple was portrayed by Yunjin Kim in the South Korean television series \"Ms. Ma, Nemesis\".\nAnime.\nFrom 2004 to 2005, Japanese TV network NHK produced a 39 episode anime series titled \"Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple\", which features both Miss Marple and Hercule Poirot. Miss Marple's voice is provided by Kaoru Yachigusa. Episodes adapted both short stories and novels.\nThe anime series dramatised the following Miss Marple stories:\nRadio.\nJune Whitfield starred as Miss Marple in Michael Bakewell's adaptations of all twelve novels, broadcast on BBC Radio 4 between 1993 and 2001.\nThree short stories with Whitfield (\"Tape-Measure Murder\", \"The Case of the Perfect Maid\" and \"Sanctuary\") were later broadcast under the collective title \"Miss Marple's Final Cases\" weekly 16 \u2013 30 September 2015.\nOther appearances.\nMarple was highlighted in volume 20 of the \"Case Closed\" manga's edition of \"Gosho Aoyama's Mystery Library\", a section of the graphic novels (usually the last page) where the author introduces a different detective (or occasionally, a villain) from mystery literature, television, or other media.\nIn the 1976 Neil Simon spoof \"Murder by Death\", Miss Marple is parodied as \"Miss Marbles\" by Elsa Lanchester.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1004", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1004", "title": "April", "text": "Fourth month in the Julian and Gregorian calendars\nApril is the fourth month of the year in the Gregorian and Julian calendars. It is the first of four months to have a length of 30 days, and the second of five months to have a length of less than 31 days.\nApril is commonly associated with the season of spring in the Northern Hemisphere, and autumn in the Southern Hemisphere, where it is the seasonal equivalent to October in the Northern Hemisphere and vice versa.\nHistory.\nThe Romans gave this month the Latin name \"Aprilis\" but the derivation of this name is uncertain. The traditional etymology is from the verb \"aperire\", \"to open\", in allusion to its being the season when trees and flowers begin to \"open\", which is supported by comparison with the modern Greek use of \u03ac\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9\u03be\u03b7 (\"\u00e1nixi\") (opening) for spring. Since some of the Roman months were named in honor of divinities, and as April was sacred to the goddess Venus, her Veneralia being held on the first day, it has been suggested that Aprilis was originally her month Aphrilis, from her equivalent Greek goddess name Aphrodite (\"Aphros\"), or from the Etruscan name \"Apru\". Jacob Grimm suggests the name of a hypothetical god or hero, \"Aper\" or \"Aprus\".\nApril was the second month of the earliest Roman calendar, before \"Ianuarius\" and \"Februarius\" were added by King Numa Pompilius about 700\u00a0BC. It became the fourth month of the calendar year (the year when twelve months are displayed in order) during the time of the decemvirs about 450\u00a0BC, when it was 29\u00a0days long. The 30th day was added back during the reform of the calendar undertaken by Julius Caesar in the mid-40s\u00a0BC, which produced the Julian calendar.\nThe Anglo-Saxons called April \"\u0113astre-mona\u00fe\". The Venerable Bede says in \"The Reckoning of Time\" that this month \"\u0113astre\" is the root of the word Easter. He further states that the month was named after a goddess \"Eostre\" whose feast was in that month. It is also attested by Einhard in his work, \"Vita Karoli Magni\".\nSt George's day is the twenty-third of the month; and St Mark's Eve, with its superstition that the ghosts of those who are doomed to die within the year will be seen to pass into the church, falls on the twenty-fourth.\nIn China the symbolic ploughing of the earth by the emperor and princes of the blood took place in their third month, which frequently corresponds to April. In Finnish April is \"huhtikuu\", meaning \"slash-and-burn moon\", when gymnosperms for beat and burn clearing of farmland were felled.\nIn Slovene, the most established traditional name is \"mali traven\", meaning the month when plants start growing. It was first written in 1466 in the \u0160kofja Loka manuscript.\nThe month Aprilis originally had 30\u00a0days; Numa Pompilius made it 29\u00a0days long; finally, Julius Caesar's calendar reform made it 30\u00a0days long again, which was not changed in the calendar revision of Augustus Caesar in 8\u00a0BC. \nIn Ancient Rome, the festival of Cerealia was held for seven days from mid-to-late April, but exact dates are uncertain. Feriae Latinae was also held in April, with the date varying. Other ancient Roman observances include Veneralia (April 1), Megalesia (April 10\u201316), Fordicidia (April 15), Parilia (April 21), Vinalia Urbana (April 23), Robigalia (April 25), and Serapia (April 25). Floralia was held April 27 during the Republican era, or April 28 on the Julian calendar, and lasted until May 3. However, these dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\nThe Lyrids meteor shower appears on April 16 \u2013 April 26 each year, with the peak generally occurring on April 22. The Eta Aquariids meteor shower also appears in April. It is visible from about April 21 to about May 20 each year with peak activity on or around May 6. The Pi Puppids appear on April 23, but only in years around the parent comet's perihelion date. The Virginids also shower at various dates in April.\nThe \"Days of April\" (\"journ\u00e9es d'avril\") is a name assigned in French history to a series of insurrections at Lyons, Paris and elsewhere, against the government of Louis Philippe in 1834, which led to violent repressive measures, and to a famous trial known as the \"proc\u00e8s d'avril\".\nApril symbols.\nApril's birthstone is the diamond.\nApril observances.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status nor general observance.\"\nNon-Gregorian observances.\n\"(All Baha'i, Islamic, and Jewish observances begin at the sundown prior to the date listed, and end at sundown of the date in question unless otherwise noted.)\"\nReferences.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1005", "revid": "43272954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1005", "title": "August", "text": "Eighth month in the Julian and Gregorian calendars\nAugust is the eighth month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars, and the fifth of seven months to have a length of 31 days. Its zodiac sign is Leo and was originally named \"Sextilis\" in Latin because it was the 6th month in the original ten-month Roman calendar under Romulus in 753 BC, with March being the first month of the year. About 700\u00a0BC, it became the eighth month when January and February were added to the year before March by King Numa Pompilius, who also gave it 29 days. Julius Caesar added two days when he created the Julian calendar in |alink=off}}]]|}}, giving it its modern length of 31 days. In 8 BC, it was renamed in honor of Emperor Augustus. According to a Senatus consultum quoted by Macrobius, he chose this month because it was the time of several of his great triumphs, including the conquest of Egypt. Commonly repeated lore has it that August has 31 days because Augustus wanted his month to match the length of Julius Caesar's July, but this is an invention of the 13th century scholar Johannes de Sacrobosco. Sextilis in fact had 31 days before it was renamed, and it was not chosen for its length.\nIn the Southern Hemisphere, August is the seasonal equivalent of February in the Northern Hemisphere. In the Northern Hemisphere, August falls in the season of summer. In the Southern Hemisphere, the month falls during the season of winter. In many European countries, August is the holiday month for most workers. Numerous religious holidays occurred during August in ancient Rome.\nCertain meteor showers take place in August. The Kappa Cygnids take place in August, with the dates varying each year. The Alpha Capricornids meteor shower takes place as early as July 10 and ends at around August 10, and the Southern Delta Aquariids take place from mid-July to mid-August, with the peak usually around July 28\u201329. The Perseids, a major meteor shower, typically takes place between July 17 and August 24, with the days of the peak varying yearly. The star cluster of Messier 30 is best observed around August.\nAmong the aborigines of the Canary Islands, especially among the Guanches of Tenerife, the month of August received in the name of Be\u00f1esmer or Be\u00f1esmen, which was also the harvest festival held this month.\nObservances.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1006", "revid": "414998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1006", "title": "Aaron", "text": "Prophet, high priest, and the brother of Moses in the Abrahamic religions\nAccording to Abrahamic religions, Aaron ( or ) was a prophet, a high priest, and the elder brother of Moses. Information about Aaron comes exclusively from religious texts such as the Hebrew Bible, the New Testament (Luke, Acts, and Hebrews), and the Quran.\nThe Hebrew Bible relates that, unlike Moses, who grew up in the Egyptian royal court, Aaron and his elder sister Miriam remained with their kinsmen in the northeastern region of the Nile Delta. When Moses first confronted the Egyptian king about the enslavement of the Israelites, Aaron served as his brother's spokesman to the Pharaoh (). Part of the Law given to Moses at Sinai granted Aaron the priesthood for himself and his male descendants, and he became the first High Priest of the Israelites. Levitical priests or \"kohanim\" are traditionally believed and halakhically required to be of direct patrilineal descent from Aaron.\nAccording to the Book of Numbers, Aaron died at 123 years of age, on Mount Hor, in the fortieth year after the Israelites had come out of the land of Egypt. Deuteronomy however places these events at Moseroth.\nBiblical narrative.\nAccording to the Book of Exodus, Aaron first functioned as Moses' assistant. Because Moses complained that he could not speak well, God appointed Aaron as Moses' \"prophet\" (). At the command of Moses, he let his rod turn into a snake. Then he stretched out his rod in order to bring on the first three plagues. After that, Moses tended to act and speak for himself.\nDuring the journey in the wilderness, Aaron was not always prominent or active. At the battle with Amalek, he was chosen with Hur to support the hand of Moses that held the \"rod of God\". When the revelation was given to Moses at Mount Sinai, he headed the elders of Israel who accompanied Moses on the way to the summit. While Joshua went with Moses to the top, however, Aaron and Hur remained below to look after the people. From here on in Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers, Joshua appears in the role of Moses' assistant while Aaron functions instead as the first high priest.\nHigh Priest.\nThe books of Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers maintain that Aaron received from God a monopoly over the priesthood for himself and his male descendants. The family of Aaron had the exclusive right and responsibility to make offerings on the altar to Yahweh. The rest of his tribe, the Levites, were given subordinate responsibilities within the sanctuary. Moses anointed and consecrated Aaron and his sons to the priesthood, and arrayed them in the robes of office. He also related to them God's detailed instructions for performing their duties while the rest of the Israelites listened. Aaron and his successors as high priest were given control over the Urim and Thummim by which the will of God could be determined. God commissioned the Aaronide priests to distinguish the holy from the common and the clean from the unclean, and to teach the divine laws (the Torah) to the Israelites. The priests were also commissioned to bless the people. When Aaron completed the altar offerings for the first time and, with Moses, \"blessed the people: and the glory of the LORD appeared unto all the people: And there came a fire out from before the LORD, and consumed upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat [which] when all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces\". In this way, the institution of the Aaronide priesthood was established.\nIn later books of the Hebrew Bible, Aaron and his kin are not mentioned very often except in literature dating to the Babylonian captivity and later. The books of Judges, Samuel and Kings mention priests and Levites, but do not mention the Aaronides in particular. The Book of Ezekiel, which devotes much attention to priestly matters, calls the priestly upper class the Zadokites after one of King David's priests. It does reflect a two-tier priesthood with the Levites in subordinate position. A two-tier hierarchy of Aaronides and Levites appears in Ezra, Nehemiah and Chronicles. As a result, many historians think that Aaronide families did not control the priesthood in pre-exilic Israel. What is clear is that high priests claiming Aaronide descent dominated the Second Temple period. Most scholars think the Torah reached its final form early in this period, which may account for Aaron's prominence in Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers.\nConflicts.\nAaron plays a leading role in several stories of conflicts during Israel's wilderness wanderings. During the prolonged absence of Moses on Mount Sinai, the people provoked Aaron to make a golden calf. This incident nearly caused God to destroy the Israelites. Moses successfully intervened, but then led the loyal Levites in executing many of the culprits; a plague afflicted those who were left. Aaron, however, escaped punishment for his role in the affair, because of the intercession of Moses according to Deuteronomy 9:20. Later retellings of this story almost always excuse Aaron for his role. For example, in rabbinic sources and in the Quran, Aaron was not the idol-maker and upon Moses' return begged his pardon because he felt mortally threatened by the Israelites.\nOn the day of Aaron's consecration, his oldest sons, Nadab and Abihu, were burned up by divine fire because they offered \"strange\" incense. Most interpreters think this story reflects a conflict between priestly families some time in Israel's past. Others argue that the story simply shows what can happen if the priests do not follow God's instructions given through Moses.\nThe Torah generally depicts the siblings, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, as the leaders of Israel after the Exodus, a view also reflected in the biblical Book of Micah. Numbers 12, however, reports that on one occasion, Aaron and Miriam complained about Moses' exclusive claim to be the LORD's prophet. Their presumption was rebuffed by God who affirmed Moses' uniqueness as the one with whom the LORD spoke face to face. Miriam was punished with a skin disease (\"tzaraath\") that turned her skin white. Aaron pleaded with Moses to intercede for her, and Miriam, after seven days' quarantine, was healed. Aaron once again escaped any retribution.\nAccording to Numbers 16\u201317, a Levite named Korah led many in challenging Aaron's exclusive claim to the priesthood. When the rebels were punished by being swallowed up by the earth, Eleazar, the son of Aaron, was commissioned to take charge of the censers of the dead priests. And when a plague broke out among the people who had sympathized with the rebels, Aaron, at the command of Moses, took his censer and stood between the living and the dead until the plague abated (), atoning in the process.\nTo emphasize the validity of the Levites' claim to the offerings and tithes of the Israelites, Moses collected a rod from the leaders of each tribe in Israel and laid the twelve rods overnight in the tent of meeting. The next morning, Aaron's rod was found to have budded and blossomed and produced ripe almonds. The following chapter then details the distinction between Aaron's family and the rest of the Levites: while all the Levites (and only Levites) were devoted to the care of the sanctuary, charge of its interior and the altar was committed to the Aaronites alone.\nDeath.\nAaron, like Moses, was not permitted to enter Canaan with the Israelites when Moses brought water out of a rock to quench the people's thirst. Although they had been commanded to speak to the rock, Moses struck it with the staff twice, which was construed as displaying a lack of deference to the LORD.\nThere are two accounts of the death of Aaron in the Torah. Numbers says that soon after the incident at Meribah, Aaron with his son Eleazar and Moses ascended Mount Hor. There Moses stripped Aaron of his priestly garments and transferred them to Eleazar. Aaron died on the summit of the mountain, and the people mourned him for thirty days. The other account is found in Deuteronomy 10:6, where Aaron died at Moserah and was buried. There is a significant amount of travel between these two points, as the itinerary in Numbers 33:31\u201337 records seven stages between Moseroth (Mosera) and Mount Hor. Aaron died on the 1st of Av and was 123 at the time of his death.\nDescendants.\nAaron married Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon of the tribe of Judah. The sons of Aaron were Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar and Itamar; only the latter two had progeny. A descendant of Aaron is an Aaronite, or Kohen, meaning Priest. Any non-Aaronic Levite\u2014i.e., descended from Levi but not from Aaron\u2014assisted the Levitical priests of the family of Aaron in the care of the tabernacle; later of the temple.\nThe Gospel of Luke records that both Zechariah and Elizabeth and therefore their son John the Baptist were descendants of Aaron.\nIn religious traditions.\nJewish rabbinic literature.\nThe older prophets and prophetical writers beheld in their priests the representatives of a religious form inferior to the prophetic truth; men without the spirit of God and lacking the will-power requisite to resist the multitude in its idolatrous proclivities. Thus Aaron, the first priest, ranks below Moses: he is his mouthpiece, and the executor of the will of God revealed through Moses, although it is pointed out that it is said fifteen times in the Torah that \"the Lord spoke to Moses \"and\" Aaron.\"\nUnder the influence of the priesthood that shaped the destinies of the nation under Persian rule, a different ideal of the priest was formed, according to Malachi 2:4-7, and the prevailing tendency was to place Aaron on a footing equal with Moses. \"At times Aaron, and at other times Moses, is mentioned first in Scripture\u2014this is to show that they were of equal rank,\" says the Mekhilta of Rabbi Ishmael, which strongly implies this when introducing in its record of renowned men the glowing description of Aaron's ministration.\nIn fulfillment of the promise of peaceful life, symbolized by the pouring of oil upon his head, Aaron's death, as described in the aggadah, was of a wonderful tranquility. Accompanied by Moses, his brother, and by Eleazar, his son, Aaron went to the summit of Mount Hor, where the rock suddenly opened before him and a beautiful cave lit by a lamp presented itself to his view. Moses said, \"Take off thy priestly raiment and place it upon thy son Eleazar!\" said Moses; \"and then follow me.\" Aaron did as commanded; and they entered the cave, where was prepared a bed around which angels stood. \"Go lie down upon thy bed, my brother,\" Moses continued; and Aaron obeyed without a murmur. Then his soul departed as if by a kiss from God. The cave closed behind Moses as he left; and he went down the hill with Eleazar, with garments rent, and crying: \"Alas, Aaron, my brother! thou, the pillar of supplication of Israel!\" When the Israelites cried in bewilderment, \"Where is Aaron?\" angels were seen carrying Aaron's bier through the air. A voice was then heard saying: \"The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found on his lips: he walked with me in righteousness, and brought many back from sin.\" He died on the first of Av. The pillar of cloud which proceeded in front of Israel's camp disappeared at Aaron's death. The seeming contradiction between Numbers 20:22 et seq. and Deuteronomy 10:6 is solved by the rabbis in the following manner: Aaron's death on Mount Hor was marked by the defeat of the people in a war with the king of Arad, in consequence of which the Israelites fled, marching seven stations backward to Mosera, where they performed the rites of mourning for Aaron; wherefore it is said: \"There [at Mosera] died Aaron.\"\nThe rabbis particularly praise the brotherly sentiment between Aaron and Moses. When Moses was appointed ruler and Aaron high priest, neither betrayed any jealousy; instead they rejoiced in each other's greatness. When Moses at first declined to go to Pharaoh, saying: \"O my Lord, send, I pray, by the hand of him whom you will send\", he was unwilling to deprive Aaron of the high position the latter had held for so many years; but the Lord reassured him, saying: \"Behold, when he sees you, he will be glad in his heart.\" Indeed, Aaron was to find his reward, says Shimon bar Yochai; for that heart which had leaped with joy over his younger brother's rise to glory greater than his was decorated with the Urim and Thummim, which were to \"be upon Aaron's heart when he goeth in before the Lord\". Moses and Aaron met in gladness of heart, kissing each other as true brothers, and of them it is written: \"Behold how good and how pleasant [it is] for brethren to dwell together in unity!\" Of them it is said: \"Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed [each other]\"; for Moses stood for righteousness and Aaron for peace. Again, mercy was personified in Aaron, according to Deuteronomy 33:8, and truth in Moses, according to Numbers 12:7.\nWhen Moses poured the oil of anointment upon the head of Aaron, Aaron modestly shrank back and said: \"Who knows whether I have not cast some blemish upon this sacred oil so as to forfeit this high office.\" Then the Shekhinah spoke the words: \"Behold the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard of Aaron, that even went down to the skirts of his garment, is as pure as the dew of Hermon.\"\nAccording to Tanhuma, Aaron's activity as a prophet began earlier than that of Moses. Hillel held Aaron up as an example, saying: \"Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing peace; love your fellow creatures and draw them nigh unto the Law!\" This is further illustrated by the tradition that Aaron was an ideal priest of the people, far more beloved for his kindly ways than was Moses. While Moses was stern and uncompromising, brooking no wrong, Aaron went about as peacemaker, reconciling man and wife when he saw them estranged, or a man with his neighbor when they quarreled, and winning evil-doers back into the right way by his friendly intercourse. As a result, Aaron's death was more intensely mourned than Moses': when Aaron died the whole house of Israel wept, including the women, while Moses was bewailed by \"the sons of Israel\" only. Even in the making of the Golden Calf the rabbis find extenuating circumstances for Aaron. His fortitude and silent submission to the will of God on the loss of his two sons are referred to as an excellent example to men how to glorify God in the midst of great affliction. Especially significant are the words represented as being spoken by God after the princes of the Twelve Tribes had brought their dedication offerings into the newly reared Tabernacle: \"Say to thy brother Aaron: Greater than the gifts of the princes is thy gift; for thou art called upon to kindle the light, and, while the sacrifices shall last only as long as the Temple lasts, thy light shall last forever.\"\nChristianity.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox and Maronite churches, Aaron is venerated as a saint whose feast day is shared with his brother Moses and celebrated on September 4. (Those churches that follow the traditional Julian calendar celebrate this day on September 17 of the modern Gregorian calendar). Aaron is also commemorated with other Old Testament saints on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers, the Sunday before Christmas.\nIn Eastern Orthodox Church he is commemorated on 20 July, 12 March, Sunday of the Forefathers, Sunday of the Fathers and on April 14 with all saint Sinai monks.\nAaron is commemorated as one of the Holy Forefathers in the Calendar of Saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on July 30. He is commemorated on July 1 in the modern Latin calendar and in the Syriac Calendar.\nThe \"Moses and Aaron Church\" (), in the Waterlooplein neighborhood of Amsterdam, is one of the most well-known Catholic churches in the city.\nOne version of the Bible has an encyclopedia that describes Aaron's role in Scripture as the \"spokesman for Moses\".\nMormonism.\nIn the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Aaronic priesthood is the lesser order of priesthood under the higher order of the Melchizedek priesthood. Those ordained to this priesthood have the authority to act in God's name in certain responsibilities in the church such as the administration of the sacrament and baptism.\nIn the Community of Christ, the Aaronic order of priesthood is regarded as an appendage to the Melchisedec order, and consists of the priesthood offices of deacon, teacher, and priest. While differing in responsibilities, these offices, along with those of the Melchisidec order, are regarded as equal before God.\nIslam.\nAaron (Arabic: \u0647\u0627\u0631\u0648\u0646, \"H\u0101r\u016bn\") is mentioned in the Quran as a prophet of God. The Quran praises Aaron repeatedly, calling him a \"believing servant\" as well as one who was \"guided\" and one of the \"victors\". Aaron is important in Islam for his role in the events of the Exodus, in which, according to the Quran and Islamic belief, he preached with his elder brother, Moses to the Pharaoh of the Exodus.\nAaron's significance in Islam, however, is not limited to his role as the helper of Moses. Islamic tradition also accords Aaron the role of a patriarch, as tradition records that the priestly descent came through Aaron's lineage, which included the entire House of Amran.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, although his father is described as both an apostle and a prophet, Aaron is merely described as a prophet. The \"Kit\u00e1b-i-\u00cdq\u00e1n\" describes Imran as his father.\nIn art.\nAaron appears paired with Moses frequently in Jewish and Christian art, especially in the illustrations of manuscript and printed Bibles. He can usually be distinguished by his priestly vestments, especially his turban or miter and jeweled breastplate. He frequently holds a censer or, sometimes, his flowering rod. Aaron also appears in scenes depicting the wilderness Tabernacle and its altar, as already in the third-century frescos in the synagogue at Dura-Europos in Syria. An eleventh-century portable silver altar from Fulda, Germany depicts Aaron with his censor, and is located in the Mus\u00e9e de Cluny in Paris. This is also how he appears in the frontispieces of early printed Passover Haggadot and occasionally in church sculptures. Aaron has rarely been the subject of portraits, such as those by Anton Kern [1710\u20131747] and by Pier Francesco Mola [c.\u20091650]. Christian artists sometimes portray Aaron as a prophet holding a scroll, as in a twelfth-century sculpture from the Cathedral of Noyon in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York and often in Eastern Orthodox icons. Illustrations of the Golden Calf story usually include him as well \u2013 most notably in Nicolas Poussin's \"The Adoration of the Golden Calf\" (c.\u20091633\u201334, National Gallery, London). Finally, some artists interested in validating later priesthoods have painted the ordination of Aaron and his sons (Leviticus 8). Harry Anderson's realistic portrayal is often reproduced in the literature of the Latter Day Saints.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nReferences in the Qur'an"}
{"id": "1008", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1008", "title": "April 6", "text": "Day of the yearApril 6 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar"}
{"id": "1009", "revid": "43162658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1009", "title": "April 12", "text": "Day of the yearApril 12 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1010", "revid": "22872292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1010", "title": "April 15", "text": "Day of the yearApril 15 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1011", "revid": "41045255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1011", "title": "April 30", "text": "Day of the yearApril 30 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1012", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1012", "title": "August 22", "text": "Day of the yearAugust 22 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1013", "revid": "1153058695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1013", "title": "August 27", "text": "Day of the yearAugust 27 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1014", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1014", "title": "Alcohol (chemistry)", "text": "Organic compound with at least one hydroxyl (\u2013OH) group\nIn chemistry, an alcohol is a type of organic compound that carries at least one hydroxyl () functional group bound to a saturated carbon atom. Alcohols range from the simple, like methanol and ethanol, to complex, like sucrose and cholesterol. The presence of an OH group strongly modifies the properties of hydrocarbons, conferring hydrophilic (water-loving) properties. The OH group provides a site at which many reactions can occur.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe flammable nature of the exhalations of wine was already known to ancient natural philosophers such as Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE), Theophrastus (c.\u2009371\u2013287 BCE), and Pliny the Elder (23/24\u201379 CE). However, this did not immediately lead to the isolation of alcohol, even despite the development of more advanced distillation techniques in second- and third-century Roman Egypt. An important recognition, first found in one of the writings attributed to J\u0101bir ibn \u1e24ayy\u0101n (ninth century CE), was that by adding salt to boiling wine, which increases the wine's relative volatility, the flammability of the resulting vapors may be enhanced. The distillation of wine is attested in Arabic works attributed to al-Kind\u012b (c.\u2009801\u2013873 CE) and to al-F\u0101r\u0101b\u012b (c.\u2009872\u2013950), and in the 28th book of al-Zahr\u0101w\u012b's (Latin: Abulcasis, 936\u20131013) \"Kit\u0101b al-Ta\u1e63r\u012bf\" (later translated into Latin as \"Liber servatoris\"). In the twelfth century, recipes for the production of \"aqua ardens\" (\"burning water\", i.e., alcohol) by distilling wine with salt started to appear in a number of Latin works, and by the end of the thirteenth century it had become a widely known substance among Western European chemists.\nThe works of Taddeo Alderotti (1223\u20131296) describe a method for concentrating alcohol involving repeated fractional distillation through a water-cooled still, by which an alcohol purity of 90% could be obtained. The medicinal properties of ethanol were studied by Arnald of Villanova (1240\u20131311 CE) and John of Rupescissa (c.\u20091310\u20131366), the latter of whom regarded it as a life-preserving substance able to prevent all diseases (the \"aqua vitae\" or \"water of life\", also called by John the \"quintessence\" of wine).\nNomenclature.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"alcohol\" derives from the Arabic \"kohl\" (), a powder used as an eyeliner. The first part of the word () is the Arabic definite article, equivalent to \"the\" in English. The second part of the word () has several antecedents in Semitic languages, ultimately deriving from the Akkadian (), meaning stibnite or antimony.\nLike its antecedents in Arabic and older languages, the term \"alcohol\" was originally used for the very fine powder produced by the sublimation of the natural mineral stibnite to form antimony trisulfide . It was considered to be the essence or \"spirit\" of this mineral. It was used as an antiseptic, eyeliner, and cosmetic. Later the meaning of alcohol was extended to distilled substances in general, and then narrowed again to ethanol, when \"spirits\" was a synonym for hard liquor.\nParacelsus and Libavius both used the term \"alcohol\" to denote a fine powder, the latter speaking of an \"alcohol\" derived from antimony. At the same time Paracelsus uses the word for a volatile liquid; \"alcool\" or \"alcool vini\" occurs often in his writings.\nBartholomew Traheron, in his 1543 translation of John of Vigo, introduces the word as a term used by \"barbarous\" authors for \"fine powder.\" Vigo wrote: \"the barbarous auctours use alcohol, or (as I fynde it sometymes wryten) alcofoll, for moost fine poudre.\"\nThe 1657 \"Lexicon Chymicum\", by William Johnson glosses the word as \"antimonium sive stibium.\" By extension, the word came to refer to any fluid obtained by distillation, including \"alcohol of wine,\" the distilled essence of wine. Libavius in \"Alchymia\" (1594) refers to \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;vini alcohol vel vinum alcalisatum\". Johnson (1657) glosses \"alcohol vini\" as \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;quando omnis superfluitas vini a vino separatur, ita ut accensum ardeat donec totum consumatur, nihilque f\u00e6cum aut phlegmatis in fundo remaneat.\" The word's meaning became restricted to \"spirit of wine\" (the chemical known today as ethanol) in the 18th century and was extended to the class of substances so-called as \"alcohols\" in modern chemistry after 1850.\nThe term \"ethanol\" was invented in 1892, blending \"ethane\" with the \"-ol\" ending of \"alcohol\", which was generalized as a libfix.\nThe term \"alcohol\" originally referred to the primary alcohol ethanol (ethyl alcohol), which is used as a drug and is the main alcohol present in alcoholic drinks. \nThe suffix \"-ol\" appears in the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) chemical name of all substances where the hydroxyl group is the functional group with the highest priority. When a higher priority group is present in the compound, the prefix \"hydroxy-\" is used in its IUPAC name. The suffix \"-ol\" in non-IUPAC names (such as paracetamol or cholesterol) also typically indicates that the substance is an alcohol. However, some compounds that contain hydroxyl functional groups have \"trivial names\" which do not include the suffix \"-ol\" or the prefix \"hydroxy-\", e.g. the sugars glucose and sucrose.\nSystematic names.\nIUPAC nomenclature is used in scientific publications and where precise identification of the substance is important. In naming simple alcohols, the name of the alkane chain loses the terminal \"e\" and adds the suffix \"-ol\", \"e.g.\", as in \"ethanol\" from the alkane chain name \"ethane\". When necessary, the position of the hydroxyl group is indicated by a number between the alkane name and the \"-ol\": propan-1-ol for , propan-2-ol for . If a higher priority group is present (such as an aldehyde, ketone, or carboxylic acid), then the prefix \"hydroxy-\"is used, e.g., as in 1-hydroxy-2-propanone (). Compounds having more than one hydroxy group are called polyols. They are named using suffixes -diol, -triol, etc., following a list of the position numbers of the hydroxyl groups, as in propane-1,2-diol for CH3CH(OH)CH2OH (propylene glycol).\nIn cases where the hydroxy group is bonded to an sp2 carbon on an aromatic ring, the molecule is classified separately as a phenol and is named using the IUPAC rules for naming phenols. Phenols have distinct properties and are not classified as alcohols.\nCommon names.\nIn other less formal contexts, an alcohol is often called with the name of the corresponding alkyl group followed by the word \"alcohol\", e.g., methyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol. Propyl alcohol may be \"n\"-propyl alcohol or isopropyl alcohol, depending on whether the hydroxyl group is bonded to the end or middle carbon on the straight propane chain. As described under systematic naming, if another group on the molecule takes priority, the alcohol moiety is often indicated using the \"hydroxy-\" prefix.\nIn archaic nomenclature, alcohols can be named as derivatives of methanol using \"-carbinol\" as the ending. For instance, can be named trimethylcarbinol.\nPrimary, secondary, and tertiary.\nAlcohols are then classified into primary, secondary (\"sec-\", \"s-\"), and tertiary (\"tert-\", \"t-\"), based upon the number of carbon atoms connected to the carbon atom that bears the hydroxyl functional group. (The respective numeric shorthands 1\u00b0, 2\u00b0, and 3\u00b0 are sometimes used in informal settings.) The primary alcohols have general formulas . The simplest primary alcohol is methanol (), for which R=H, and the next is ethanol, for which , the methyl group. Secondary alcohols are those of the form RR'CHOH, the simplest of which is 2-propanol (). For the tertiary alcohols the general form is RR'R\"COH. The simplest example is tert-butanol (2-methylpropan-2-ol), for which each of R, R', and R\" is . In these shorthands, R, R', and R\" represent substituents, alkyl or other attached, generally organic groups.\nApplications.\nAlcohols have a long history of myriad uses. For simple mono-alcohols, which is the focus on this article, the following are most important industrial alcohols:\nMethanol is the most common industrial alcohol, with about 12 million tons/y produced in 1980. The combined capacity of the other alcohols is about the same, distributed roughly equally.\nToxicity.\nWith respect to acute toxicity, simple alcohols have low acute toxicities. Doses of several milliliters are tolerated. For pentanols, hexanols, octanols and longer alcohols, LD50 range from 2\u20135 g/kg (rats, oral). Ethanol is less acutely toxic. All alcohols are mild skin irritants.\nThe metabolism of methanol (and ethylene glycol) is affected by the presence of ethanol, which has a higher affinity for liver alcohol dehydrogenase. In this way methanol will be excreted intact in urine.\nPhysical properties.\nIn general, the hydroxyl group makes alcohols polar. Those groups can form hydrogen bonds to one another and to most other compounds. Owing to the presence of the polar OH alcohols are more water-soluble than simple hydrocarbons. Methanol, ethanol, and propanol are miscible in water. Butanol, with a four-carbon chain, is moderately soluble.\nBecause of hydrogen bonding, alcohols tend to have higher boiling points than comparable hydrocarbons and ethers. The boiling point of the alcohol ethanol is 78.29\u00a0\u00b0C, compared to 69\u00a0\u00b0C for the hydrocarbon hexane, and 34.6\u00a0\u00b0C for diethyl ether.\nOccurrence in nature.\nSimple alcohols are found widely in nature. Ethanol is the most prominent because it is the product of fermentation, a major energy-producing pathway. Other simple alcohols, chiefly fusel alcohols, are formed in only trace amounts. More complex alcohols however are pervasive, as manifested in sugars, some amino acids, and fatty acids.\nProduction.\nHydroxylation.\nMany alcohols are produced by hydroxylation, i.e., the installation of a hydroxy group using oxygen or related oxidant. Hydroxylation is the means by which the body processes many poisons, converting lipophilic compounds into hydrophilic derivatives that are more readily excreted. Enzymes called hydroxylases and oxidases facilitate these conversions. \nMany industrial alcohols, such as cyclohexanol for the production of nylon, are produced by hydroxylation. \nZiegler and oxo processes.\nIn the Ziegler process, linear alcohols are produced from ethylene and triethylaluminium followed by oxidation and hydrolysis. An idealized synthesis of 1-octanol is shown:\n&lt;chem&gt;Al(C2H5)3 + 9 C2H4 -&gt; Al(C8H17)3&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;Al(C8H17)3 + 3O + 3 H2O -&gt; 3 HOC8H17 + Al(OH)3&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe process generates a range of alcohols that are separated by distillation.\nMany higher alcohols are produced by hydroformylation of alkenes followed by hydrogenation. When applied to a terminal alkene, as is common, one typically obtains a linear alcohol:\n&lt;chem&gt;RCH=CH2 + H2 + CO -&gt; RCH2CH2CHO&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;RCH2CH2CHO + 3 H2 -&gt; RCH2CH2CH2OH&lt;/chem&gt;\nSuch processes give fatty alcohols, which are useful for detergents.\nHydration reactions.\nSome low molecular weight alcohols of industrial importance are produced by the addition of water to alkenes. Ethanol, isopropanol, 2-butanol, and tert-butanol are produced by this general method. Two implementations are employed, the direct and indirect methods. The direct method avoids the formation of stable intermediates, typically using acid catalysts. In the indirect method, the alkene is converted to the sulfate ester, which is subsequently hydrolyzed. The direct hydration using ethylene (ethylene hydration) or other alkenes from cracking of fractions of distilled crude oil.\nHydration is also used industrially to produce the diol ethylene glycol from ethylene oxide.\nFermentation.\nEthanol is obtained by fermentation of glucose (which is often obtained from starch) in the presence of yeast. Carbon dioxide is cogenerated. Like ethanol, butanol can be produced by fermentation processes. \"Saccharomyces\" yeast are known to produce these higher alcohols at temperatures above . The bacterium \"Clostridium acetobutylicum\" can feed on cellulose (also an alcohol) to produce butanol on an industrial scale.\nSubstitution.\nPrimary alkyl halides react with aqueous NaOH or KOH to alcohols in nucleophilic aliphatic substitution. (Secondary and especially tertiary alkyl halides will give the elimination (alkene) product instead). Grignard reagents react with carbonyl groups to secondary and tertiary alcohols. Related reactions are the Barbier reaction and the Nozaki-Hiyama reaction.\nReduction.\nAldehydes or ketones are reduced with sodium borohydride or lithium aluminium hydride (after an acidic workup). Another reduction by aluminiumisopropylates is the Meerwein-Ponndorf-Verley reduction. Noyori asymmetric hydrogenation is the asymmetric reduction of \u03b2-keto-esters.\nHydrolysis.\nAlkenes engage in an acid catalysed hydration reaction using concentrated sulfuric acid as a catalyst that gives usually secondary or tertiary alcohols. Formation of a secondary alcohol via alkene reduction and hydration is shown on the right:\nThe hydroboration-oxidation and oxymercuration-reduction of alkenes are more reliable in organic synthesis. Alkenes react with N-bromosuccinimide and water in halohydrin formation reaction. Amines can be converted to diazonium salts, which are then hydrolyzed.\nReactions.\nDeprotonation.\nWith aqueous p\"K\"a values of around 16\u201319, they are, in general, slightly weaker acids than water. With strong bases such as sodium hydride or sodium they form salts called \"alkoxides\", with the general formula (where R is an alkyl and M is a metal).\n &lt;chem&gt;2 R-OH + 2 NaH -&gt; 2 R-O-Na + 2 H2&lt;/chem&gt;\n &lt;chem&gt;2 R-OH + 2 Na -&gt; 2 R-O-Na + H2&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe acidity of alcohols is strongly affected by solvation. In the gas phase, alcohols are more acidic than in water. In DMSO, alcohols (and water) have a p\"K\"a of around 29\u201332. As a consequence, alkoxides (and hydroxide) are powerful bases and nucleophiles (e.g., for the Williamson ether synthesis) in this solvent. In particular, or in DMSO can be used to generate significant equilibrium concentrations of acetylide ions through the deprotonation of alkynes (see Favorskii reaction).\nNucleophilic substitution.\nTertiary alcohols react with hydrochloric acid to produce tertiary alkyl chloride. Primary and secondary alcohols are converted to the corresponding chlorides using thionyl chloride and various phosphorus chloride reagents.\nPrimary and secondary alcohols, likewise, convert to alkyl bromides phosphorus tribromide, for example:\n &lt;chem&gt;3 R-OH + PBr3 -&gt; 3 RBr + H3PO3&lt;/chem&gt;\nIn the Barton-McCombie deoxygenation an alcohol is deoxygenated to an alkane with tributyltin hydride or a trimethylborane-water complex in a radical substitution reaction.\nDehydration.\nMeanwhile, the oxygen atom has lone pairs of nonbonded electrons that render it weakly basic in the presence of strong acids such as sulfuric acid. For example, with methanol:\nUpon treatment with strong acids, alcohols undergo the E1 elimination reaction to produce alkenes. The reaction, in general, obeys Zaitsev's Rule, which states that the most stable (usually the most substituted) alkene is formed. Tertiary alcohols eliminate easily at just above room temperature, but primary alcohols require a higher temperature.\nThis is a diagram of acid catalysed dehydration of ethanol to produce ethylene:\nA more controlled elimination reaction requires the formation of the xanthate ester.\nProtonolysis.\nTertiary alcohols react with strong acids to generate carbocations. The reaction is related to their dehydration, e.g. isobutylene from tert-butyl alcohol. A special kind of dehydration reaction involves triphenylmethanol and especially its amine-substituted derivatives. When treated with acid, these alcohols lose water to give stable carbocations, which are commercial dyes.\nEsterification.\nAlcohol and carboxylic acids react in the so-called Fischer esterification. The reaction usually requires a catalyst, such as concentrated sulfuric acid:\n &lt;chem&gt;R-OH + R'-CO2H -&gt; R'-CO2R + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nOther types of ester are prepared in a similar manner\u00a0\u2013 for example, tosyl (tosylate) esters are made by reaction of the alcohol with p-toluenesulfonyl chloride in pyridine.\nOxidation.\nPrimary alcohols () can be oxidized either to aldehydes () or to carboxylic acids (). The oxidation of secondary alcohols () normally terminates at the ketone () stage. Tertiary alcohols () are resistant to oxidation.\nThe direct oxidation of primary alcohols to carboxylic acids normally proceeds via the corresponding aldehyde, which is transformed via an \"aldehyde hydrate\" () by reaction with water before it can be further oxidized to the carboxylic acid.\nReagents useful for the transformation of primary alcohols to aldehydes are normally also suitable for the oxidation of secondary alcohols to ketones. These include Collins reagent and Dess-Martin periodinane. The direct oxidation of primary alcohols to carboxylic acids can be carried out using potassium permanganate or the Jones reagent.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1016", "revid": "40855175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1016", "title": "Achill Island", "text": "Island off the western coast of Ireland, in County Mayo\nAchill Island (; ) is the largest of the Irish isles and lies off the west coast of Ireland in County Mayo. It has a population of 2,594. Its area is . Achill is attached to the mainland by Michael Davitt Bridge, between the villages of Achill Sound and Polranny. A bridge was first completed here in 1887. Other centres of population include the villages of Keel, Dooagh, Dooega, Dooniver, and Dugort. The parish's main Gaelic football pitch and secondary school are on the mainland at Polranny. Early human settlements are believed to have been established on Achill around 3000 BC.\nThe island is 87% peat bog. The parish of Achill consists of Achill Island, Achillbeg, Inishbiggle and the Corraun Peninsula.\nRoughly half of the island, including the villages of Achill Sound and Bunacurry are in the Gaeltacht (traditional Irish-speaking region) of Ireland, although the vast majority of the island's population speaks English as their daily language.\nHistory.\nIt is believed that at the end of the Neolithic Period (around 4000 BC), Achill had a population of 500\u20131,000 people. The island would have been mostly forest until the Neolithic people began crop cultivation. Settlement increased during the Iron Age, and the dispersal of small promontory forts around the coast indicate the warlike nature of the times. Megalithic tombs and forts can be seen at Slievemore, along the Atlantic Drive and on Achillbeg.\nOverlords.\nAchill Island lies in the Barony of Burrishoole, in the territory of ancient Umhall (Umhall Uactarach and Umhall Ioctarach), that originally encompassed an area extending from the County Galway/Mayo border to Achill Head.\nThe hereditary chieftains of Umhall were the O'Malleys, recorded in the area in 814 AD when they successfully repelled an onslaught by the Vikings in Clew Bay. The Anglo-Norman invasion of Connacht in 1235 AD saw the territory of Umhall taken over by the Butlers and later by the de Burgos. The Butler Lordship of Burrishoole continued into the late 14th century when Thomas le Botiller was recorded as being in possession of Akkyll and Owyll.\nImmigration.\nIn the 17th and 18th centuries, there was much migration to Achill from other parts of Ireland, particularly Ulster, due to the political and religious turmoil of the time. For a while, there were two different dialects of Irish being spoken on Achill. This led to many townlands being recorded as having two names during the 1824 Ordnance Survey, and some maps today give different names for the same place. Achill Irish still has many traces of Ulster Irish.\nIn the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, seasonal migration of farm workers to Scotland to pick potatoes took place; these squads of 'tattie howkers' were known as Achill workers, although not all were from Achill, and were organised for potato merchants by gaffers or gangers. Squads travelled from farm to farm to harvest the crop and were allocated basic accommodation. On 15 September 1937 ten young migrant potato pickers from Achill died in a fire at Kirkintilloch. \nSpecific historical sites and events.\nGrace O'Malley's Castle.\nCarrickkildavnet Castle is a 15th-century tower house associated with the O'Malley Clan, who were once a ruling family of Achill. Grace O' Malley, or Granuaile, the most famous of the O'Malleys, was born on Clare Island around 1530. Her father was the chieftain of the barony of Murrisk. The O'Malleys were a powerful seafaring family, who traded widely. Grace became a fearless leader and gained fame as a sea captain and pirate. She is reputed to have met with Queen Elizabeth I in 1593. She died around 1603 and is buried in the O'Malley family tomb on Clare Island.\nAchill Mission.\nOne of Achill's most famous historical sites is that of the Achill Mission or 'the Colony' at Dugort. In 1831, the Anglican (Church of Ireland) Rev Edward Nangle founded a mission at Dugort. The Mission included schools, cottages, an orphanage, an infirmary and a guesthouse. \nThe Colony gave rise to mixed assessments, particularly during the Great Famine when charges of \"souperism\" were leveled against Nangle. The provision of food across the Achill Mission schools - which also provided 'scriptural' religious instruction - was particularly controversial. \nFor almost forty years, Nangle edited a newspaper called the \"Achill Missionary Herald and Western Witness\", which was printed in Achill. He expanded his mission into Mweelin, Kilgeever, West Achill where a school, church, rectory, cottages and a training school were built. Edward's wife, Eliza, suffered poor health in Achill and died in 1852; she is buried with six of the Nangle children on the slopes of Slievemore in North Achill. \nIn 1848, at the height of the Great Famine, the Achill Mission published a prospectus seeking to raise funds for the acquisition of significant additional lands from Sir Richard O'Donnell. The document gives an overview, from the Mission's perspective, of its activities in Achill over the previous decade and a half including considerable sectarian unrest. In 1851, Edward Nangle confirmed the purchase of the land which made the Achill Mission the largest landowner on the island. \nThe Achill Mission began to decline slowly after Nangle was moved from Achill and closed in the 1880s. When Edward Nangle died in 1883 there were opposing views on his legacy.\nRailway.\nIn 1894, the Westport \u2013 Newport railway line was extended to Achill Sound. The railway station is now a hostel. The train provided a great service to Achill, but it also is said to have fulfilled an ancient prophecy. Brian Rua O' Cearbhain had prophesied that 'carts on iron wheels' would carry bodies into Achill on their first and last journey. In 1894, the first train on the Achill railway carried the bodies of victims of the Clew Bay Drowning. This tragedy occurred when a boat overturned in Clew Bay, drowning thirty-two young people. They had been going to meet the steamer which would take them to Scotland for potato picking.\nThe Kirkintilloch Fire in 1937 almost fulfilled the second part of the prophecy when the bodies of ten victims were carried by rail to Achill. While it was not literally the last train, the railway closed just two weeks later. These people had died in a fire in a bothy in Kirkintilloch. This term referred to the temporary accommodation provided for those who went to Scotland to pick potatoes, a migratory pattern that had been established in the early nineteenth century.\nKildamhnait.\nKildamhnait on the south-east coast of Achill is named after St. Damhnait, or Dymphna, who founded a church there in the 7th century. There is also a holy well just outside the graveyard. The present church was built in the 1700s and the graveyard contains memorials to the victims of two of Achill's greatest tragedies, the Kirchintilloch Fire (1937) and the Clew Bay Drowning (1894).\nThe Monastery.\nIn 1852, Dr John MacHale, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Tuam, purchased land in Bunnacurry, on which a Franciscan Monastery was established, which, for many years, provided an education for local children. The building of the monastery was marked by a conflict between the Protestants of the mission colony and the workers building the monastery. The dispute is known in the island folklore as the \"Battle of the Stones\". \nA notable monk who lived at the monastery for almost thirty years was Brother Paul Carney. He wrote a biography of James Lynchehaun who rose to either fame or infamy (depending on whom you spoke to) following his conviction for the 1894 attack on an Englishwoman named Agnes MacDonnell, which left her face disfigured, and the burning of her home, Valley House, Tonatanvally, North Achill. (The home was rebuilt and Mrs MacDonnell died there in 1923, while Lynchehaun escaped to the USA after serving 7 years and successfully resisted extradition but spent his last years in Scotland, where he died.) Brother Carney's-great grandniece, Patricia Byrne, write her own account of Mrs MacDonnell and Lynchehaun, entitled \"The Veiled Woman of Achill\".\nBrother Carney also wrote accounts of his lengthy fundraising trips across the U.S. at the start of the 20th century. The ruins of this monastery are still to be seen in Bunnacurry today.\nValley House.\nThe historic Valley House is located in Tonatanvally, \"The Valley\", near Dugort, in the northeast of Achill Island. The present building sits on the site of a hunting lodge built by the Earl of Cavan in the 19th century. Its notoriety arises from an incident in 1894 in which the then owner, an Englishwoman, Mrs Agnes McDonnell, was savagely beaten and the house set alight by a local man, James Lynchehaun. Lynchehaun had been employed by McDonnell as her land agent, but the two fell out and he was sacked and told to quit his accommodation on her estate. A lengthy legal battle ensued, with Lynchehaun refusing to leave. At the time, in the 1890s, the issue of land ownership in Ireland was politically charged. After the events at the Valley House in 1895, Lynchehaun would falsely claim his actions were carried out on behalf of the Irish Republican Brotherhood and motivated by politics. He escaped custody after serving seven years and fled to the United States seeking political asylum (although Michael Davitt refused to shake his hand, calling Lynchehaun a \"murderer\"), where he successfully defeated legal attempts by the British authorities to have him extradited to face charges arising from the attack and the burning of the Valley House. Agnes McDonnell suffered terrible injuries from the attack but survived and lived for another 23 years, dying in 1923. Lynchehaun is said to have returned to Achill on two occasions, once in disguise as an American tourist, and eventually died in Girvan, Scotland, in 1937. The Valley House is now a hostel and bar.\nThe Deserted Village.\nClose by Dugort, at the base of Slievemore mountain lies the Deserted Village. There are approximately 80 ruined houses in the village. The houses were built of unmortared stone, which means that no cement or mortar was used to hold the stones together. Each house consisted of just one room and this room was used as a kitchen, living room, bedroom and even a stable. If one looks at the fields around the Deserted Village and right up the mountain, one can see the tracks in the fields of 'lazy beds', which is the way crops like potatoes were grown. In Achill, as in many areas of Ireland, a system called 'Rundale' was used for farming. This meant that the land around a village was rented from a landlord. This land was then shared by all the villagers to graze their cattle and sheep. Each family would then have two or three small pieces of land scattered about the village, which they used to grow crops. For many years people lived in the village and then in 1845 Famine struck in Achill as it did in the rest of Ireland. Most of the families moved to the nearby village of Dooagh, which is beside the sea, while some others emigrated. Living beside the sea meant that fish and shellfish could be used for food. The village was completely abandoned which is where the name 'Deserted Village' came from.\nNo one has lived in these houses since the time of the Famine, however, the families that moved to Dooagh and their descendants, continued to use the village as a 'booley village'. This means that during the summer season, the younger members of the family, teenage boys and girls, would take the cattle to graze on the hillside and they would stay in the houses of the Deserted Village. This custom continued until the 1940s. Boolying was also carried out in other areas of Achill, including Annagh on Croaghaun mountain and in Curraun. At Ailt, Kildownet, the remains of a similar deserted village can be found. This village was deserted in 1855 when the tenants were evicted by the local landlord so the land could be used for cattle grazing; the tenants were forced to rent holdings in Currane, Dooega and Slievemore. Others emigrated to America.\nArchaeology.\nRecent archaeological research suggests the village was occupied year-round at least as early as the 19th century, though it is known to have served as a seasonally occupied 'booley village' by the first half of the 20th century. A booley village (a number of which exist in a ruined state on the island) is a village occupied only during part of the year, such as a resort community, a lake community, or (as the case on Achill) a place to live while tending flocks or herds of ruminants during winter or summer pasturing. Specifically, some of the people of Dooagh and Pollagh would migrate in the summer to Slievemore and then go back to Dooagh in the autumn. The summer 2009 field school excavated Round House 2 on Slievemore Mountain under the direction of archaeologist Stuart Rathbone. Only the outside north wall, entrance way and inside of the Round House were completely excavated.\nFrom 2004 to 2006, the Achill Island Maritime Archaeology Project directed by Chuck Meide was sponsored by the College of William and Mary, the Institute of Maritime History, the Achill Folklife Centre (now the Achill Archaeology Centre), and the Lighthouse Archaeological Maritime Program (LAMP). This project focused on the documentation of archaeological resources related to Achill's rich maritime heritage. Maritime archaeologists recorded a 19th-century fishing station, an ice house, boat house ruins, a number of anchors which had been salvaged from the sea, 19th-century and more recent currach pens, a number of traditional vernacular watercraft including a possibly 100-year-old Achill yawl, and the remains of four historic shipwrecks.\nOther places of interest.\nThe cliffs of Croaghaun on the western end of the island are the third highest sea cliffs in Europe but are inaccessible by road. Near the westernmost point of Achill, Achill Head, is Keem Bay. Keel Beach is quite popular with tourists and some locals as a surfing location. South of Keem beach is Moytoge Head, which with its rounded appearance drops dramatically down to the ocean. An old British observation post, built during World War I to prevent the Germans from landing arms for the Irish Republican Army, is still standing on Moytoge. During the Second World War this post was rebuilt by the Irish Defence Forces as a lookout post for the Coast Watching Service wing of the Defence Forces. It operated from 1939 to 1945.\nThe mountain of Slievemore, (672\u00a0m) rises dramatically in the north of the island and the Atlantic Drive (along the south/west of the island) has some scenic views. On the slopes of Slievemore, there is an abandoned village, the \"Deserted Village\", traditionally thought to be a remnant village from An Gorta M\u00f3r (The Great Hunger of 1845\u20131849). Just west of the deserted village is an old Martello tower, again built by the British to warn of any possible French invasion during the Napoleonic Wars. The area also boasts an approximately 5000-year-old Neolithic tomb.\nAchillbeg (\"\", \"Little Achill\") is a small island just off Achill's southern tip. Its inhabitants were resettled on Achill in the 1960s. A plaque to Johnny Kilbane is situated on Achillbeg and was erected to celebrate 100 years since his first championship win. \nThe villages of Dooniver and Askill have picturesque scenery and the cycle route is popular with tourists.\nCaisle\u00e1n Ghr\u00e1inne, also known as Kildownet Castle, is a small tower house built in the early 1400s. It is located in Cloughmore, on the south of Achill Island. It is noted for its associations with Grace O'Malley, along with the larger Rockfleet Castle in Newport.\nEconomy.\nWhile a number of attempts at setting up small industrial units on the island have been made, its economy is largely dependent on tourism. Subventions from Achill people working abroad allowed many families to remain living in Achill throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. In the past, fishing was a significant activity but this aspect of the economy is small now. At one stage, the island was known for its shark fishing, basking shark in particular was fished for its valuable shark liver oil. There was a big spurt of growth in tourism in the 1960s and 1970s before which life was tough and difficult on the island. Despite healthy visitor numbers each year, the common perception is that tourism in Achill has been slowly declining since its heyday. Currently, the largest employers on Achill are two hotels.\nReligion.\nMost people on Achill are either Roman Catholic or Anglican (Church of Ireland).\nOverview of the churches\nArtists.\nFor almost two centuries, a number of artists have had a close relationship with Achill Island, including the landscape painter Paul Henry. Within the emerging Irish Free State, Paul Henry's landscapes from Achill and other areas reinforced a vision of Ireland of communities living in harmony with the land. He lived in Achill for almost a decade with his wife, artist Grace Henry and, while using similar subject-matter, the pair developed very different styles.\nThis relationship of artists with Achill was particularly intense in the early decades of the twentieth century when Eva O'Flaherty (1874-1963) became a focal point for artistic networking on the island. A network of over 200 artists linked to Achill is charted in \"Achill Painters - An Island History\" and includes painters such as the Belgian Marie Howet, the American Robert Henri, the modernist painter Mainie Jellett and contemporary artist Camille Souter.\nThe 2018 \"Coming Home Art &amp; The Great Hunger\" exhibition, in partnership with The Great Hunger Museum of Quinnipiac University, USA, featured Achill's Deserted Village and the island lazy beds prominently in works by Geraldine O'Reilly and Alanna O'Kelly; also included was an 1873 painting, 'Cottage, Achill Island' by Alexander Williams - one of the first artists to open up the island to a wider audience.\nEducation.\nHedge schools existed in most villages of Achill in various periods of history. A university was started by the missions to Achill in Mweelin. In the modern age, there used to be two secondary schools in Achill, Mc Hale College and Scoil Damhnait. However, in August 2011, the two schools amalgamated to form Col\u00e1iste Pobail Acla. For primary education, there are eight national schools including Bullsmouth NS, Valley NS, Bunnacurry NS, Dookinella NS, Dooagh NS, Saula NS, Achill Sound NS and Tonragee NS. National schools closed down include Dooega NS, Crumpaun NS, Ashleam NS and Currane NS.\nTransport.\nRail.\nAchill railway station, still on the mainland and not on the island, was opened by the Midland Great Western Railway on 13 May 1895, the terminus of its line from Westport via Newport and Mulranny. The station, and the line, were closed by the Great Southern Railways on 1 October 1937. The Great Western Greenway, created during 2010 and 2011, follows the line's route and has proved to be very successful in attracting visitors to Achill and the surrounding areas.\nRoad.\nThe R319 road is the main road onto the island.\nBus.\nBus \u00c9ireann's route 450 operates several times daily to Westport and Louisburgh from the island's scattered villages. Bus \u00c9ireann also provides transport for the area's secondary school children.\nCuisine.\nAchill Island has several bars, cafes and restaurants. The island's Atlantic location means that seafood, including lobster, mussels, salmon, trout and winkles, are common meals. With a large sheep and cow populations, lamb and beef are popular on the island too.\nSport.\nAchill has a Gaelic football club which competes in the junior championship and division 1E of the Mayo League. There are also Achill Rovers which play in the Mayo Association Football League.\nThere is a 9-hole links golf course on the island. Outdoor activities can be done through Achill Outdoor Education Centre. Achill Island's rugged landscape and the surrounding ocean offers multiple locations for outdoor adventure activities, like surfing, kite-surfing and sea kayaking. Fishing and watersports are also common. Sailing regattas featuring a local vessel type, the Achill Yawl, have been popular since the 19th century, though most present-day yawls, unlike their traditional working boat ancestors, have been structurally modified to promote greater speed under sail. The island's waters and underwater sites are occasionally visited by scuba divers, though Achill's unpredictable weather generally has precluded a commercially successful recreational diving industry.\nPopulation.\nIn 2016, the population was 2,594, with 5.2% claiming they spoke the Irish on a daily basis outside the education system. The island's population has declined from around 6,000 before the Great Famine of the mid-19th century.\nDemographics.\nThe table below reports data on Achill Island's population taken from \"Discover the Islands of Ireland\" (Alex Ritsema, Collins Press, 1999) and the census of Ireland. \nArchitecture.\nFew inhabited houses date from before the 20th century, though there are many examples of abandoned stone structures dating to the 19th century.\nThe best known of these earlier can be seen in the \"Deserted Village\" ruins near the graveyard at the foot of Slievemore. Even the houses in this village represent a relatively comfortable class of dwelling as, even as recently as a hundred years ago, some people still used \"Beehive\" style houses (small circular single-roomed dwellings with a hole in the ceiling to let out smoke).\nMany of the oldest inhabited cottages date from the activities of the Congested Districts Board for Ireland\u2014a body set up around the turn of the 20th century in Ireland to improve the welfare of the inhabitants of small villages and towns. Most of the homes in Achill at the time were very small and tightly packed together in villages. The CDB subsidised the building of new, more spacious (though still small by modern standards) homes outside of the traditional villages.\nIn popular culture.\nThe island is featured throughout the film \"The Banshees of Inisherin\" in various locations on the island including Keem Bay, Cloughmore, and Purteen Pier.\nThe film \"My Sailor My Love\" features Achill island.\nThe island is the primary setting of the visual novel \"If Found...\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1017", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1017", "title": "Allen Ginsberg", "text": "American poet and writer (1926\u20131997)\nIrwin Allen Ginsberg (; June 3, 1926\u00a0\u2013 April 5, 1997) was an American poet and writer. As a student at Columbia University in the 1940s, he began friendships with William S. Burroughs and Jack Kerouac, forming the core of the Beat Generation. He vigorously opposed militarism, economic materialism, and sexual repression, and he embodied various aspects of this counterculture with his views on drugs, sex, multiculturalism, hostility to bureaucracy, and openness to Eastern religions.\nBest known for his poem \"Howl\", Ginsberg denounced what he saw as the destructive forces of capitalism and conformity in the United States. San Francisco police and US Customs seized copies of \"Howl\" in 1956, and a subsequent obscenity trial in 1957 attracted widespread publicity due to the poem's language and descriptions of heterosexual and homosexual sex at a time when sodomy laws made (male) homosexual acts a crime in every state. The poem reflected Ginsberg's own sexuality and his relationships with a number of men, including Peter Orlovsky, his lifelong partner. Judge Clayton W. Horn ruled that \"Howl\" was not obscene, asking: \"Would there be any freedom of press or speech if one must reduce his vocabulary to vapid innocuous euphemisms?\"\nGinsberg was a Buddhist who extensively studied Eastern religious disciplines. He lived modestly, buying his clothing in second-hand stores and residing in apartments in New York City's East Village. One of his most influential teachers was Tibetan Buddhist Ch\u00f6gyam Trungpa, the founder of the Naropa Institute in Boulder, Colorado. At Trungpa's urging, Ginsberg and poet Anne Waldman started The Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics there in 1974.\nFor decades, Ginsberg was active in political protests across a range of issues from the Vietnam War to the war on drugs. His poem \"September on Jessore Road\" drew attention to refugees fleeing the 1971 Bangladeshi genocide, exemplifying what literary critic Helen Vendler described as Ginsberg's persistent opposition to \"imperial politics\" and the \"persecution of the powerless\". His collection \"The Fall of America\" shared the annual National Book Award for Poetry in 1974. In 1979, he received the National Arts Club gold medal and was inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Letters. He was a Pulitzer Prize finalist in 1995 for his book \"Cosmopolitan Greetings: Poems 1986\u20131992\".\nBiography.\nEarly life and family.\nGinsberg was born into a Jewish family in Newark, New Jersey, and grew up in nearby Paterson. He was the second son of Louis Ginsberg, also born in Newark, a schoolteacher and published poet, and the former Naomi Levy, born in Nevel (Russia) and a fervent Marxist.\nAs a teenager, Ginsberg began to write letters to \"The New York Times\" about political issues, such as World War II and workers' rights. He published his first poems in the \"Paterson Morning Call\". While in high school, Ginsberg became interested in the works of Walt Whitman, inspired by his teacher's passionate reading. In 1943, Ginsberg graduated from Eastside High School and briefly attended Montclair State College before entering Columbia University on a scholarship from the Young Men's Hebrew Association of Paterson.\nIn 1945, he joined the Merchant Marine to earn money to continue his education at Columbia. While at Columbia, Ginsberg contributed to the \"Columbia Review\" literary journal, the \"Jester\" humor magazine, won the Woodberry Poetry Prize, served as president of the Philolexian Society (literary and debate group), and joined Boar's Head Society (poetry society).\nHe was a resident of Hartley Hall, where other Beat Generation poets such as Jack Kerouac and Herbert Gold also lived. Ginsberg has stated that he considered his required freshman seminar in Great Books, taught by Lionel Trilling, to be his favorite Columbia course.\nAccording to The Poetry Foundation, Ginsberg spent several months in a mental institution after he pleaded insanity during a hearing. He was allegedly being prosecuted for harboring stolen goods in his dorm room. It was noted that the stolen property was not his, but belonged to an acquaintance. Ginsberg also took part in public readings at the Episcopal St. Mark's Church in-the-Bowery which would later hold a memorial service for him after his death.\nRelationship with his parents.\nGinsberg referred to his parents in a 1985 interview as \"old-fashioned delicatessen philosophers\". His mother was also an active member of the Communist Party and took Ginsberg and his brother Eugene to party meetings. Ginsberg later said that his mother \"made up bedtime stories that all went something like: 'The good king rode forth from his castle, saw the suffering workers and healed them.'\" Of his father Ginsberg said: \"My father would go around the house either reciting Emily Dickinson and Longfellow under his breath or attacking T. S. Eliot for ruining poetry with his 'obscurantism.' I grew suspicious of both sides.\"\nNaomi Ginsberg had schizophrenia which often manifested as paranoid delusions, disordered thinking and multiple suicide attempts. She would claim, for example, that the president had implanted listening devices in their home and that her mother-in-law was trying to kill her. Her suspicion of those around her caused Naomi to draw closer to young Allen, \"her little pet,\" as Bill Morgan says in his biography of Ginsberg, titled \"I Celebrate Myself: The Somewhat Private Life of Allen Ginsberg\". She also tried to kill herself by slitting her wrists and was soon taken to Greystone, a mental hospital; she would spend much of Ginsberg's youth in mental hospitals. His experiences with his mother and her mental illness were a major inspiration for his two major works, \"Howl\" and his long autobiographical poem \"Kaddish for Naomi Ginsberg (1894\u20131956)\".\nWhen he was in junior high school, he accompanied his mother by bus to her therapist. The trip deeply disturbed Ginsberg\u2014he mentioned it and other moments from his childhood in \"Kaddish\". His experiences with his mother's mental illness and her institutionalization are also frequently referred to in \"Howl.\" For example, \"Pilgrim State, Rockland, and Grey Stone's foetid halls\" is a reference to institutions frequented by his mother and Carl Solomon, ostensibly the subject of the poem: Pilgrim State Hospital and Rockland State Hospital in New York and Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital in New Jersey. This is followed soon by the line \"with mother finally ******.\" Ginsberg later admitted the deletion was the expletive \"fucked.\" He also says of Solomon in section three, \"I'm with you in Rockland where you imitate the shade of my mother,\" once again showing the association between Solomon and his mother.\nGinsberg received a letter from his mother after her death responding to a copy of \"Howl\" he had sent her. It admonished Ginsberg to be good and stay away from drugs; she says, \"The key is in the window, the key is in the sunlight at the window\u2014I have the key\u2014Get married Allen don't take drugs\u2014the key is in the bars, in the sunlight in the window.\" In a letter she wrote to Ginsberg's brother Eugene, she said, \"God's informers come to my bed, and God himself I saw in the sky. The sunshine showed too, a key on the side of the window for me to get out. The yellow of the sunshine, also showed the key on the side of the window.\" These letters and the absence of a facility to recite kaddish inspired Ginsberg to write \"Kaddish\", which makes references to many details from Naomi's life, Ginsberg's experiences with her, and the letter, including the lines \"the key is in the light\" and \"the key is in the window.\"\nNew York Beats.\nIn Ginsberg's first year at Columbia he met fellow undergraduate Lucien Carr, who introduced him to a number of future Beat writers, including Jack Kerouac, William S. Burroughs, and John Clellon Holmes. They bonded, because they saw in one another an excitement about the potential of American youth, a potential that existed outside the strict conformist confines of post\u2013World War II, McCarthy-era America. Ginsberg and Carr talked excitedly about a \"New Vision\" (a phrase adapted from Yeats' \"A Vision\"), for literature and America. Carr also introduced Ginsberg to Neal Cassady, for whom Ginsberg had a long infatuation. In the first chapter of his 1957 novel \"On the Road\" Kerouac described the meeting between Ginsberg and Cassady. Kerouac saw them as the dark (Ginsberg) and light (Cassady) side of their \"New Vision\", a perception stemming partly from Ginsberg's association with communism, of which Kerouac had become increasingly distrustful. Though Ginsberg was never a member of the Communist Party, Kerouac named him \"Carlo Marx\" in \"On the Road\". This was a source of strain in their relationship.\nAlso, in New York, Ginsberg met Gregory Corso in the Pony Stable Bar. Corso, recently released from prison, was supported by the Pony Stable patrons and was writing poetry there the night of their meeting. Ginsberg claims he was immediately attracted to Corso, who was straight, but understood homosexuality after three years in prison. Ginsberg was even more struck by reading Corso's poems, realizing Corso was \"spiritually gifted.\" Ginsberg introduced Corso to the rest of his inner circle. In their first meeting at the Pony Stable, Corso showed Ginsberg a poem about a woman who lived across the street from him and sunbathed naked in the window. Amazingly, the woman happened to be Ginsberg's girlfriend that he was living with during one of his forays into heterosexuality. Ginsberg took Corso over to their apartment. There the woman proposed sex with Corso, who was still very young and fled in fear. Ginsberg introduced Corso to Kerouac and Burroughs and they began to travel together. Ginsberg and Corso remained lifelong friends and collaborators.\nShortly after this period in Ginsberg's life, he became romantically involved with Elise Nada Cowen after meeting her through Alex Greer, a philosophy professor at Barnard College whom she had dated for a while during the burgeoning Beat generation's period of development. As a Barnard student, Elise Cowen extensively read the poetry of Ezra Pound and T. S. Eliot, when she met Joyce Johnson and Leo Skir, among other Beat players. As Cowen had felt a strong attraction to darker poetry most of the time, Beat poetry seemed to provide an allure to what suggests a shadowy side of her persona. While at Barnard, Cowen earned the nickname \"Beat Alice\" as she had joined a small group of anti-establishment artists and visionaries known to outsiders as beatniks, and one of her first acquaintances at the college was the beat poet Joyce Johnson who later portrayed Cowen in her books, including \"Minor Characters\" and \"Come and Join the Dance\", which expressed the two women's experiences in the Barnard and Columbia Beat community. Through his association with Elise Cowen, Ginsberg discovered that they shared a mutual friend, Carl Solomon, to whom he later dedicated his most famous poem \"Howl.\" This poem is considered an autobiography of Ginsberg up to 1955, and a brief history of the Beat Generation through its references to his relationship to other Beat artists of that time.\nThe \"Blake vision\".\nIn 1948, in an apartment in East Harlem, Ginsberg experienced an auditory hallucination while masturbating and reading the poetry of William Blake, which he later referred to as his \"Blake vision\". Ginsberg claimed to have heard the voice of God\u2014also described as the \"voice of the Ancient of Days\"\u2014or of Blake himself reading \"Ah! Sun-flower\", \"The Sick Rose\" and \"The Little Girl Lost\". The experience lasted several days, with him believing that he had witnessed the interconnectedness of the universe; Ginsberg recounted that after looking at latticework on the fire escape of the apartment and then at the sky, he intuited that one had been crafted by human beings, while the other had been crafted by itself. He explained that this hallucination was not inspired by drug use, but said he sought to recapture the feeling of interconnectedness later with various drugs.\nSan Francisco Renaissance.\nGinsberg moved to San Francisco during the 1950s. Before \"Howl and Other Poems\" was published in 1956 by City Lights, he worked as a market researcher.\nIn 1954, in San Francisco, Ginsberg met Peter Orlovsky (1933\u20132010), with whom he fell in love and who remained his lifelong partner. Selections from their correspondence have been published.\nAlso in San Francisco, Ginsberg met members of the San Francisco Renaissance (James Broughton, Robert Duncan, Madeline Gleason and Kenneth Rexroth) and other poets who would later be associated with the Beat Generation in a broader sense. Ginsberg's mentor William Carlos Williams wrote an introductory letter to San Francisco Renaissance figurehead Kenneth Rexroth, who then introduced Ginsberg into the San Francisco poetry scene. There, Ginsberg also met three budding poets and Zen enthusiasts who had become friends at Reed College: Gary Snyder, Philip Whalen, and Lew Welch. In 1959, along with poets John Kelly, Bob Kaufman, A. D. Winans, and William Margolis, Ginsberg was one of the founders of the \"Beatitude\" poetry magazine.\nWally Hedrick\u2014a painter and co-founder of the Six Gallery\u2014approached Ginsberg in mid-1955 and asked him to organize a poetry reading at the Six Gallery. At first, Ginsberg refused, but once he had written a rough draft of \"Howl,\" he changed his \"fucking mind,\" as he put it. Ginsberg advertised the event as \"Six Poets at the Six Gallery.\" One of the most important events in Beat mythos, known simply as \"The Six Gallery reading\" took place on October 7, 1955. The event, in essence, brought together the East and West Coast factions of the Beat Generation. Of more personal significance to Ginsberg, the reading that night included the first public presentation of \"Howl,\" a poem that brought worldwide fame to Ginsberg and to many of the poets associated with him. An account of that night can be found in Kerouac's novel \"The Dharma Bums\", describing how change was collected from audience members to buy jugs of wine, and Ginsberg reading passionately, drunken, with arms outstretched.\nGinsberg's principal work, \"Howl,\" is well known for its opening line: \"I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical naked\u00a0[...].\" \"Howl\" was considered scandalous at the time of its publication, because of the rawness of its language. Shortly after its 1956 publication by San Francisco's City Lights Bookstore, it was banned for obscenity. The ban became a cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre among defenders of the First Amendment, and was later lifted, after Judge Clayton W. Horn declared the poem to possess redeeming artistic value. Ginsberg and Shig Murao, the City Lights manager who was jailed for selling \"Howl,\" became lifelong friends.\nBiographical references in \"Howl\".\nGinsberg claimed at one point that all of his work was an extended biography (like Kerouac's \"Duluoz Legend\"). \"Howl\" is not only a biography of Ginsberg's experiences before 1955, but also a history of the Beat Generation. Ginsberg also later claimed that at the core of \"Howl\" were his unresolved emotions about his schizophrenic mother. Though \"Kaddish\" deals more explicitly with his mother, \"Howl\" in many ways is driven by the same emotions. \"Howl\" chronicles the development of many important friendships throughout Ginsberg's life. He begins the poem with \"I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness\", which sets the stage for Ginsberg to describe Cassady and Solomon, immortalizing them into American literature. This madness was the \"angry fix\" that society needed to function\u2014madness was its disease. In the poem, Ginsberg focused on \"Carl Solomon! I'm with you in Rockland\", and, thus, turned Solomon into an archetypal figure searching for freedom from his \"straightjacket\". Though references in most of his poetry reveal much about his biography, his relationship to other members of the Beat Generation, and his own political views, \"Howl,\" his most famous poem, is still perhaps the best place to start.\nTo Paris and the \"Beat Hotel\", Tangier and India.\nIn 1957, Ginsberg surprised the literary world by abandoning San Francisco. After a spell in Morocco, he and Peter Orlovsky joined Gregory Corso in Paris. Corso introduced them to a shabby lodging house above a bar at 9 rue G\u00eet-le-C\u0153ur that was to become known as the Beat Hotel. They were soon joined by Burroughs and others. It was a productive, creative time for all of them. There, Ginsberg began his epic poem \"Kaddish,\" Corso composed \"Bomb\" and \"Marriage\", and Burroughs (with help from Ginsberg and Corso) put together \"Naked Lunch\" from previous writings. This period was documented by the photographer Harold Chapman, who moved in at about the same time, and took pictures constantly of the residents of the \"hotel\" until it closed in 1963. During 1962\u20131963, Ginsberg and Orlovsky travelled extensively across India, living half a year at a time in Calcutta (now Kolkata) and Benares (Varanasi). On his road to India he stayed two months in Athens ( 29/08/1961 - 31/10/1961) where he visited various cites such as Delphi, Mycines, Crete, and then he continued his journey to Israel, Kenya and finally India. Also during this time, he formed friendships with some of the prominent young Bengali poets of the time including Shakti Chattopadhyay and Sunil Gangopadhyay. Ginsberg had several political connections in India; most notably Pupul Jayakar who helped him extend his stay in India when the authorities were eager to expel him.\nEngland and the International Poetry Incarnation.\nIn May 1965, Ginsberg arrived in London, and offered to read anywhere for free. Shortly after his arrival, he gave a reading at Better Books, which was described by Jeff Nuttall as \"the first healing wind on a very parched collective mind.\" Tom McGrath wrote: \"This could well turn out to have been a very significant moment in the history of England\u2014or at least in the history of English Poetry.\"\nSoon after the bookshop reading, plans were hatched for the International Poetry Incarnation, which was held at the Royal Albert Hall in London on June 11, 1965. The event attracted an audience of 7,000, who heard readings and live and tape performances by a wide variety of figures, including Ginsberg, Adrian Mitchell, Alexander Trocchi, Harry Fainlight, Anselm Hollo, Christopher Logue, George MacBeth, Gregory Corso, Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Michael Horovitz, Simon Vinkenoog, Spike Hawkins and Tom McGrath. The event was organized by Ginsberg's friend, the filmmaker Barbara Rubin.\nPeter Whitehead documented the event on film and released it as \"Wholly Communion\". A book featuring images from the film and some of the poems that were performed was also published under the same title by Lorrimer in the UK and Grove Press in US.\nContinuing literary activity.\nThough the term \"Beat\" is most accurately applied to Ginsberg and his closest friends (Corso, Orlovsky, Kerouac, Burroughs, etc.), the term \"Beat Generation\" has become associated with many of the other poets Ginsberg met and became friends with in the late 1950s and early 1960s. A key feature of this term seems to be a friendship with Ginsberg. Friendship with Kerouac or Burroughs might also apply, but both writers later strove to disassociate themselves from the name \"Beat Generation.\" Part of their dissatisfaction with the term came from the mistaken identification of Ginsberg as the leader. Ginsberg never claimed to be the leader of a movement. He claimed that many of the writers with whom he had become friends in this period shared many of the same intentions and themes. Some of these friends include: David Amram, Bob Kaufman; Diane di Prima; Jim Cohn; poets associated with the Black Mountain College such as Charles Olson, Robert Creeley, and Denise Levertov; poets associated with the New York School such as Frank O'Hara and Kenneth Koch. LeRoi Jones before he became Amiri Baraka, who, after reading \"Howl\", wrote a letter to Ginsberg on a sheet of toilet paper. Baraka's independent publishing house Totem Press published Ginsberg's early work. Through a party organized by Baraka, Ginsberg was introduced to Langston Hughes while Ornette Coleman played saxophone.\nLater in his life, Ginsberg formed a bridge between the beat movement of the 1950s and the hippies of the 1960s, befriending, among others, Timothy Leary, Ken Kesey, Hunter S. Thompson, and Bob Dylan. Ginsberg gave his last public reading at Booksmith, a bookstore in the Haight-Ashbury neighborhood of San Francisco, a few months before his death. In 1993, Ginsberg visited the University of Maine at Orono to pay homage to the 90-year-old great Carl Rakosi.\nBuddhism and Krishna.\nIn 1950, Kerouac began studying Buddhism and shared what he learned from Dwight Goddard's \"Buddhist Bible\" with Ginsberg. Ginsberg first heard about the Four Noble Truths and such sutras as the Diamond Sutra at this time.\nGinsberg's spiritual journey began early on with his spontaneous visions, and continued with an early trip to India with Gary Snyder. Snyder had previously spent time in Kyoto to study at the First Zen Institute at Daitoku-ji Monastery. At one point, Snyder chanted the Prajnaparamita, which in Ginsberg's words \"blew my mind.\" His interest piqued, Ginsberg traveled to meet the Dalai Lama as well as the Karmapa at Rumtek Monastery. Continuing on his journey, Ginsberg met Dudjom Rinpoche in Kalimpong, who taught him: \"If you see something horrible, don't cling to it, and if you see something beautiful, don't cling to it.\"\nAfter returning to the United States, a chance encounter on a New York City street with Ch\u00f6gyam Trungpa Rinpoche (they both tried to catch the same cab), a Kagyu and Nyingma Tibetan Buddhist master, led to Trungpa becoming his friend and lifelong teacher. Ginsberg helped Trungpa and New York poet Anne Waldman in founding the Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics at Naropa University in Boulder, Colorado.\nGinsberg was also involved with Krishnaism. He had started incorporating chanting the Hare Krishna mantra into his religious practice in the mid-1960s. After learning that A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the founder of the Hare Krishna movement in the Western world had rented a store front in New York, he befriended him, visiting him often and suggesting publishers for his books, and a fruitful relationship began. This relationship is documented by Satsvarupa dasa Goswami in his biographical account \"Srila Prabhupada Lilamrta\". Ginsberg donated money, materials, and his reputation to help the Swami establish the first temple, and toured with him to promote his cause.\nDespite disagreeing with many of Bhaktivedanta Swami's required prohibitions, Ginsberg often sang the Hare Krishna mantra publicly as part of his philosophy and declared that it brought a state of ecstasy. He was glad that Bhaktivedanta Swami, an authentic swami from India, was now trying to spread the chanting in America. Along with other counterculture ideologists like Timothy Leary, Gary Snyder, and Alan Watts, Ginsberg hoped to incorporate Bhaktivedanta Swami and his chanting into the hippie movement, and agreed to take part in the Mantra-Rock Dance concert and to introduce the swami to the Haight-Ashbury hippie community.\nOn January 17, 1967, Ginsberg helped plan and organize a reception for Bhaktivedanta Swami at San Francisco International Airport, where fifty to a hundred hippies greeted the Swami, chanting Hare Krishna in the airport lounge with flowers in hands. To further support and promote Bhaktivendata Swami's message and chanting in San Francisco, Allen Ginsberg agreed to attend the Mantra-Rock Dance, a musical event 1967 held at the Avalon Ballroom by the San Francisco Hare Krishna temple. It featured some leading rock bands of the time: Big Brother and the Holding Company with Janis Joplin, the Grateful Dead, and Moby Grape, who performed there along with the Hare Krishna founder Bhaktivedanta Swami and donated proceeds to the Krishna temple. Ginsberg introduced Bhaktivedanta Swami to some three thousand hippies in the audience and led the chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra.\nMusic and chanting were both important parts of Ginsberg's live delivery during poetry readings. He often accompanied himself on a harmonium, and was often accompanied by a guitarist. It is believed that the Hindi and Buddhist poet Nagarjun had introduced Ginsberg to the harmonium in Banaras. According to Malay Roy Choudhury, Ginsberg refined his practice while learning from his relatives, including his cousin Savitri Banerjee. When Ginsberg asked if he could sing a song in praise of Lord Krishna on William F. Buckley, Jr.'s TV show \"Firing Line\" on September 3, 1968, Buckley acceded and the poet chanted slowly as he played dolefully on a harmonium. According to Richard Brookhiser, an associate of Buckley's, the host commented that it was \"the most unharried Krishna I've ever heard.\"\nAt the 1967 Human Be-In in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park, the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, and the 1970 Black Panther rally at Yale campus Allen chanted \"Om\" repeatedly over a sound system for hours on end.\nGinsberg further brought mantras into the world of rock and roll when he recited the Heart Sutra in the song \"Ghetto Defendant.\" The song appears on the 1982 album Combat Rock by British first wave punk band The Clash.\nGinsberg came in touch with the Hungryalist poets of Bengal, especially Malay Roy Choudhury, who introduced Ginsberg to the three fish with one head of Indian emperor Jalaluddin Mohammad Akbar. The three fish symbolised coexistence of all thought, philosophy, and religion.\nIn spite of Ginsberg's attraction to Eastern religions, the journalist Jane Kramer argues that he, like Whitman, adhered to an \"American brand of mysticism\" that was \"rooted in humanism and in a romantic and visionary ideal of harmony among men.\"\nThe Allen Ginsberg Estate and Jewel Heart International partnered to present \"Transforming Minds: Kyabje Gelek Rimpoche and Friends,\" a gallery and online exhibition of images of Gelek Rimpoche by Allen Ginsberg, a student with whom he had an \u201cindissoluble bond,\u201d in 2021 at Tibet House US in New York City. Fifty negatives from Ginsberg's Stanford University photo archive celebrated \"the unique relationship between Allen and Rimpoche.\" The selection of never-before presented images, featuring great Tibetan masters including the Dalai Lama, Tibetologists, and students were \"guided by Allen's extensive notes on the contact sheets and images he'd circled with the intention to print.\"\nIllness and death.\nIn 1960, he was treated for a tropical disease, and it is speculated that he contracted hepatitis from an unsterilized needle administered by a doctor, which played a role in his death 37 years later.\nGinsberg was a lifelong smoker, and though he tried to quit for health and religious reasons, his busy schedule in later life made it difficult, and he always returned to smoking.\nIn the 1970s, Ginsberg had two minor strokes which were first diagnosed as Bell's palsy, which gave him significant paralysis and stroke-like drooping of the muscles in one side of his face.\nLater in life, he also had constant minor ailments such as high blood pressure. Many of these symptoms were related to stress, but he never slowed down his schedule.\nGinsberg won a 1974 National Book Award for ' (split with Adrienne Rich, ').\nIn 1986, Ginsberg was awarded the Golden Wreath by the Struga Poetry Evenings International Festival in Macedonia, the second American poet to be so awarded since W. H. Auden. At Struga, Ginsberg met with the other Golden Wreath winners, Bulat Okudzhava and Andrei Voznesensky.\nIn 1989, Ginsberg appeared in Rosa von Praunheim's award-winning film \"Silence = Death\" about the fight of gay artists in New York City for AIDS-education and the rights of HIV infected people.\nIn 1993, the French Minister of Culture appointed Ginsberg a Chevalier des Arts et des Lettres.\nGinsberg continued to help his friends as much as he could: he gave money to Herbert Huncke out of his own pocket, regularly supplied neighbor Arthur Russell with an extension cord to power his home recording setup, and housed a broke, drug-addicted Harry Smith.\nWith the exception of a special guest appearance at the NYU Poetry Slam on February 20, 1997, Ginsberg gave what is thought to be his last reading at The Booksmith in San Francisco on December 16, 1996.\nAfter returning home from the hospital for the last time, where he had been unsuccessfully treated for congestive heart failure, Ginsberg continued making phone calls to say goodbye to nearly everyone in his address book. Some of the phone calls were sad and interrupted by crying, and others were joyous and optimistic. Ginsberg continued to write through his final illness, with his last poem, \"Things I'll Not Do (Nostalgias)\", written on March 30.\nHe died on April 5, 1997, surrounded by family and friends in his East Village loft in Manhattan, succumbing to liver cancer via complications of hepatitis at the age of 70. Gregory Corso, Roy Lichtenstein, Patti Smith and others came by to pay their respects. He was cremated, and his ashes were buried in his family plot in Gomel Chesed Cemetery in Newark. He was survived by Orlovsky.\nIn 1998, various writers, including Catfish McDaris read at a gathering at Ginsberg's farm to honor Allen and the Beats.\n\"Good Will Hunting\" (released in December 1997) was dedicated to Ginsberg, as well as Burroughs, who died four months later.\nSocial and political activism.\nFree speech.\nGinsberg's willingness to talk about taboo subjects made him a controversial figure during the conservative 1950s, and a significant figure in the 1960s. In the mid-1950s, no reputable publishing company would even consider publishing \"Howl\". At the time, such \"sex talk\" employed in \"Howl\" was considered by some to be vulgar or even a form of pornography, and could be prosecuted under law. Ginsberg used phrases such as \"cocksucker\", \"fucked in the ass\", and \"cunt\" as part of the poem's depiction of different aspects of American culture. Numerous books that discussed sex were banned at the time, including \"Lady Chatterley's Lover\". The sex that Ginsberg described did not portray the sex between heterosexual married couples, or even longtime lovers. Instead, Ginsberg portrayed casual sex. For example, in \"Howl\", Ginsberg praises the man \"who sweetened the snatches of a million girls.\" Ginsberg used gritty descriptions and explicit sexual language, pointing out the man \"who lounged hungry and lonesome through Houston seeking jazz or sex or soup.\" In his poetry, Ginsberg also discussed the then-taboo topic of homosexuality. The explicit sexual language that filled \"Howl\" eventually led to an important trial on First Amendment issues. Ginsberg's publisher was brought up on charges for publishing pornography, and the outcome led to a judge going on record dismissing charges, because the poem carried \"redeeming social importance,\" thus setting an important legal precedent. Ginsberg continued to broach controversial subjects throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. From 1970 to 1996, Ginsberg had a long-term affiliation with PEN American Center with efforts to defend free expression. When explaining how he approached controversial topics, he often pointed to Herbert Huncke: he said that when he first got to know Huncke in the 1940s, Ginsberg saw that he was sick from his heroin addiction, but at the time heroin was a taboo subject and Huncke was left with nowhere to go for help.\nRole in Vietnam War protests.\nGinsberg was a signer of the anti-war manifesto \"A Call to Resist Illegitimate Authority\", circulated among draft resistors in 1967 by members of the radical intellectual collective RESIST. Other signers and RESIST members included Mitchell Goodman, Henry Braun, Denise Levertov, Noam Chomsky, William Sloane Coffin, Dwight Macdonald, Robert Lowell, and Norman Mailer. In 1968, Ginsberg signed the \"Writers and Editors War Tax Protest\" pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War, and later became a sponsor of the War Tax Resistance project, which practiced and advocated tax resistance as a form of anti-war protest.\nHe was present the night of the Tompkins Square Park riot (1988) and provided an eyewitness account to \"The New York Times\".\nRelationship to communism.\nGinsberg talked openly about his connections with communism and his admiration for past communist heroes and the labor movement at a time when the Red Scare and McCarthyism were still raging. He admired Fidel Castro and many other Marxist figures from the 20th century. In \"America\" (1956), Ginsberg writes: \"America, I used to be a communist when I was a kid I'm not sorry\". Biographer Jonah Raskin has claimed that, despite his often stark opposition to communist orthodoxy, Ginsberg held \"his own idiosyncratic version of communism.\" On the other hand, when Donald Manes, a New York City politician, publicly accused Ginsberg of being a member of the Communist Party, Ginsberg objected: \"I am not, as a matter of fact, a member of the Communist party, nor am I dedicated to the overthrow of the U.S. government or any government by violence\u00a0... I must say that I see little difference between the armed and violent governments both Communist and Capitalist that I have observed\".\nGinsberg travelled to several communist countries to promote free speech. He claimed that communist countries, such as China, welcomed him because they thought he was an enemy of capitalism, but often turned against him when they saw him as a troublemaker. For example, in 1965 Ginsberg was deported from Cuba for publicly protesting the persecution of homosexuals. The Cubans sent him to Czechoslovakia, where one week after being named the \"Kr\u00e1l maj\u00e1lesu\" (\"King of May\", a students' festivity, celebrating spring and student life), Ginsberg was arrested for alleged drug use and public drunkenness, and the security agency StB confiscated several of his writings, which they considered to be lewd and morally dangerous. Ginsberg was then deported from Czechoslovakia on May 7, 1965, by order of the StB. V\u00e1clav Havel points to Ginsberg as an important inspiration.\nGay rights.\nOne contribution that is often considered his most significant and most controversial was his openness about homosexuality. Ginsberg was an early proponent of freedom for gay people. In 1943, he discovered within himself \"mountains of homosexuality.\" He expressed this desire openly and graphically in his poetry. He also struck a note for gay marriage by listing Peter Orlovsky, his lifelong companion, as his spouse in his \"Who's Who\" entry. Subsequent gay writers saw his frank talk about homosexuality as an opening to speak more openly and honestly about something often before only hinted at or spoken of in metaphor.\nIn writing about sexuality in graphic detail and in his frequent use of language seen as indecent, he challenged\u2014and ultimately changed\u2014obscenity laws. He was a staunch supporter of others whose expression challenged obscenity laws (William S. Burroughs and Lenny Bruce, for example).\nAssociation with NAMBLA.\nGinsberg was a supporter and member of the North American Man/Boy Love Association (NAMBLA), a pedophilia and pederasty advocacy organization in the United States that works to abolish age of consent laws and legalize sexual relations between adults and children. Saying that he joined the organization \"in defense of free speech\", Ginsberg stated: \"Attacks on NAMBLA stink of politics, witchhunting for profit, humorlessness, vanity, anger and ignorance\u00a0...\u00a0I'm a member of NAMBLA because I love boys too\u2014everybody does, who has a little humanity\". In 1994, Ginsberg appeared in a documentary on NAMBLA called \"\" (playing on the gay male slang term \"Chickenhawk\"), in which he read a \"graphic ode to youth\".\nIn her 2002 book \"Heartbreak\", Andrea Dworkin claimed Ginsberg had ulterior motives for allying with NAMBLA. In reference to his onetime friend Dworkin, Ginsberg stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I've known Andrea since she was a student. I had a conversation with her when I said I've had many young affairs, [with men who were] 16, 17, or 18. I said, 'What are you going to do, send me to jail?' And she said, 'You should be shot.' The problem is, she was molested when she was young, and she hasn't recovered from the trauma, and she's taking it out on ordinary lovers.\nDemystification of drugs.\nGinsberg talked often about drug use. He organized the New York City chapter of LeMar (Legalize Marijuana). Throughout the 1960s he took an active role in the demystification of LSD, and, with Timothy Leary, worked to promote its common use. He remained for many decades an advocate of marijuana legalization, and, at the same time, warned his audiences against the hazards of tobacco in his \"Put Down Your Cigarette Rag (Don't Smoke):\" \"Don't Smoke Don't Smoke Nicotine Nicotine No / No don't smoke the official Dope Smoke Dope Dope.\"\nCIA drug trafficking.\nGinsberg worked closely with Alfred W. McCoy on the latter's book \"The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia\", which claimed that the CIA was knowingly involved in the production of heroin in the Golden Triangle of Burma, Thailand, and Laos. In addition to working with McCoy, Ginsberg personally confronted Richard Helms, the director of the CIA in the 1970s, about the matter, but Helms denied that the CIA had anything to do with selling illegal drugs. Allen wrote many essays and articles, researching and compiling evidence of the CIA's alleged involvement in drug trafficking, but it took ten years, and the publication of McCoy's book in 1972, before anyone took him seriously. In 1978, Ginsberg received a note from the chief editor of \"The New York Times\", apologizing for not having taken his allegations seriously. The political subject is dealt with in his song/poem \"CIA Dope calypso\". The United States Department of State responded to McCoy's initial allegations stating that they were \"unable to find any evidence to substantiate them, much less proof.\" Subsequent investigations by the Inspector General of the CIA, United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs, and United States Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, a.k.a. the Church Committee, also found the charges to be unsubstantiated.\nWork.\nMost of Ginsberg's very early poetry was written in formal rhyme and meter like that of his father, and of his idol William Blake. His admiration for the writing of Jack Kerouac inspired him to take poetry more seriously. In 1955, upon the advice of a psychiatrist, Ginsberg dropped out of the working world to devote his entire life to poetry. Soon after, he wrote \"Howl\", the poem that brought him and his Beat Generation contemporaries to national attention and allowed him to live as a professional poet for the rest of his life. Later in life, Ginsberg entered academia, teaching poetry as Distinguished Professor of English at Brooklyn College from 1986 until his death.\nInspiration from friends.\nGinsberg claimed throughout his life that his biggest inspiration was Kerouac's concept of \"spontaneous prose.\" He believed literature should come from the soul without conscious restrictions. Ginsberg was much more prone to revise than Kerouac. For example, when Kerouac saw the first draft of \"Howl,\" he disliked the fact that Ginsberg had made editorial changes in pencil (transposing \"negro\" and \"angry\" in the first line, for example). Kerouac only wrote out his concepts of spontaneous prose at Ginsberg's insistence because Ginsberg wanted to learn how to apply the technique to his poetry.\nThe inspiration for \"Howl\" was Ginsberg's friend, Carl Solomon, and \"Howl\" is dedicated to him. Solomon was a Dada and Surrealism enthusiast (he introduced Ginsberg to Artaud) who had bouts of clinical depression. Solomon wanted to commit suicide, but he thought a form of suicide appropriate to dadaism would be to go to a mental institution and demand a lobotomy. The institution refused, giving him many forms of therapy, including electroshock therapy. Much of the final section of the first part of \"Howl\" is a description of this.\nGinsberg used Solomon as an example of all those ground down by the machine of \"Moloch.\" Moloch, to whom the second section is addressed, is a Levantine god to whom children were sacrificed. Ginsberg may have gotten the name from the Kenneth Rexroth poem \"Thou Shalt Not Kill,\" a poem about the death of one of Ginsberg's heroes, Dylan Thomas. Moloch is mentioned a few times in the Torah and references to Ginsberg's Jewish background are frequent in his work. Ginsberg said the image of Moloch was inspired by peyote visions he had of the Francis Drake Hotel in San Francisco which appeared to him as a skull; he took it as a symbol of the city (not specifically San Francisco, but all cities). Ginsberg later acknowledged in various publications and interviews that behind the visions of the Francis Drake Hotel were memories of the Moloch of Fritz Lang's film \"Metropolis\" (1927) and of the woodcut novels of Lynd Ward. Moloch has subsequently been interpreted as any system of control, including the conformist society of post-World War II America, focused on material gain, which Ginsberg frequently blamed for the destruction of all those outside of societal norms.\nHe also made sure to emphasize that Moloch is a part of humanity in multiple aspects, in that the decision to \"defy\" socially created systems of control\u2014and therefore go against Moloch\u2014is a form of self-destruction. Many of the characters Ginsberg references in \"Howl\", such as Neal Cassady and Herbert Huncke, destroyed themselves through excessive substance abuse or a generally wild lifestyle. The personal aspects of \"Howl\" are perhaps as important as the political aspects. Carl Solomon, the prime example of a \"best mind\" destroyed by defying society, is associated with Ginsberg's schizophrenic mother: the line \"with mother finally fucked\" comes after a long section about Carl Solomon, and in Part III, Ginsberg says: \"I'm with you in Rockland where you imitate the shade of my mother.\" Ginsberg later admitted that the drive to write \"Howl\" was fueled by sympathy for his ailing mother, an issue which he was not yet ready to deal with directly. He dealt with it directly with 1959's \"Kaddish\", which had its first public reading at a Catholic Worker Friday Night meeting, possibly due to its associations with Thomas Merton.\nInspiration from mentors and idols.\nGinsberg's poetry was strongly influenced by Modernism (most importantly the American style of Modernism pioneered by William Carlos Williams), Romanticism (specifically William Blake and John Keats), the beat and cadence of jazz (specifically that of bop musicians such as Charlie Parker), and his Kagyu Buddhist practice and Jewish background. He considered himself to have inherited the visionary poetic mantle handed down from the English poet and artist William Blake, the American poet Walt Whitman and the Spanish poet Federico Garc\u00eda Lorca. The power of Ginsberg's verse, its searching, probing focus, its long and lilting lines, as well as its New World exuberance, all echo the continuity of inspiration that he claimed.\nHe corresponded with William Carlos Williams, who was then in the middle of writing his epic poem \"Paterson\" about the industrial city near his home. After attending a reading by Williams, Ginsberg sent the older poet several of his poems and wrote an introductory letter. Most of these early poems were rhymed and metered and included archaic pronouns like \"thee.\" Williams disliked the poems and told Ginsberg, \"In this mode perfection is basic, and these poems are not perfect.\"\nThough he disliked these early poems, Williams loved the exuberance in Ginsberg's letter. He included the letter in a later part of \"Paterson\". He encouraged Ginsberg not to emulate the old masters, but to speak with his own voice and the voice of the common American. From Williams, Ginsberg learned to focus on strong visual images, in line with Williams' own motto \"No ideas but in things.\" Studying Williams' style led to a tremendous shift from the early formalist work to a loose, colloquial free verse style. Early breakthrough poems include \"Bricklayer's Lunch Hour\" and \"Dream Record\".\nCarl Solomon introduced Ginsberg to the work of Antonin Artaud (\"To Have Done with the Judgement of God\" and \"Van Gogh: The Man Suicided by Society\"), and Jean Genet (\"Our Lady of the Flowers\"). Philip Lamantia introduced him to other Surrealists and Surrealism continued to be an influence (for example, sections of \"Kaddish\" were inspired by Andr\u00e9 Breton's \"Free Union\"). Ginsberg claimed that the anaphoric repetition of \"Howl\" and other poems was inspired by Christopher Smart in such poems as \"Jubilate Agno\". Ginsberg also claimed other more traditional influences, such as: Franz Kafka, Herman Melville, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Edgar Allan Poe, and Emily Dickinson.\nGinsberg also made an intense study of haiku and the paintings of Paul C\u00e9zanne, from which he adapted a concept important to his work, which he called the \"Eyeball Kick\". He noticed in viewing C\u00e9zanne's paintings that when the eye moved from one color to a contrasting color, the eye would spasm, or \"kick.\" Likewise, he discovered that the contrast of two seeming opposites was a common feature in haiku. Ginsberg used this technique in his poetry, putting together two starkly dissimilar images: something weak with something strong, an artifact of high culture with an artifact of low culture, something holy with something unholy. The example Ginsberg most often used was \"hydrogen jukebox\" (which later became the title of a song cycle composed by Philip Glass with lyrics drawn from Ginsberg's poems). Another example is Ginsberg's observation on Bob Dylan during Dylan's hectic and intense 1966 electric-guitar tour, fueled by a cocktail of amphetamines, opiates, alcohol, and psychedelics, as a \"Dexedrine Clown\". The phrases \"eyeball kick\" and \"hydrogen jukebox\" both show up in \"Howl\", as well as a direct quote from C\u00e9zanne: \"Pater Omnipotens Aeterna Deus\".\nInspiration from music.\nAllen Ginsberg also found inspiration in music. He frequently included music in his poetry, invariably composing his tunes on an old Indian harmonium, which he often played during his readings. He wrote and recorded music to accompany William Blake's \"Songs of Innocence\" and \"Songs of Experience\". He also recorded a handful of other albums. To create music for \"Howl\" and \"Wichita Vortex Sutra,\" he worked with the minimalist composer, Philip Glass.\nGinsberg worked with, drew inspiration from, and inspired artists such as Bob Dylan, The Clash, Patti Smith, Phil Ochs, and The Fugs. He worked with Dylan on various projects and maintained a friendship with him over many years.\nIn 1981, Ginsberg recorded a song called \"Birdbrain.\" He was backed by the Gluons, and the track was released as a single. In 1996, he recorded a song co-written with Paul McCartney and Philip Glass, \"The Ballad of the Skeletons,\" which reached number 8 on the Triple J Hottest 100 for that year.\nStyle and technique.\nFrom the study of his idols and mentors and the inspiration of his friends\u2014not to mention his own experiments\u2014Ginsberg developed an individualistic style that's easily identified as Ginsbergian. Ginsberg stated that Whitman's long line was a dynamic technique few other poets had ventured to develop further, and Whitman is also often compared to Ginsberg because their poetry sexualized aspects of the male form.\nMany of Ginsberg's early long line experiments contain some sort of anaphora, repetition of a \"fixed base\" (for example \"who\" in \"Howl\", \"America\" in \"America\") and this has become a recognizable feature of Ginsberg's style. He said later this was a crutch because he lacked confidence; he did not yet trust \"free flight.\" In the 1960s, after employing it in some sections of \"Kaddish\" (\"caw\" for example) he, for the most part, abandoned the anaphoric form. 'Latter-Day Beat' Bob Dylan is known for using anaphora, as in 'Tangled Up in Blue' where the phrase, returned to at the end of every verse, takes the place of a chorus.\nSeveral of his earlier experiments with methods for formatting poems as a whole became regular aspects of his style in later poems. In the original draft of \"Howl\", each line is in a \"stepped triadic\" format reminiscent of William Carlos Williams. He abandoned the \"stepped triadic\" when he developed his long line although the stepped lines showed up later, most significantly in the travelogues of \"The Fall of America\". \"Howl\" and \"Kaddish\", arguably his two most important poems, are both organized as an inverted pyramid, with larger sections leading to smaller sections. In \"America\", he also experimented with a mix of longer and shorter lines.\nGinsberg's mature style made use of many specific, highly developed techniques, which he expressed in the \"poetic slogans\" he used in his Naropa teaching. Prominent among these was the inclusion of his unedited mental associations so as to reveal the mind at work (\"First thought, best thought.\" \"Mind is shapely, thought is shapely.\") He preferred expression through carefully observed physical details rather than abstract statements (\"Show, don't tell.\" \"No ideas but in things.\") In these he carried on and developed traditions of modernism in writing that are also found in Kerouac and Whitman.\nIn \"Howl\" and in his other poetry, Ginsberg drew inspiration from the epic, free verse style of the 19th-century American poet Walt Whitman. Both wrote passionately about the promise (and betrayal) of American democracy, the central importance of erotic experience, and the spiritual quest for the truth of everyday existence. J. D. McClatchy, editor of the \"Yale Review\", called Ginsberg \"the best-known American poet of his generation, as much a social force as a literary phenomenon.\" McClatchy added that Ginsberg, like Whitman, \"was a bard in the old manner\u2014outsized, darkly prophetic, part exuberance, part prayer, part rant. His work is finally a history of our era's psyche, with all its contradictory urges.\" McClatchy's barbed eulogies define the essential difference between Ginsberg (\"a beat poet whose writing was\u00a0[...] journalism raised by combining the recycling genius with a generous mimic-empathy, to strike audience-accessible chords; always lyrical and sometimes truly poetic\") and Kerouac (\"a poet of singular brilliance, the brightest luminary of a 'beat generation' he came to symbolise in popular culture\u00a0[...] [though] in reality he far surpassed his contemporaries\u00a0[...] Kerouac is an originating genius, exploring then answering\u2014like Rimbaud a century earlier, by necessity more than by choice\u2014the demands of authentic self-expression as applied to the evolving quicksilver mind of America's only literary virtuoso\u00a0[...]\").\nHonors.\nHis collection \"The Fall of America\" shared the annual U.S. National Book Award for Poetry in 1974. In 1979, he received the National Arts Club gold medal and was inducted into the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters. Ginsberg was a Pulitzer Prize finalist in 1995 for his book \"Cosmopolitan Greetings: Poems 1986\u20131992\". In 1993, he received a John Jay Award posthumously from Columbia.\nIn 2014, Ginsberg was one of the inaugural honorees in the Rainbow Honor Walk, a walk of fame in San Francisco's Castro neighborhood noting LGBTQ people who have \"made significant contributions in their fields.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1018", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1018", "title": "Algebraically closed field", "text": "Algebraic structure for which the fundamental theorem of algebra is true\nIn mathematics, a field \"F\" is algebraically closed if every non-constant polynomial in \"F\"[\"x\"] (the univariate polynomial ring with coefficients in \"F\") has a root in \"F\".\nExamples.\nAs an example, the field of real numbers is not algebraically closed, because the polynomial equation formula_1 has no solution in real numbers, even though all its coefficients (1 and 0) are real. The same argument proves that no subfield of the real field is algebraically closed; in particular, the field of rational numbers is not algebraically closed. By contrast, the fundamental theorem of algebra states that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed. Another example of an algebraically closed field is the field of (complex) algebraic numbers.\nNo finite field \"F\" is algebraically closed, because if \"a\"1, \"a\"2, ..., \"an\" are the elements of \"F\", then the polynomial (\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"1)(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"2)\u00a0\u22ef\u00a0(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"\"n\")\u00a0+\u00a01\nhas no zero in \"F\". However, the union of all finite fields of a fixed characteristic \"p\" is an algebraically closed field, which is, in fact, the algebraic closure of the field formula_2 with \"p\" elements.\nEquivalent properties.\nGiven a field \"F\", the assertion \"\"F\" is algebraically closed\" is equivalent to other assertions:\nThe only irreducible polynomials are those of degree one.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if the only irreducible polynomials in the polynomial ring \"F\"[\"x\"] are those of degree one.\nThe assertion \"the polynomials of degree one are irreducible\" is trivially true for any field. If \"F\" is algebraically closed and \"p\"(\"x\") is an irreducible polynomial of \"F\"[\"x\"], then it has some root \"a\" and therefore \"p\"(\"x\") is a multiple of \"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\". Since \"p\"(\"x\") is irreducible, this means that \"p\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"k\"(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\"), for some \"k\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"F\"\u00a0\\\u00a0{0}. On the other hand, if \"F\" is not algebraically closed, then there is some non-constant polynomial \"p\"(\"x\") in \"F\"[\"x\"] without roots in \"F\". Let \"q\"(\"x\") be some irreducible factor of \"p\"(\"x\"). Since \"p\"(\"x\") has no roots in \"F\", \"q\"(\"x\") also has no roots in \"F\". Therefore, \"q\"(\"x\") has degree greater than one, since every first degree polynomial has one root in \"F\".\nEvery polynomial is a product of first degree polynomials.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if every polynomial \"p\"(\"x\") of degree \"n\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a01, with coefficients in \"F\", splits into linear factors. In other words, there are elements \"k\",\u00a0\"x\"1,\u00a0\"x\"2,\u00a0...,\u00a0\"xn\" of the field \"F\" such that \"p\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"k\"(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"x\"1)(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"x\"2)\u00a0\u22ef\u00a0(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"xn\").\nIf \"F\" has this property, then clearly every non-constant polynomial in \"F\"[\"x\"] has some root in \"F\"; in other words, \"F\" is algebraically closed. On the other hand, that the property stated here holds for \"F\" if \"F\" is algebraically closed follows from the previous property together with the fact that, for any field \"K\", any polynomial in \"K\"[\"x\"] can be written as a product of irreducible polynomials.\nPolynomials of prime degree have roots.\nIf every polynomial over \"F\" of prime degree has a root in \"F\", then every non-constant polynomial has a root in \"F\". It follows that a field is algebraically closed if and only if every polynomial over \"F\" of prime degree has a root in \"F\".\nThe field has no proper algebraic extension.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if it has no proper algebraic extension.\nIf \"F\" has no proper algebraic extension, let \"p\"(\"x\") be some irreducible polynomial in \"F\"[\"x\"]. Then the quotient of \"F\"[\"x\"] modulo the ideal generated by \"p\"(\"x\") is an algebraic extension of \"F\" whose degree is equal to the degree of \"p\"(\"x\"). Since it is not a proper extension, its degree is 1 and therefore the degree of \"p\"(\"x\") is\u00a01.\nOn the other hand, if \"F\" has some proper algebraic extension \"K\", then the minimal polynomial of an element in \"K\"\u00a0\\\u00a0\"F\" is irreducible and its degree is greater than\u00a01.\nThe field has no proper finite extension.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if it has no proper finite extension because if, within the previous proof, the term \"algebraic extension\" is replaced by the term \"finite extension\", then the proof is still valid. (Finite extensions are necessarily algebraic.)\nEvery endomorphism of \"Fn\" has some eigenvector.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if, for each natural number \"n\", every linear map from \"Fn\" into itself has some eigenvector.\nAn endomorphism of \"Fn\" has an eigenvector if and only if its characteristic polynomial has some root. Therefore, when \"F\" is algebraically closed, every endomorphism of \"Fn\" has some eigenvector. On the other hand, if every endomorphism of \"Fn\" has an eigenvector, let \"p\"(\"x\") be an element of \"F\"[\"x\"]. Dividing by its leading coefficient, we get another polynomial \"q\"(\"x\") which has roots if and only if \"p\"(\"x\") has roots. But if \"q\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a0\"xn\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"a\"\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01\"x\"\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01+\u00a0\u22ef\u00a0+\u00a0\"a\"0, then \"q\"(\"x\") is the characteristic polynomial of the \"n\u00d7n\" companion matrix\nformula_3\nDecomposition of rational expressions.\nThe field \"F\" is algebraically closed if and only if every rational function in one variable \"x\", with coefficients in \"F\", can be written as the sum of a polynomial function with rational functions of the form \"a\"/(\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"b\")\"n\", where \"n\" is a natural number, and \"a\" and \"b\" are elements of \"F\".\nIf \"F\" is algebraically closed then, since the irreducible polynomials in \"F\"[\"x\"] are all of degree 1, the property stated above holds by the theorem on partial fraction decomposition.\nOn the other hand, suppose that the property stated above holds for the field \"F\". Let \"p\"(\"x\") be an irreducible element in \"F\"[\"x\"]. Then the rational function 1/\"p\" can be written as the sum of a polynomial function \"q\" with rational functions of the form \"a\"/(\"x\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0\"b\")\"n\". Therefore, the rational expression\nformula_4\ncan be written as a quotient of two polynomials in which the denominator is a product of first degree polynomials. Since \"p\"(\"x\") is irreducible, it must divide this product and, therefore, it must also be a first degree polynomial.\nRelatively prime polynomials and roots.\nFor any field \"F\", if two polynomials \"p\"(\"x\"),\"q\"(\"x\")\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"F\"[\"x\"] are relatively prime then they do not have a common root, for if \"a\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"F\" was a common root, then\u00a0\"p\"(\"x\") and \u00a0\"q\"(\"x\") would both be multiples of \"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\" and therefore they would not be relatively prime. The fields for which the reverse implication holds (that is, the fields such that whenever two polynomials have no common root then they are relatively prime) are precisely the algebraically closed fields.\nIf the field \"F\" is algebraically closed, let \"p\"(\"x\") and \"q\"(\"x\") be two polynomials which are not relatively prime and let \"r\"(\"x\") be their greatest common divisor. Then, since \"r\"(\"x\") is not constant, it will have some root \"a\", which will be then a common root of \"p\"(\"x\") and \"q\"(\"x\").\nIf \"F\" is not algebraically closed, let \"p\"(\"x\") be a polynomial whose degree is at least 1 without roots. Then \"p\"(\"x\") and \"p\"(\"x\") are not relatively prime, but they have no common roots (since none of them has roots).\nOther properties.\nIf \"F\" is an algebraically closed field and \"n\" is a natural number, then \"F\" contains all \"n\"th roots of unity, because these are (by definition) the \"n\" (not necessarily distinct) zeroes of the polynomial \"xn\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01. A field extension that is contained in an extension generated by the roots of unity is a \"cyclotomic extension\", and the extension of a field generated by all roots of unity is sometimes called its \"cyclotomic closure\". Thus algebraically closed fields are cyclotomically closed. The converse is not true. Even assuming that every polynomial of the form \"xn\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\" splits into linear factors is not enough to assure that the field is algebraically closed.\nIf a proposition which can be expressed in the language of first-order logic is true for an algebraically closed field, then it is true for every algebraically closed field with the same characteristic. Furthermore, if such a proposition is valid for an algebraically closed field with characteristic\u00a00, then not only is it valid for all other algebraically closed fields with characteristic\u00a00, but there is some natural number \"N\" such that the proposition is valid for every algebraically closed field with characteristic\u00a0\"p\" when \"p\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"N\".\nEvery field \"F\" has some extension which is algebraically closed. Such an extension is called an algebraically closed extension. Among all such extensions there is one and only one (up to isomorphism, but not unique isomorphism) which is an algebraic extension of \"F\"; it is called the algebraic closure of \"F\".\nThe theory of algebraically closed fields has quantifier elimination.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "1019", "revid": "16771471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1019", "title": "August 6", "text": "Day of the yearAugust 6 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1020", "revid": "38841215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1020", "title": "Anatoly Karpov", "text": "Russian chess champion (born 1951)\nAnatoly Yevgenyevich Karpov (Russian: , ]; born May 23, 1951) is a Russian and former Soviet chess grandmaster, former World Chess Champion, \u2063and politician. He was the 12th World Chess Champion from 1975 to 1985, a three-time FIDE World Champion (1993, 1996, 1998), twice World Chess champion as a member of the USSR team (1985, 1989), and a six-time winner of Chess Olympiads as a member of the USSR team (1972, 1974, 1980, 1982, 1986, 1988). The International Association of Chess Press awarded him nine Chess Oscars (1973, 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1979, 1980, 1981, 1984).\nKarpov's chess tournament successes include over 160 first-place finishes. He had a peak Elo rating of 2780, and his 102 total months at world number one is the third-longest of all time, behind Magnus Carlsen and Garry Kasparov, since the inception of the FIDE ranking list in 1970.\nKarpov is also an elected Member of the State Duma in Russia. Since 2006, he has chaired the Commission for Ecological Safety and Environmental Protection of the Civic Chamber of the Russian Federation, and since 2007, he has been a member of the Public Council under the Ministry of Defence.\nEarly life.\nKarpov was born into a Russian family on May 23, 1951, in Zlatoust, in the Urals region of the former Soviet Union, and learned to play chess at the age of four. His early rise in chess was swift, as he became a candidate master by age 11. At 12, he was accepted into Mikhail Botvinnik's prestigious chess school, though Botvinnik made the following remark about the young Karpov: \"The boy does not have a clue about chess, and there's no future at all for him in this profession.\"\nKarpov acknowledged that his understanding of chess theory was very confused at that time, and later wrote that the homework Botvinnik assigned greatly helped him, since it required that he consult chess books and work diligently. Karpov improved so quickly under Botvinnik's tutelage that he became the youngest Soviet master in history at the age of fifteen in 1966; this tied the record established by Boris Spassky in 1952.\nCareer.\nYoung master.\nKarpov finished first in his first international tournament, in T\u0159inec, several months later, ahead of Viktor Kupreichik. In 1967, he won the annual Niemeyer Tournament in Groningen. Karpov won a gold medal for academic excellence in high school, and entered Moscow State University in 1968 to study mathematics. He later transferred to Leningrad State University, eventually graduating from there in economics. One reason for the transfer was to be closer to his coach, grandmaster Semyon Furman, who lived in Leningrad. In his writings, Karpov credits Furman as a major influence on his development as a world-class player.\nIn 1969, Karpov became the first Soviet player since Spassky (1955) to win the World Junior Championship, scoring an undefeated 10/11 in the final A group at Stockholm. This victory earned him the International Master title. In 1970, Karpov tied for fourth and fifth places with Pal Benko at an international tournament in Caracas, Venezuela, and earned the international grandmaster title. FIDE awarded him the title during its 41st congress, held during the Chess Olympiad in Siegen, West Germany in September 1970.\nGrandmaster.\nKarpov won the 1971 Alekhine Memorial tournament in Moscow (jointly with Leonid Stein), ahead of a star-studded field, for his first significant adult victory. His Elo rating shot from 2540 in 1971 to 2660 in 1973, during which he shared second place in the 1973 Soviet championship, one point behind Spassky, and qualified for the Leningrad Interzonal.\nCandidate.\nKarpov's world junior championship qualified him for one of the two Interzonals, a stage in the 1975 World Championship cycle to choose the challenger to play world champion Bobby Fischer. He finished equal first in the Leningrad Interzonal, qualifying for the 1974 Candidates Matches.\nKarpov defeated Lev Polugaevsky by the score of +3=5 in the first Candidates' match, earning the right to face former champion Boris Spassky in the semifinal round. Karpov was on record saying that he believed Spassky would easily beat him and win the Candidates' cycle to face Fischer, and that he (Karpov) would win the following Candidates' cycle in 1977. Spassky won the first game as Black in good style, but tenacious, aggressive play from Karpov secured him overall victory by +4\u22121=6.\nThe Candidates' final was played in Moscow with Victor Korchnoi. Karpov took an early lead, winning the second game against the Sicilian Dragon, then scoring another victory in the sixth game. Following ten consecutive draws, Korchnoi threw away a winning position in the seventeenth game to give Karpov a 3\u20130 lead. In game 19, Korchnoi succeeded in winning a long endgame, then notched a speedy victory after a blunder by Karpov two games later. Three more draws, the last agreed by Karpov with Karpov in a clearly better position, closed the match, as he thus prevailed +3\u22122=19, moving on to challenge Fischer for the world title.\nMatch with Fischer in 1975.\nThough a world championship match between Karpov and Fischer was highly anticipated, those hopes were never realised. Fischer not only insisted that the match be the first to ten wins (draws not counting), but also that the champion retain the crown if the score was tied 9\u20139. FIDE, the International Chess Federation, refused to allow this proviso, and gave both players a deadline of April 1, 1975, to agree to play the match under the FIDE-approved rules. When Fischer did not agree, FIDE President Max Euwe declared on April 3, 1975, that Fischer had forfeited his title and Karpov was the new World Champion. Karpov later attempted to set up another match with Fischer, but the negotiations fell through. This thrust the young Karpov into the role of World Champion without having faced the reigning champion.\nGarry Kasparov argued that Karpov would have had good chances because he had beaten Spassky convincingly and was a new breed of tough professional, and indeed had higher quality games, while Fischer had been inactive for three years. This view is echoed by Karpov himself. Spassky thought that Fischer would have won in 1975, but Karpov would have qualified again and beaten Fischer in 1978.\nKarpov has said that if he had had the opportunity to play Fischer for the championship in his twenties, he could have been a much better player as a result.\nWorld champion.\nDetermined to prove himself a legitimate champion, Karpov participated in nearly every major tournament for the next ten years. He convincingly won the Milan tournament in 1975, and captured his first of three Soviet titles in 1976. He created a phenomenal streak of tournament wins against the strongest players in the world. Karpov held the record for most consecutive tournament victories (9) until it was shattered by Garry Kasparov (14). As a result, most chess professionals soon agreed that Karpov was a legitimate world champion.\nIn 1978, Karpov's first title defence was against Viktor Korchnoi, the opponent he had defeated in the 1973\u201375 Candidates' cycle; the match was played at Baguio, Philippines, with the winner needing six victories.\nAs in 1974, Karpov took an early lead, winning the eighth game after seven draws to open the match. When the score was +5\u22122=20 in Karpov's favour, Korchnoi staged a comeback, and won three of the next four games to draw level with Karpov. Karpov then won the very next game to retain the title (+6\u22125=21).\nThree years later, Korchnoi reemerged as the Candidates' winner against German finalist Robert H\u00fcbner to challenge Karpov in Merano, Italy. Karpov handily won this match, 11\u20137 (+6\u22122=10), in what is remembered as the \"Massacre in Merano\".\nKarpov's tournament career reached a peak at the Montreal \"Tournament of Stars\" tournament in 1979, where he finished joint first (+7\u22121=10) with Mikhail Tal ahead of a field of strong grandmasters completed by Jan Timman, Ljubomir Ljubojevi\u0107, Boris Spassky, Vlastimil Hort, Lajos Portisch, Robert H\u00fcbner, Bent Larsen and Lubomir Kavalek. He dominated Las Palmas in 1977 with 13\u00bd/15. He also won the prestigious Bugojno tournament in 1978 (shared), 1980 and 1986, the Linares tournament in 1981 (shared with Larry Christiansen) and 1994, the Tilburg tournament in 1977, 1979, 1980, 1982, and 1983, and the Soviet Championship in 1976, 1983, and 1988.\nKarpov represented the Soviet Union at six Chess Olympiads, in all of which the USSR won the team gold medal. He played as the first reserve at Skopje 1972, winning the board prize with 13/15. At Nice 1974, he advanced to board one and again won the board prize with 12/14. At La Valletta 1980, he was again board one and scored 9/12. At Lucerne 1982, he scored 6\u00bd/8 on board one. At Dubai 1986, he scored 6/9 on board two. His last was Thessaloniki 1988, where on board two he scored 8/10. In Olympiad play, Karpov lost only two games out of 68 played.\nTo illustrate Karpov's dominance over his peers as champion, his score was +11\u22122=20 versus Spassky, +5=12 versus Robert H\u00fcbner, +6\u22121=16 versus Ulf Andersson, +3\u22121=10 versus Vasily Smyslov, +1=16 versus Mikhail Tal, and +10\u22122=13 versus Ljubomir Ljubojevi\u0107.\nRivalry with Kasparov.\nKarpov had cemented his position as the world's best player and world champion by the time Garry Kasparov arrived on the scene. In their first match, the World Chess Championship 1984 in Moscow, the first player to win six games would win the match. Karpov built a 4\u20130 lead after nine games. The next 17 games were drawn, setting a record for world title matches, and it took Karpov until game 27 to gain his fifth win. In game 31, Karpov had a winning position but failed to take advantage and settled for a draw. He lost the next game, after which 14 more draws ensued. Karpov held a solidly winning position in Game 41, but again blundered and had to settle for a draw. After Kasparov won games 47 and 48, FIDE President Florencio Campomanes unilaterally terminated the match, citing the players' health. Karpov is said to have lost 10\u00a0kg over the course of the match. The match had lasted an unprecedented five months, with five wins for Karpov, three for Kasparov, and 40 draws.\nA rematch was set for later in 1985, also in Moscow. The events of the so-called Marathon Match forced FIDE to return to the previous format, with a match limited to 24 games (with Karpov remaining champion if the match finished 12\u201312). Karpov needed to win the final game to draw the match and retain his title, but lost, surrendering the title to his opponent. The final score was 13\u201311 (+3\u22125=16) in favour of Kasparov.\nKarpov remained a formidable opponent (and the world No. 2) until the mid-1990s. He fought Kasparov in three more world championship matches in 1986 (held in London and Leningrad), 1987 (in Seville), and 1990 (in New York City and Lyon). All three matches were extremely close: the scores were 11\u00bd\u201312\u00bd (+4\u22125=15), 12\u201312 (+4\u22124=16), and 11\u00bd\u201312\u00bd (+3\u22124=17). In all three matches, Karpov had winning chances up to the last games. The ending of the 1987 Seville match was particularly dramatic. Karpov won the 23rd game when Kasparov miscalculated a combination. In the final game, needing only a draw to win the title, Karpov cracked under time pressure at the end of the first session of play, missed a variation leading to an almost forced draw, and allowed Kasparov to adjourn the game with an extra pawn. After a further mistake in the second session, Karpov was slowly ground down and resigned on move 64, ending the match and allowing Kasparov to keep the title.\nIn their five world championship matches, Karpov scored 19 wins, 21 losses, and 104 draws in 144 games. Overall, Karpov played five matches against Kasparov for the title from 1984 to 1990 without ever defeating him in a match.\nFIDE champion again (1993\u20131999).\nIn 1992, Karpov lost a Candidates Match against Nigel Short. But in the World Chess Championship 1993, Karpov reacquired the FIDE World Champion title when Kasparov and Short split from FIDE. Karpov defeated Timman \u2013 the loser of the Candidates' final against Short.\nThe next major meeting of Kasparov and Karpov was the 1994 Linares chess tournament. The field, in eventual finishing order, was Karpov, Kasparov, Shirov, Bareev, Kramnik, Lautier, Anand, Kamsky, Topalov, Ivanchuk, Gelfand, Illescas, Judit Polg\u00e1r, and Beliavsky; with an average Elo rating of 2685, the highest ever at that time. Impressed by the strength of the tournament, Kasparov had said several days before the tournament that the winner could rightly be called the world champion of tournaments. Perhaps spurred on by this comment, Karpov played the best tournament of his life. He was undefeated and earned 11 points out of 13 (the best world-class tournament winning percentage since Alekhine won San Remo in 1930), finishing 2\u00bd points ahead of second-place Kasparov and Shirov. Many of his wins were spectacular (in particular, his win over Topalov is considered possibly the finest of his career). This performance against the best players in the world put his Elo rating tournament performance at 2985, the highest performance rating of any player in history up until 2009, when Magnus Carlsen won the category XXI Pearl Spring chess tournament with a performance of 3002. Chess statistician Jeff Sonas considers Karpov's Linares performance the best tournament result in history.\nKarpov defended his FIDE title against the rising star Gata Kamsky (+6\u22123=9) in 1996. In 1998, FIDE largely scrapped the old system of Candidates' Matches, instead having a large knockout event in which a large number of players contested short matches against each other over just a few weeks. In the first of these events, the FIDE World Chess Championship 1998, champion Karpov was seeded straight into the final, defeating Viswanathan Anand (+2\u22122=2, rapid tiebreak 2\u20130). In the subsequent cycle, the format was changed, with the champion having to qualify. Karpov refused to defend his title, and ceased to be FIDE World Champion after the FIDE World Chess Championship 1999.\nTowards retirement.\nKarpov's classical tournament play has been seriously limited since 1997, since he prefers to be more involved in Russian politics. He had been a member of the Supreme Soviet Commission for Foreign Affairs and the president of the Soviet Peace Fund before the Soviet Union dissolved. In addition, he has been involved in several disputes with FIDE. In the September 2009 FIDE rating list, he dropped out of the world's Top 100 for the first time.\nKarpov usually limits his play to exhibition events, and has revamped his style to specialize in rapid chess. In 2002, he won a match against Kasparov, defeating him in a rapid time control match 2\u00bd\u20131\u00bd. In 2006, he tied for first with Kasparov in a blitz tournament, ahead of Korchnoi and Judit Polg\u00e1r.\nKarpov and Kasparov played a mixed 12-game match from September 21\u201324, 2009, in Valencia, Spain. It consisted of four rapid (or semi-rapid) and eight blitz games and took place exactly 25 years after the two players' legendary encounter at the World Chess Championship 1984. Kasparov won the match 9\u20133.\nKarpov played a match against Yasser Seirawan in 2012 in St. Louis, Missouri, an important center of the North American chess scene, winning 8\u20136 (+5\u22123=6).\nIn November 2012, he won the Cap d'Agde rapid tournament that bears his name (Anatoly Karpov Trophy), beating Vasyl Ivanchuk (ranked 9th in the October 2012 FIDE world rankings) in the final.\nProfessional and political career after retirement from chess.\nIn 2003, Karpov opened his first American chess school in Lindsborg, Kansas. On March 2, 2022, the school announced a name change to International School of Chess of the Midwest due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nKarpov has been a member of the sixth, seventh and eighth Russian State Dumas. Since 2005, he has been a member of the Public Chamber of Russia. He has involved himself in several humanitarian causes, such as advocating the use of iodised salt. On December 17, 2012, Karpov supported the law in the Russian Parliament banning adoption of Russian orphans by U.S. citizens.\nKarpov expressed support of the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, and accused Europe of trying to demonize Putin. In August 2019, Maxim Dlugy said that Karpov had been waiting since March for the approval of a non-immigrant visa to the United States, despite frequently visiting the country since 1972. Karpov had been scheduled to teach a summer camp at the Chess Max Academy. Dlugy said that Karpov had been questioned at the US embassy in Moscow about whether he planned to communicate with American politicians. Karpov was among the Russian State Duma members placed under sanctions by the EU and UK during the Russo-Ukrainian War. In March 2022, after the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the FIDE Council suspended Karpov's title of FIDE Ambassador for Life. \nIn November 2022, Karpov received a head injury that left him concussed; according to some sources, he was placed in an induced coma. Sources vary on the cause of the injury, including allegations that he was attacked while heavily intoxicated. Karpov's daughter Sofia claimed that he had accidentally fallen; this was echoed by the Russian Chess Federation. However he has made a full recovery since the incident. \nCandidate for FIDE presidency.\nIn March 2010, Karpov announced that he would be a candidate for the presidency of FIDE. The election took place in September 2010 at the 39th Chess Olympiad. In May, a fundraising event took place in New York with the participation of Kasparov and Magnus Carlsen, who both supported his bid and campaigned for him. Nigel Short also supported Karpov's candidacy. On September 29, 2010, Kirsan Ilyumzhinov was reelected as president of FIDE, 95 votes to 55.\nStyle.\nKarpov's \"boa constrictor\" playing style is solidly positional, taking minimal risks but reacting mercilessly to the slightest error by his opponent. As a result, he is often compared to Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca, the third world champion. Karpov himself describes his style as follows:Let us say the game may be continued in two ways: one of them is a beautiful tactical blow that gives rise to variations that don't yield to precise calculations; the other is clear positional pressure that leads to an endgame with microscopic chances of victory... I would choose [the latter] without thinking twice. If the opponent offers keen play I don't object; but in such cases I get less satisfaction, even if I win, than from a game conducted according to all the rules of strategy with its ruthless logic.\nHobbies.\nKarpov's extensive stamp collection of Belgian philately and Belgian Congo stamps and postal history covering mail from 1742 through 1980 was sold by David Feldman's auction company between December 2011 and 2012. He is also known to have large chess stamp and chess book collections. His private chess library consists of 9,000 books.\nBooks.\nKarpov has authored or co-authored several books, most of which have been translated into English.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1021", "revid": "41946056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1021", "title": "Aspect ratio", "text": "Attribute of a geometric shape\nThe aspect ratio of a geometric shape is the ratio of its sizes in different dimensions. For example, the aspect ratio of a rectangle is the ratio of its longer side to its shorter side\u2014the ratio of width to height, when the rectangle is oriented as a \"landscape\".\nThe aspect ratio is most often expressed as two integer numbers separated by a colon (x:y), less commonly as a simple or decimal fraction. The values x and y do not represent actual widths and heights but, rather, the proportion between width and height. As an example, 8:5, 16:10, 1.6:1, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;8\u20445 and 1.6 are all ways of representing the same aspect ratio.\nIn objects of more than two dimensions, such as hyperrectangles, the aspect ratio can still be defined as the ratio of the longest side to the shortest side.\nApplications and uses.\nThe term is most commonly used with reference to:\nAspect ratios of simple shapes.\nRectangles.\nFor a rectangle, the aspect ratio denotes the ratio of the width to the height of the rectangle. A square has the smallest possible aspect ratio of 1:1.\nExamples:\nEllipses.\nFor an ellipse, the aspect ratio denotes the ratio of the major axis to the minor axis. An ellipse with an aspect ratio of 1:1 is a circle.\nAspect ratios of general shapes.\nIn geometry, there are several alternative definitions to aspect ratios of general compact sets in a d-dimensional space:\nIf the dimension \"d\" is fixed, then all reasonable definitions of aspect ratio are equivalent to within constant factors.\nNotations.\nAspect ratios are mathematically expressed as \"x\":\"y\" (pronounced \"x-to-y\").\nCinematographic aspect ratios are usually denoted as a (rounded) decimal multiple of width vs unit height, while photographic and videographic aspect ratios are usually defined and denoted by whole number ratios of width to height. In digital images there is a subtle distinction between the \"display\" aspect ratio (the image as displayed) and the \"storage\" aspect ratio (the ratio of pixel dimensions); see Distinctions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1022", "revid": "2824367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1022", "title": "Auto racing", "text": "Motorsport involving the racing of cars for competition\nAuto racing (also known as car racing, motor racing, or automobile racing) is a motorsport involving the racing of automobiles for competition.\nAuto racing has existed since the invention of the automobile. Races of various sorts were organised, with the first recorded as early as 1867. Many of the earliest events were effectively reliability trials, aimed at proving these new machines were a practical mode of transport, but soon became an important way for automobile makers to demonstrate their machines. By the 1930s, specialist racing cars had developed.\nThere are now numerous different categories, each with different rules and regulations.\nHistory.\nThe first prearranged match race of two self-powered road vehicles over a prescribed route occurred at 4:30 A.M. on August 30, 1867, between Ashton-under-Lyne and Old Trafford, England, a distance of . It was won by the carriage of Isaac Watt Boulton.\nInternal combustion auto racing events began soon after the construction of the first successful gasoline-fueled automobiles. The first organized contest was on April 28, 1887, by the chief editor of Paris publication \"\", Monsieur Fossier. It ran from Neuilly Bridge to the Bois de Boulogne.\nOn July 22, 1894, the Parisian magazine \"\" organized what is considered to be the world's first motoring competition, from Paris to Rouen. One hundred and two competitors paid a 10-franc entrance fee.\nThe first American automobile race is generally held to be the Thanksgiving Day \"Chicago Times-Herald\" race of November 28, 1895. Press coverage of the event first aroused significant American interest in the automobile.\nThe Targa Florio was an open road endurance automobile race held in the mountains of Sicily, Italy near the island's capital of Palermo. Founded in 1906, it was the oldest sports car racing event, part of the World Sportscar Championship between 1955 and 1973.\nThe oldest surviving sports car racing event is the 24 Hours of Le Mans, begun in 1923. It is run by the Automobile Club of the West (ACO). Team Ferrari won the race in 2023. \nWith auto construction and racing dominated by France, the French automobile club ACF staged a number of major international races, usually from or to Paris, connecting with another major city, in France or elsewhere in Europe.\nAspendale Racecourse, in Australia, was the world's first purpose-built motor racing circuit, opening in January 1906. The pear-shaped track was close to a mile in length, with slightly banked curves and a gravel surface of crushed cement.\nBrooklands, in Surrey, England, was the first purpose-built 'banked' motor racing venue, opening in June 1907. It featured a concrete track with high-speed banked corners.\nOne of the oldest existing purpose-built automobile racing circuits in the United States, still in use, is the Indianapolis Motor Speedway in Speedway, Indiana. It is the largest capacity sports venue of any variety worldwide, with a top capacity of some 257,000+ seated spectators.\nNASCAR was founded by Bill France Sr. on February 21, 1948, with the help of several other drivers of the time. The first NASCAR \"Strictly Stock\" race ever was held on June 19, 1949, at Daytona Beach, Florida, U.S..\nFrom 1962, sports cars temporarily took a back seat to GT cars, with the (FIA) replacing the World Championship for Sports Cars with the International Championship for GT Manufacturers.\nFrom 1962 through 2003, NASCAR's premier series was called the Winston Cup Series, sponsored by R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company cigarette brand Winston. The changes that resulted from RJR's involvement, as well as the reduction of the schedule from 56 to 34 races a year, established 1972 as the beginning of NASCAR's \"modern era\".\nThe IMSA GT Series evolved into the American Le Mans Series, which ran its first season in 1998. The European races eventually became the closely related European Le Mans Series, both of which mix prototypes and GTs.\n (TC) is a popular touring car racing series in Argentina, and one of the oldest car racing series still active in the world. The first TC competition took place in 1931 with 12 races, each in a different province. Future Formula One star Juan Manuel Fangio (Chevrolet) won the 1940 and 1941 editions of the TC. It was during this time that the series' Chevrolet-Ford rivalry began, with Ford acquiring most of its historical victories.\nOver the last few years, auto racing has seen a transformative shift, echoing past pivots. The industry, much like the cars it champions, has had to navigate through the hairpin turns of a global pandemic and a persistent chip shortage, each threatening to derail production schedules. At the same time, a new course is being charted towards an electric future, a dramatic change in direction that's challenging the old guard of gasoline engines. There is also a growing number of events for electric racing cars, such as the Formula E,the Eco Grand Prix or the Electric GT Championship.\nCategories.\nOpen-wheel racing.\nIn single-seater (open-wheel) racing, the wheels are not covered, and the cars often have aerofoil wings front and rear to produce downforce and enhance adhesion to the track. The two most popular varieties of open-wheel road racing are Formula One and the IndyCar Series. In Europe and Asia, open-wheeled racing is commonly referred to as 'Formula', with appropriate hierarchical suffixes. In North America, the 'Formula' terminology is not followed (with the exception of F1). The sport is usually arranged to follow an international format (such as F1), a regional format (such as the Formula 3 Euro Series), and/or a domestic, or country-specific, format (such as the German Formula 3 championship, or the British Formula Ford).\nF1 is a worldwide series that runs only street circuit and race tracks. These cars are heavily based on technology and their aerodynamics. The speed record was set in 2005 by Juan Pablo Montoya hitting 373\u00a0km/h (232\u00a0mph). Some of the most prominent races are the Monaco Grand Prix, the Italian Grand Prix, and the British Grand Prix. The season ends with the crowning of the World Championship for drivers and constructors.\nIn the United States, the most popular series is the IndyCar Series. The cars have traditionally been similar to, though less technologically sophisticated than, F1 cars, with more restrictions on technology aimed at controlling costs. While these cars are not as technologically advanced, they are faster, mainly because they compete on oval race tracks, being able to average a lap at 388\u00a0km/h (241\u00a0mph). The series' biggest race is the Indianapolis 500, which is commonly referred to as \"The Greatest Spectacle in Racing\" due to being the longest continuously run race and having the largest crowd for a single-day sporting event (350,000+).\nThe other major international single-seater racing series is Formula 2 (formerly known as Formula 3000 and GP2 Series). Regional series include Super Formula and Formula V6 Asia (specifically in Asia), Formula Renault 3.5 (also known as the World Series by Renault, succession series of World Series by Nissan), Formula Three, Formula Palmer Audi and Formula Atlantic. In 2009, the FIA Formula Two Championship brought about the revival of the F2 series. Domestic, or country-specific, series include Formula Three and Formula Renault, with the leading introductory series being Formula Ford.\nSingle-seater racing is not limited merely to professional teams and drivers. There exist many amateur racing clubs. In the UK, the major club series are the Monoposto Racing Club, BRSCC F3 (Formerly ClubF3, formerly ARP F3), Formula Vee and Club Formula Ford. Each series caters to a section of the market, with some primarily providing low-cost racing, while others aim for an authentic experience using the same regulations as the professional series (BRSCC F3).\nThere are other categories of single-seater racing, including kart racing, which employs a small, low-cost machine on small tracks. Many of the current top drivers began their careers in karts. Formula Ford represents the most popular first open-wheel category for up-and-coming drivers stepping up from karts. The series is still the preferred option, as it has introduced an aero package and slicks, allowing the junior drivers to gain experience in a race car with dynamics closer to F1. The Star Mazda Series is another entry-level series.\nStudents at colleges and universities can also take part in single-seater racing through the Formula SAE competition, which involves designing and building a single-seater car in a multidisciplinary team and racing it at the competition. This also develops other soft skills, such as teamwork, while promoting motorsport and engineering.\nThe world's first all-female Formula racing team was created in 2006. The group was an assemblage of drivers from different racing disciplines and formed for an MTV reality pilot, which was shot at Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca.\nIn December 2005, the FIA gave approval to Superleague Formula racing, which debuted in 2008, whereby the racing teams are owned and run by prominent sports clubs such as A.C. Milan and Liverpool F.C.\nAfter 25 years away from the sport, former Formula 2 champion Jonathan Palmer reopened the F2 category again; most drivers have graduated from the Formula Palmer Audi series. The category is officially registered as the FIA Formula Two championship. Most rounds have two races and are support races to the FIA World Touring Car Championship.\nTouring car racing.\nTouring car racing is a style of road racing that is run with production-derived four-seat race cars. The lesser use of aerodynamics means following cars have a much easier time passing than in open-wheel racing. It often features full-contact racing with subtle bumping and nudging due to the small speed differentials and large grids.\nThe major touring car championships conducted worldwide are the Supercars Championship (Australia), British Touring Car Championship, Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters (DTM), World Touring Car Championship and the World Touring Car Cup. The European Touring Car Cup is a one-day event open to Super 2000 specification touring cars from Europe's many national championships.\nThe Sports Car Club of America's SPEED World Challenge Touring Car and GT championships are dominant in North America. America's historic Trans-Am Series is undergoing a period of transition, but is still the longest-running road racing series in the U.S. The National Auto Sport Association also provides a venue for amateurs to compete in home-built factory-derived vehicles on various local circuits.\nSports car racing.\nIn sports car racing, production-derived versions of two-seat sports cars, also known as grand tourers (GTs), and purpose-built sports prototype cars compete within their respective classes on closed circuits. The premier championship series of sports car racing is the FIA World Endurance Championship. The main series for GT car racing is the Blancpain GT Series, divided into two separate championships: the Blancpain GT World Challenge Europe and the Blancpain GT Series Endurance Cup. This series has formed after the folding of the various FIA GT championships.\nOther major GT championships include the Blancpain GT World Challenge America, Blancpain GT World Challenge Asia, Super GT, and the International GT Open. There are minor regional and national GT series using mainly GT4 and GT3 cars featuring both amateur and professional drivers.\nSports prototypes, unlike GT cars, do not rely on road-legal cars as a base. They are closed-wheel and often closed-cockpit purpose-built race cars intended mainly for endurance racing. They have much lower weight and more downforce compared to GT cars, making them much faster. They are raced in the 24 hours of Le Mans (held annually since 1923) and in the (European) Le Mans series, Asian Le Mans Series and the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship. These cars are referred to as LMP (Le Mans prototype) cars with LMP1 being run mainly by manufacturers and the slightly less powerful LMP2 cars run by privateer teams. All three Le Mans Series run GT cars in addition to Le Mans Prototypes; these cars have different restrictions than the FIA GT cars.\nAnother prototype and GT racing championship exists in the United States; the Grand-Am, which began in 2000, sanctions its own endurance series, the Rolex Sports Car Series, which consists of slower and lower-cost race cars compared to LMP and FIA GT cars. The Rolex Sports Car Series and American Le Mans Series announced a merger between the two series forming the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship starting in 2014.\nThese races are often conducted over long distances, at least , and cars are driven by teams of two or more drivers, switching every few hours. Due to the performance difference between production-based sports cars and purpose-built sports prototypes, one race usually involves several racing classes, each fighting for its own championship.\nFamous sports car races include the 24 Hours of Le Mans, the Rolex 24 at Daytona, 24 Hours of Spa-Franchorchamps, the 12 Hours of Sebring, the 6 Hours of Watkins Glen, and the Petit Le Mans at Road Atlanta. There is also the 24 Hours of the N\u00fcrburgring on the infamous Nordschleife track and the Dubai 24 Hour, which is aimed at GT3 and below cars with a mixture of professional and pro-am drivers.\nProduction-car racing.\nProduction-car racing, otherwise known as \"showroom stock\" in the US, is an economical and rules-restricted version of touring-car racing, mainly used to restrict costs. Numerous production racing categories are based on particular makes of cars.\nMost series, with a few exceptions, follow the Group N regulation. There are several different series that are run all over the world, most notably, Japan's Super Taikyu and IMSA's Firehawk Series, which ran in the 1980s and 1990s all over the United States.\nStock car racing.\nIn North America, stock car racing is the most popular form of auto racing. Primarily raced on oval tracks, stock cars vaguely resemble production cars, but are in fact purpose-built racing machines that are built to tight specifications and, together with touring cars, also called Silhouette racing cars.\nThe largest stock car racing governing body is NASCAR (National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing). NASCAR's premier series is the NASCAR Cup Series, its most famous races being the Daytona 500, the Southern 500, the Coca-Cola 600, and the Brickyard 400. NASCAR also runs several feeder series, including the Xfinity Series and Gander RV &amp; Outdoors Truck Series (a pickup truck racing series). The series conduct races across the entire continental United States. The NASCAR Pinty's Series conducts races across Canada and the NASCAR PEAK Mexico Series conducts races across Mexico.\nNASCAR also governs several smaller regional series, such as the Whelen Modified Tour. Modified cars are best described as open-wheel cars. Modified cars have no parts related to the stock vehicle for which they are named after. A number of modified cars display a \"manufacturer's\" logo and \"vehicle name\", yet use components produced by another automobile manufacturer.\nThere are also other stock car governing bodies, most notably the Automobile Racing Club of America (ARCA).\nIn the UK, British Stock car racing is also referred to as \"Short Circuit Racing\". UK Stock car racing started in the 1950s and grew rapidly through the 1960s and 1970s. Events take place on shale or tarmac tracks\u00a0\u2013 usually around 1/4\u00a0mile long. There are around 35 tracks in the UK and upwards of 7000 active drivers. The sport is split into three basic divisions\u00a0\u2013 distinguished by the rules regarding car contact during racing. The most famous championship are the BriSCA F1 Stock Cars. \nFull-contact formulas include Bangers, Bombers, and Rookie Bangers\u00a0\u2013 and racing features Demolition Derbies, Figure of Eight, and Oval Racing.\nSemi Contact Formulas include BriSCA F1, F2, and Superstox\u00a0\u2013 where bumpers are used tactically.\nNon-contact formulas include National Hot Rods, Stock Rods, and Lightning Rods.\nOne-make racing.\nOne-make, or single marque, championships often employ production-based cars from a single manufacturer or even a single model from a manufacturer's range. There are numerous notable one-make formulae from various countries and regions, some of which\u00a0\u2013 such as the Porsche Supercup and, previously, IROC\u00a0\u2013 have fostered many distinct national championships. Single marque series are often found at the club level, to which the production-based cars, limited modifications, and close parity in performance are very well suited. Some of the better-known single-make series are the Mini 7 Championship (Europe's longest-running one-make championship), the Radical European Masters, John Cooper Mini Challenge, Clio Cup, Ginettas, Caterhams, BMWs, and MX5s. There are also single-chassis single seater formulae, such as Formula Renault and Formula BMW, usually as \"feeder\" series for \"senior\" race formula (in the fashion of farm teams).\nRallying.\nRallying is typically distinguished from other forms of motorsport by not running directly against other competitors over laps of a circuit, but instead in a point-to-point format in which participants leave at regular intervals from one or more start points. Cars compete on closed public roads or off-road areas on a point-to-point format where participants and their co-drivers \"rally\" to a set of points, leaving in regular intervals from start points. A rally is typically conducted over a number of \"special stages\" on any terrain, which entrants are often allowed to scout beforehand at reduced speeds compiling detailed shorthand descriptions of the track or road as they go. These detailed descriptions are known as pace notes. During the actual rally, the co-driver reads the pace notes aloud (using an in-helmet intercom system) to the driver, enabling them to complete each stage as quickly as possible. Competition is based on the lowest total elapsed time over the course of an event's special stages, including penalties.\nRallying at international and most national championship levels involves two classes of homologated road-legal production-based cars; Group N production cars and more modified Group A cars. The top series is the World Rally Championship (WRC), first contested in 1973, but there are also regional championships, and many countries have their own national championships. Some famous rallies include the Monte Carlo Rally, Rally Argentina, Rally Finland, and Rally GB. Another famous event (actually best described as a rally raid) is the Paris-Dakar Rally, conceived in 1978. There are also many smaller, club level, categories of rallies, which are popular with amateurs, making up the \"grass roots\" of motor sports. Cars at this level may not comply fully with the requirements of group A or group N homologation.\nOther major rally events include the British Rally Championship, Intercontinental Rally Challenge, African Rally Championship, Asia-Pacific Rally Championship, and endurance rally events like the Dakar Rally.\nThe Targa Tasmania, held on the Australian island state of Tasmania and run annually since 1992, takes its name from the Targa Florio, a former motoring event held on the island of Sicily. The competition concept is drawn directly from the best features of the Mille Miglia, the Coupe des Alpes, and the Tour de Corse. Similarly named events around the world include the Targa Newfoundland based in Canada, Targa West based in Western Australia, Targa New Zealand, and other smaller events.\nTime Attack Series.\nTime attack events began in Japan in the mid-1960s. They have since spread around the world.\nTime Attack racing is a type of motorsport in which the racers compete for the best lap time. Each vehicle is timed through numerous circuits of the track. The racers make a preliminary circuit, then run the timed laps, and then finish with a cool-down lap.\nTime Attack and time trial events differ by competition format and rules. Time Attack has a limited number of laps, time trial has open sessions.\nUnlike other timed motorsport disciplines such as sprinting and hillclimbing, the car is required to start off under full rolling start conditions following a warm-up lap in which they will have to accelerate out as fast as possible to determine how fast they enter their timed lap. Commonly, as the cars are modified road-going cars, they are required to have tires authorized for road use.\nDrag racing.\nIn drag racing, the objective is to complete a given straight-line distance, from a standing start, ahead of a vehicle in a parallel lane. This distance is traditionally , though has become popular since the 1990s. The vehicles may or may not be given the signal to start at the same time, depending on the class of racing. Vehicles range from the everyday car to the purpose-built dragster. Speeds and elapsed time differ from class to class. Average street cars cover the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 mile in 12 to 16\u00a0seconds, whereas a top fuel dragster takes 4.5\u00a0seconds or less, reaching speeds of up to . Drag racing was organized as a sport by Wally Parks in the early 1950s through the National Hot Rod Association (NHRA). The NHRA was formed to discourage street racing.\nWhen launching, a top fuel dragster will accelerate at 3.4 g (33\u00a0m/s2), and when braking parachutes are deployed the deceleration is 4\u00a0g (39\u00a0m/s2), more than the Space Shuttle experiences. A top fuel car can be heard over away and can generate a reading from 1.5 to 3.9 on the Richter scale.\nDrag racing is two cars head-to-head, the winner proceeding to the next round. Professional classes are all first to the finish line wins. Sportsman racing is handicapped (slower car getting a head start) using an index (a lowest e.t. allowed), and cars running under (quicker than) their index \"break out\" and lose. The slowest cars, bracket racers, are also handicapped, but rather than an index, they use a dial-in.\nOff-road racing.\nIn off-road racing, various classes of specially modified vehicles, including cars, compete in races through off-road environments. In North America these races often take place in the desert, such as the famous Baja 1000. Another format for off-road racing happens on closed-course short course tracks such as Crandon International Off-Road Raceway. In the 1980s and 1990s, the short course was extended to racing inside stadiums in the Mickey Thompson Entertainment Group; this format was revived by Robby Gordon in 2013 with his Stadium Super Trucks series.\nIn Europe, \"offroad\" refers to events such as autocross or rallycross, while desert races and rally-raids such as the Paris-Dakar, Master Rallye or European \"bajas\" are called \"cross-country rallies.\"\nKart racing.\nThe modern kart was invented by Art Ingels, a fabricator at the Indianapolis-car manufacturer Kurtis-Kraft, in Southern California in 1956. Ingels took a small chainsaw engine and mounted it to a simple tube-frame chassis weighing less than 100\u00a0lb. Ingels, and everyone else who drove the kart, were startled at its performance capabilities. The sport soon blossomed in Southern California, and quickly spread around the world. Although often seen as the entry point for serious racers into the sport, kart racing, or karting, can be an economical way for amateurs to try racing and is also a fully-fledged international sport in its own right. A large proportion of professional racing drivers began in karts, often from a very young age, such as Michael Schumacher and Fernando Alonso. Several former motorcycle champions have also taken up the sport, notably Wayne Rainey, who was paralysed in a racing accident and now races a hand-controlled kart. As one of the cheapest ways to race, karting is seeing its popularity grow worldwide.\nDespite their diminutive size, karts of the most powerful class, superkart (assuming a weight of 205\u00a0kg (452\u00a0lb), and a power output of 100\u00a0hp (75\u00a0kW)), can have a power-to-weight ratio (including the driver) of 490\u00a0hp/tonne (0.22\u00a0hp/lb). Without the driver, this figure doubles, to almost 980\u00a0hp/tonne (0.44\u00a0hp/lb).\nHistorical racing.\nHistoric motorsport or vintage motorsport uses vehicles limited to a particular era. Only safety precautions are modernized in these hobbyist races. A historical event can be of various types of motorsport disciplines, from road racing to rallying. Because it is based on a particular era it is more hobbyist-oriented, reducing corporate sponsorship. The only modern equipment used is related to safety and timing. A historical event can be of a number of different motorsport disciplines.\nSome of the most famous events include the Goodwood Festival of Speed and Goodwood Revival in Britain and Monterey Historic in the United States. Championships range from \"grass root\" Austin Seven racing to the FIA Thoroughbred Grand Prix Championship for classic Formula One chassis. While there are several professional teams and drivers in historical racing, this branch of auto sport tends to be contested by wealthy car owners and is thus more amateur and less competitive in its approach.\nUse of flags.\nIn many types of auto races, particularly those held on closed courses, flags are displayed to indicate the general status of the track and to communicate instructions to competitors. While individual series have different rules, and the flags have changed from the first years (e.g., red used to start a race), these are generally accepted.\nAccidents.\nThe worst accident in racing history is the 1955 Le Mans disaster, where more than 80 people died, including the French driver Pierre Levegh.\nRacing-car setup.\nIn auto racing, the racing setup or car setup is the set of adjustments made to the vehicle to optimize its behaviour (performance, handling, reliability, etc.). Adjustments can occur in suspensions, brakes, transmissions, engines, tires, and many others.\nAerodynamics.\nAerodynamics and airflow play big roles in the setup of a race car. Aerodynamic downforce improves the race car's handling by lowering the center of gravity and distributing the weight of the car equally on each tire. Once this is achieved, fuel consumption decreases and the forces against the car are significantly lowered. Many aerodynamic experiments are conducted in wind tunnels, to simulate real-life situations while measuring the various drag forces on the car. These \"Rolling roads\" produce many wind situations and direct air flow at certain speeds and angles. When a diffuser is installed under the car, the amount of drag force is significantly lowered, and the overall aerodynamics of the vehicle is positively adjusted. Wings and canards channel the airflow in the most efficient way to get the least amount of drag from the car. It is experimentally proven that downforce is gained and the vehicle's handling is considerably changed when aerodynamic wings on the front and rear of the vehicle are installed.\nSuspension.\nSuspension plays a huge part in giving the race car the ability to be driven optimally. Shocks are mounted vertically or horizontally to prevent the body from rolling in the corners. The suspension is important because it makes the car stable and easier to control and keeps the tires on the road when driving on uneven terrain. It works in three different ways including vertically, longitudinally, and laterally to control movement when racing on various tracks.\nTyres.\nTyres called R-Compounds are commonly used in motorsports for high amounts of traction. The soft rubber allows them to expand when they are heated up, making more surface area on the pavement, therefore producing the most traction. These types of tyres do not have grooves on them. Tyre pressure is dependent on the temperature of the tyre and track when racing. Each time a driver pulls into the pits, the tyre pressure and temperature should be tested for optimal performance. When the tyres get too hot they will swell or inflate and need to be deflated to the correct pressure. When the tyres are not warmed up they will not perform as well.\nBrakes.\nBrakes on a race car are imperative in slowing and stopping the car at precise times and wear quickly depending on the road or track on which the car is being raced, how many laps are being run, track conditions due to weather, and how many caution runs require more braking. There are three variables to consider in racing: brake pedal displacement, brake pedal force, and vehicle deceleration. Various combinations of these variables work together to determine the stiffness, sensitivity, and pedal force of the brakes. When using the brakes effectively, the driver must go through a buildup phase and end with a modulating phase. These phases include attaining maximum deceleration and modulating the brake pressure. Brake performance is measured in bite and consistency. Bite happens when the driver first applies the brakes and they have not warmed up to the correct temperature to operate efficiently. Consistency is measured in how consistent the friction is during the entire time of braking. These two measurements determine the wear of the brakes.\nEngine.\nThe race car's engine needs a considerable amount of air to produce maximum power. The air intake manifold sucks the air from scoops on the hood and front bumper and feeds it into the engine. Many engine modifications to increase horsepower and efficiency are commonly used in many racing-sanctioning bodies. Engines are tuned on a machine called a dynamometer, which is commonly known in the racing world as a DYNO. The car is driven onto the DYNO and many gauges and sensors are hooked up to the car that are controlled by an online program to test force, torque, or power. Through the testing, the car's engine maps can be changed to get the most horsepower and ultimately speed out of the vehicle.\nRacing drivers.\nRacing drivers, at the highest levels, are usually paid by the team, or by sponsors, and can command very substantial salaries.\nContrary to what may be popularly assumed, racing drivers as a group do not have unusually better reflexes or peripheral response time. During repeated physiological (and psychological) evaluations of professional racing drivers, the two characteristics that stand out are racers' near-obsessive need to control their surroundings (the psychological aspect), and an unusual ability to process fast-moving information (physiological). In this, researchers have noted a strong correlation between racers' psychological profiles and those of fighter pilots. In tests comparing racers to members of the general public, the greater the complexity of the information processing matrix, the greater the speed gap between racers and the public.\nDue partly to the performance capabilities of modern racing cars, racing drivers require a high level of fitness, focus, and the ability to concentrate at high levels for long periods in an inherently difficult environment. Racing drivers mainly complain about pains in the lumbar, shoulder, and neck regions.\nRacing drivers experience extremely large g-forces because formula cars and sports prototypes generate more downforce and are able to corner at significantly higher speeds. Formula 1 drivers routinely experience g-loadings in excess of 4.5 g.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1023", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1023", "title": "Anarcho-capitalism", "text": "Political philosophy and economic theory\nAnarcho-capitalism (or, colloquially, ancap) is an anti-statist, libertarian, political philosophy and economic theory that seeks to abolish centralized states in favor of stateless societies with systems of private property enforced by private agencies, the non-aggression principle, free markets and the right-libertarian interpretation of self-ownership, which extends the concept to include control of private property as part of the self. In the absence of statute, anarcho-capitalists hold that society tends to contractually self-regulate and civilize through participation in the free market, which they describe as a voluntary society involving the voluntary exchange of services and goods. In a theoretical anarcho-capitalist society, the system of private property would still exist and be enforced by private defense agencies and/or insurance companies selected by customers, which would operate competitively in a market and fulfill the roles of courts and the police.\nAccording to its proponents, various historical theorists have espoused philosophies similar to anarcho-capitalism, but the first person to use the term \"anarcho-capitalism\" was Murray Rothbard, in the 1940s. Rothbard, a leading figure in the 20th-century American libertarian movement, synthesized elements from the Austrian School, classical liberalism and 19th-century American individualist anarchists and mutualists Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker while rejecting the labor theory of value. Rothbard's anarcho-capitalist society would operate under a mutually agreed-upon \"legal code which would be generally accepted, and which the courts would pledge themselves to follow\". This legal code would recognize contracts between individuals, private property, self-ownership and tort law in keeping with the non-aggression principle. Rothbard views the power of the state as unjustified, arguing that it restricts individual rights and prosperity, and creates social and economic problems.\nAnarcho-capitalists and right-libertarians cite several historical precedents of what they believe to be examples of quasi-anarcho-capitalism, including the Republic of Cospaia, Acadia, Anglo-Saxon England, Medieval Iceland, the American Old West, Gaelic Ireland, and law merchant, admiralty law, and early common law.\nAnarcho-capitalism is distinguished from minarchism, which advocates a night-watchman state limited to protecting individuals from aggression and enforcing private property. Anarcho-capitalism is also generally distinguished from anarchism, an anti-capitalist movement that opposes unnecessary coercion and hierarchy, and social anarchism, a branch of anarchism that sees individual freedom as interrelated with mutual aid. Unlike anarchists, anarcho-capitalists support private property and private institutions. Anarcho-capitalists also reject the libertarian socialist economic theories of anarchism, arguing that they are inherently authoritarian or require authoritarianism to achieve. Anarcho-capitalism is usually seen as part of the New Right.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nAnarcho-capitalism developed from radical American anti-state libertarianism and individualist anarchism. A strong current within anarchism does not consider anarcho-capitalism to be part of the anarchist movement because anarchism has historically been an anti-capitalist movement and for definitional reasons which see anarchism as incompatible with capitalist forms. Anarcho-capitalism lies outside the tradition of the vast majority of anarchist schools of thought and is more closely affiliated with capitalism, right-libertarianism and classical liberalism according to many scholars. Social anarchists oppose and reject capitalism, and consider \"anarcho-capitalism\" to be a contradiction in terms, although some, including anarcho-capitalists and right-libertarians, have argued that anarcho-capitalism is a form of anarchism.\nAccording to Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anarcho-capitalism challenges other forms of anarchism by supporting private property and private institutions with significant economic power.\nPhilosophy.\nAuthor J Michael Oliver says that during the 1960s, a philosophical movement arose in the United States that championed \"reason, ethical egoism, and free-market capitalism\". According to Oliver, anarcho-capitalism is a political theory which logically follows the philosophical conclusions of Objectivism, a philosophical system developed by Russian-American writer Ayn Rand, but Oliver acknowledges that his advocacy of anarcho-capitalism is \"quite at odds with Rand's ardent defense of 'limited government'\". Professor Lisa Duggan also says that Rand's anti-statist, pro\u2013\"free market\" stances went on to shape the politics of anarcho-capitalism.\nAccording to Patrik Schumacher, the political ideology and programme of Anarcho-capitalism envisages the radicalization of the neoliberal \"rollback of the state\", and calls for the extension of \"entrepreneurial freedom\" and \"competitive market rationality\" to the point where the scope for private enterprise is all-encompassing and \"leaves no space for state action whatsoever\".\nOn the state.\nAnarcho-capitalists opposition to the state is reflected in their goal of keeping but privatizing all functions of the state. They see capitalism and the \"free market\" as the basis for a free and prosperous society. Murray Rothbard, who is credited with coining the term \"anarcho-capitalism\", stated that the difference between free-market capitalism and state capitalism is the difference between \"peaceful, voluntary exchange\" and a \"collusive partnership\" between business and government that \"uses coercion to subvert the free market\".\nRothbard argued that all government services, including defense, are inefficient because they lack a market-based pricing mechanism regulated by \"the voluntary decisions of consumers purchasing services that fulfill their highest-priority needs\" and by investors seeking the most profitable enterprises to invest in. Furthermore, Linda and Morris Tannehill believe that no coercive monopoly of force can arise on a truly free market and that a government's citizenry can not desert them in favor of a competent protection and defense agency.\nMaverick Edwards of the Liberty University describes anarcho-capitalism as a political, social, and economic theory that places markets as the central \"governing body\" and where government no longer \"grants\" rights to its citizenry.\nNon-aggression principle.\nWriter Stanis\u0142aw W\u00f3jtowicz says that although anarcho-capitalists are against centralized states, they hold that all people would naturally share and agree to a specific moral theory based on the non-aggression principle. While the Friedmanian formulation of anarcho-capitalism is robust to the presence of violence and in fact, assumes some degree of violence will occur, anarcho-capitalism as formulated by Rothbard and others holds strongly to the central libertarian nonaggression axiom, sometimes non-aggression principle. Rothbard wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The basic axiom of libertarian political theory holds that every man is a self-owner, having absolute jurisdiction over his own body. In effect, this means that no one else may justly invade, or aggress against, another's person. It follows then that each person justly owns whatever previously unowned resources he appropriates or \"mixes his labor with\". From these twin axioms \u2013 self-ownership and \"homesteading\" \u2013 stem the justification for the entire system of property rights titles in a free-market society. This system establishes the right of every man to his own person, the right of donation, of bequest (and, concomitantly, the right to receive the bequest or inheritance), and the right of contractual exchange of property titles.\nRothbard's defense of the self-ownership principle stems from what he believed to be his falsification of all other alternatives, namely that either a group of people can own another group of people, or that no single person has full ownership over one's self. Rothbard dismisses these two cases on the basis that they cannot result in a universal ethic, i.e. a just natural law that can govern all people, independent of place and time. The only alternative that remains to Rothbard is self-ownership which he believes is both axiomatic and universal.\nIn general, the non-aggression axiom is described by Rothbard as a prohibition against the initiation of force, or the threat of force, against persons (in which he includes direct violence, assault and murder) or property (in which he includes fraud, burglary, theft and taxation). The initiation of force is usually referred to as aggression or coercion. The difference between anarcho-capitalists and other libertarians is largely one of the degree to which they take this axiom. Minarchist libertarians such as libertarian political parties would retain the state in some smaller and less invasive form, retaining at the very least public police, courts, and military. However, others might give further allowance for other government programs. In contrast, Rothbard rejects any level of \"state intervention\", defining the state as a coercive monopoly and as the only entity in human society, excluding acknowledged criminals, that derives its income entirely from coercion, in the form of taxation, which Rothbard describes as \"compulsory seizure of the property of the State's inhabitants, or subjects.\"\nSome anarcho-capitalists such as Rothbard accept the non-aggression axiom on an intrinsic moral or natural law basis. It is in terms of the non-aggression principle that Rothbard defined his interpretation of anarchism, \"a system which provides no legal sanction for such aggression ['against person and property']\"; and wrote that \"what anarchism proposes to do, then, is to abolish the State, i.e. to abolish the regularized institution of aggressive coercion\". In an interview published in the American libertarian journal \"The New Banner\", Rothbard stated that \"capitalism is the fullest expression of anarchism, and anarchism is the fullest expression of capitalism\".\nProperty.\nPrivate property.\nAnarcho-capitalists postulate the privatization of everything, including cities with all their infrastructures, public spaces, streets and urban management systems.\nCentral to Rothbardian anarcho-capitalism are the concepts of self-ownership and original appropriation that combines personal and private property. Hans-Hermann Hoppe wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Everyone is the proper owner of his own physical body as well as of all places and nature-given goods that he occupies and puts to use by means of his body, provided only that no one else has already occupied or used the same places and goods before him. This ownership of \"originally appropriated\" places and goods by a person implies his right to use and transform these places and goods in any way he sees fit, provided only that he does not change thereby uninvitedly the physical integrity of places and goods originally appropriated by another person. In particular, once a place or good has been first appropriated by, in John Locke's phrase, 'mixing one's labor' with it, ownership in such places and goods can be acquired only by means of a voluntary\u00a0\u2013 contractual\u00a0\u2013 transfer of its property title from a previous to a later owner.\nRothbard however rejected the Lockean proviso, and followed the rule of \"first come, first served\", without any consideration of how much resources are left for other individuals, which opposed John Locke's beliefs.\nAnarcho-capitalists advocate private ownership of the means of production and the allocation of the product of labor created by workers within the context of wage labour and the free market \u2013 that is through decisions made by property and capital owners, regardless of what an individual needs or does not need. Original appropriation allows an individual to claim any never-before-used resources, including land and by improving or otherwise using it, own it with the same \"absolute right\" as their own body, and retaining those rights forever, regardless of whether the resource is still being used by them. According to Rothbard, property can only come about through labor, therefore original appropriation of land is not legitimate by merely claiming it or building a fence around it\u2014it is only by using land and by mixing one's labor with it that original appropriation is legitimized: \"Any attempt to claim a new resource that someone does not use would have to be considered invasive of the property right of whoever the first user will turn out to be\". Rothbard argued that the resource need not continue to be used in order for it to be the person's property as \"for once his labor is mixed with the natural resource, it remains his owned land. His labor has been irretrievably mixed with the land, and the land is therefore his or his assigns' in perpetuity\".\nRothbard also spoke about a theory of justice in property rights:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn \"Justice and Property Right\", Rothbard wrote that \"any identifiable owner (the original victim of theft or his heir) must be accorded his property\". In the case of slavery, Rothbard claimed that in many cases \"the old plantations and the heirs and descendants of the former slaves can be identified, and the reparations can become highly specific indeed\". Rothbard believed slaves rightfully own any land they were forced to work on under the homestead principle. If property is held by the state, Rothbard advocated its confiscation and \"return to the private sector\", writing that \"any property in the hands of the State is in the hands of thieves, and should be liberated as quickly as possible\". Rothbard proposed that state universities be seized by the students and faculty under the homestead principle. Rothbard also supported the expropriation of nominally \"private property\" if it is the result of state-initiated force such as businesses that receive grants and subsidies. Rothbard further proposed that businesses who receive at least 50% of their funding from the state be confiscated by the workers, writing: \"What we libertarians object to, then, is not government \"per se\" but crime, what we object to is unjust or criminal property titles; what we are for is not 'private' property \"per se\" but just, innocent, non-criminal private property\".\nSimilarly, Karl Hess wrote that \"libertarianism wants to advance principles of property but that it in no way wishes to defend, willy nilly, all property which now is called private ... Much of that property is stolen. Much is of dubious title. All of it is deeply intertwined with an immoral, coercive state system\".\nBy accepting an axiomatic definition of private property and property rights, anarcho-capitalists deny the legitimacy of a state on principle. Hans-Hermann Hoppe argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnarchists view capitalism as an inherently authoritarian and hierarchical system and seek the abolishment of private property. There is disagreement between anarchists and anarcho-capitalists as the former generally rejects anarcho-capitalism as a form of anarchism and considers \"anarcho-capitalism\" a contradiction in terms, while the latter holds that the abolishment of private property would require expropriation which is \"counterproductive to order\" and would require a state.\nCommon property.\nAs opposed to anarchists, most anarcho-capitalists reject the commons. However, some of them propose that non-state public or community property can also exist in an anarcho-capitalist society. For anarcho-capitalists, what is important is that it is \"acquired\" and transferred without help or hindrance from what they call the \"compulsory state\". Deontological anarcho-capitalists believe that the only just and most economically beneficial way to acquire property is through voluntary trade, gift, or labor-based original appropriation, rather than through aggression or fraud.\nAnarcho-capitalists state that there could be cases where common property may develop in a Lockean natural rights framework. Anarcho-capitalists make the example of a number of private businesses which may arise in an area, each owning the land and buildings that they use, but they argue that the paths between them become cleared and trodden incrementally through customer and commercial movement. These thoroughfares may become valuable to the community, but according to them ownership cannot be attributed to any single person and original appropriation does not apply because many contributed the labor necessary to create them. In order to prevent it from falling to the \"tragedy of the commons\", anarcho-capitalists suggest transitioning from common to private property, wherein an individual would make a homesteading claim based on disuse, acquire title by the assent of the community consensus, form a corporation with other involved parties, or other means.\nRandall G. Holcombe see challenges stemming from the idea of common property under anarcho-capitalism, such as whether an individual might claim fishing rights in the area of a major shipping lane and thereby forbid passage through it. In contrast, Hoppe's work on anarcho-capitalist theory is based on the assumption that all property is privately held, \"including all streets, rivers, airports, and harbors\" which forms the foundation of his views on immigration.\nIntellectual property.\nSome anarcho-capitalists strongly oppose intellectual property (i.e., trademarks, patents, copyrights). Stephan N. Kinsella argues that ownership only relates to tangible assets.\nContractual society.\nThe society envisioned by anarcho-capitalists has been labelled by them as a \"contractual society\" which Rothbard described as \"a society based purely on voluntary action, entirely unhampered by violence or threats of violence\" The system relies on contracts between individuals as the legal framework which would be enforced by private police and security forces as well as private arbitrations.\nRothbard argues that limited liability for corporations could also exist through contract, arguing that \"[c]orporations are not at all monopolistic privileges; they are free associations of individuals pooling their capital. On the purely free market, those men would simply announce to their creditors that their liability is limited to the capital specifically invested in the corporation\". However, corporations created in this way would not be able to replicate the limit on liabilities arising non-contractually such as liability in tort for environmental disasters or personal injury which corporations currently enjoy. Rothbard acknowledges that \"limited liability for torts is the illegitimate conferring of a special privilege\".\nThere are limits to the right to contract under some interpretations of anarcho-capitalism. Rothbard believes that the right to contract is based in inalienable rights and because of this any contract that implicitly violates those rights can be voided at will, preventing a person from permanently selling himself or herself into unindentured slavery. However, Rothbard justifies the practice of child selling. Other interpretations conclude that banning such contracts would in itself be an unacceptably invasive interference in the right to contract.\nIncluded in the right of contract is \"the right to contract oneself out for employment by others\". While anarchists criticize wage labour describing it as wage slavery, anarcho-capitalists view it as a consensual contract. Some anarcho-capitalists prefer to see self-employment prevail over wage labor. David D. Friedman has expressed a preference for a society where \"almost everyone is self-employed\" and \"instead of corporations there are large groups of entrepreneurs related by trade, not authority. Each sells not his time, but what his time produces\".\nLaw and order and the use of violence.\nDifferent anarcho-capitalists propose different forms of anarcho-capitalism and one area of disagreement is in the area of law. In \"The Market for Liberty\", Morris and Linda Tannehill object to any statutory law whatsoever. They argue that all one has to do is ask if one is aggressing against another in order to decide if an act is right or wrong. However, while also supporting a on force and fraud, Rothbard supports the establishment of a mutually agreed-upon centralized libertarian legal code which private courts would pledge to follow, as he presumes a high degree of convergence amongst individuals about what constitutes natural justice.\nUnlike both the Tannehills and Rothbard who see an ideological commonality of ethics and morality as a requirement, David D. Friedman proposes that \"the systems of law will be produced for profit on the open market, just as books and bras are produced today. There could be competition among different brands of law, just as there is competition among different brands of cars\". Friedman says whether this would lead to a libertarian society \"remains to be proven\". He says it is a possibility that very un-libertarian laws may result, such as laws against drugs, but he thinks this would be rare. He reasons that \"if the value of a law to its supporters is less than its cost to its victims, that law ... will not survive in an anarcho-capitalist society\".\nAnarcho-capitalists only accept the collective defense of individual liberty (i.e. courts, military, or police forces) insofar as such groups are formed and paid for on an explicitly voluntary basis. However, their complaint is not just that the state's defensive services are funded by taxation, but that the state assumes it is the only legitimate practitioner of physical force\u2014that is, they believe it forcibly prevents the private sector from providing comprehensive security, such as a police, judicial and prison systems to protect individuals from aggressors. Anarcho-capitalists believe that there is nothing morally superior about the state which would grant it, but not private individuals, a right to use physical force to restrain aggressors. If competition in security provision were allowed to exist, prices would also be lower and services would be better according to anarcho-capitalists. According to Molinari: \"Under a regime of liberty, the natural organization of the security industry would not be different from that of other industries\". Proponents believe that private systems of justice and defense already exist, naturally forming where the market is allowed to \"compensate for the failure of the state\", namely private arbitration, security guards, neighborhood watch groups and so on. These private courts and police are sometimes referred to generically as private defense agencies (PDAs). The defense of those unable to pay for such protection might be financed by charitable organizations relying on voluntary donation rather than by state institutions relying on taxation, or by cooperative self-help by groups of individuals. Edward Stringham argues that private adjudication of disputes could enable the market to internalize externalities and provide services that customers desire.\nIn the context of revolution, Rothbard stated that the American Revolutionary War was the only war involving the United States that could be justified. Some anarcho-capitalists such as Rothbard feel that violent revolution is counter-productive and prefer voluntary forms of economic secession to the extent possible. Retributive justice is often a component of the contracts imagined for an anarcho-capitalist society. According to Matthew O'Keefee, some anarcho-capitalists believe prisons or indentured servitude would be justifiable institutions to deal with those who violate anarcho-capitalist property relations while others believe exile or forced restitution are sufficient.\nBruce L. Benson argues that legal codes may impose punitive damages for intentional torts in the interest of deterring crime. Benson gives the example of a thief who breaks into a house by picking a lock. Even if caught before taking anything, Benson argues that the thief would still owe the victim for violating the sanctity of his property rights. Benson opines that despite the lack of objectively measurable losses in such cases, \"standardized rules that are generally perceived to be fair by members of the community would, in all likelihood, be established through precedent, allowing judgments to specify payments that are reasonably appropriate for most criminal offenses\".\nMorris and Linda Tannehill raise a similar example, saying that a bank robber who had an attack of conscience and returned the money would still owe reparations for endangering the employees' and customers' lives and safety, in addition to the costs of the defense agency answering the teller's call for help. However, they believe that the robber's loss of reputation would be even more damaging. They suggest that specialized companies would list aggressors so that anyone wishing to do business with a man could first check his record, provided they trust the veracity of the companies' records. They further theorise that the bank robber would find insurance companies listing him as a very poor risk and other firms would be reluctant to enter into contracts with him.\nInfluences.\nMurray Rothbard has listed different ideologies of which his interpretations, he said, have influenced anarcho-capitalism. This includes his interpretation of anarchism, and more precisely individualist anarchism; classical liberalism and the Austrian School of economic thought. Scholars additionally associate anarcho-capitalism with neo-classical liberalism, radical neoliberalism and right-libertarianism.\nAnarchism.\nIn both its social and individualist forms, anarchism is usually considered an anti-capitalist and radical left-wing or far-left movement that promotes libertarian socialist economic theories such as collectivism, communism, individualism, mutualism and syndicalism. Because anarchism is usually described alongside libertarian Marxism as the libertarian wing of the socialist movement and as having a historical association with anti-capitalism and socialism, anarchists believe that capitalism is incompatible with social and economic equality and therefore do not recognize anarcho-capitalism as an anarchist school of thought. In particular, anarchists argue that capitalist transactions are not voluntary and that maintaining the class structure of a capitalist society requires coercion which is incompatible with an anarchist society. The usage of \"libertarian\" is also in dispute. While both anarchists and anarcho-capitalists have used it, \"libertarian\" was synonymous with \"anarchist\" until the mid-20th century, when anarcho-capitalist theory developed.\nAnarcho-capitalists are distinguished from the dominant anarchist tradition by their relation to property and capital. While both anarchism and anarcho-capitalism share general antipathy towards power by government authority, the latter exempts power wielded through free-market capitalism. Anarchists, including egoists such as Max Stirner, have supported the protection of an individual's freedom from powers of both government and private property owners. In contrast, while condemning governmental encroachment on personal liberties, anarcho-capitalists support freedoms based on private property rights. Anarcho-capitalist theorist Murray Rothbard argued that protesters should rent a street for protest from its owners. The abolition of public amenities is a common theme in some anarcho-capitalist writings.\nAs anarcho-capitalism puts \"laissez-faire\" economics before economic equality, it is commonly viewed as incompatible with the anti-capitalist and egalitarian tradition of anarchism. Although anarcho-capitalist theory implies the abolition of the state in favour of a fully \"laissez-faire\" economy, it lies outside the tradition of anarchism. While using the language of anarchism, anarcho-capitalism only shares anarchism's antipathy towards the state and not anarchism's antipathy towards hierarchy as theorists expect from anarcho-capitalist economic power relations. It follows a different paradigm from anarchism and has a fundamentally different approach and goals. In spite of the \"anarcho-\" in its title, anarcho-capitalism is more closely affiliated with capitalism, right-libertarianism, and liberalism than with anarchism. Some within this \"laissez-faire\" tradition reject the designation of \"anarcho-capitalism\", believing that \"capitalism\" may either refer to the \"laissez-faire\" market they support or the government-regulated system that they oppose.\nRothbard argued that anarcho-capitalism is the only true form of anarchism\u2014the only form of anarchism that could possibly exist in reality as he maintained that any other form presupposes authoritarian enforcement of a political ideology such as \"redistribution of private property\", which he attributed to anarchism. According to this argument, the capitalist free market is \"the natural situation\" that would result from people being free from state authority and entails the establishment of all voluntary associations in society such as cooperatives, non-profit organizations, businesses and so on. Moreover, anarcho-capitalists, as well as classical liberal minarchists, argue that the application of anarchist ideals as advocated by what they term \"left-wing anarchists\" would require an authoritarian body of some sort to impose it. Based on their understanding and interpretation of anarchism, in order to forcefully prevent people from accumulating capital, which they believe is a goal of anarchists, there would necessarily be a redistributive organization of some sort which would have the authority to in essence exact a tax and re-allocate the resulting resources to a larger group of people. They conclude that this theoretical body would inherently have political power and would be nothing short of a state. The difference between such an arrangement and an anarcho-capitalist system is what anarcho-capitalists see as the voluntary nature of organization within anarcho-capitalism contrasted with a \"centralized ideology\" and a \"paired enforcement mechanism\" which they believe would be necessary under what they describe as a \"coercively\" egalitarian-anarchist system.\nRothbard also argued that the capitalist system of today is not properly anarchistic because it often colludes with the state. According to Rothbard, \"what Marx and later writers have done is to lump together two extremely different and even contradictory concepts and actions under the same portmanteau term. These two contradictory concepts are what I would call 'free-market capitalism' on the one hand, and 'state capitalism' on the other\". \"The difference between free-market capitalism and state capitalism\", writes Rothbard, \"is precisely the difference between, on the one hand, peaceful, voluntary exchange, and on the other, violent expropriation\". He continues: \"State capitalism inevitably creates all sorts of problems which become insoluble\".\nTraditional anarchists reject the notion of capitalism, hierarchies and private property. Albert Meltzer argued that anarcho-capitalism simply cannot be anarchism because capitalism and the state are inextricably interlinked and because capitalism exhibits domineering hierarchical structures such as that between an employer and an employee. Anna Morgenstern approaches this topic from the opposite perspective, arguing that anarcho-capitalists are not really capitalists because \"mass concentration of capital is impossible\" without the state. According to Jeremy Jennings, \"[i]t is hard not to conclude that these ideas\", referring to anarcho-capitalism, argued to have \"roots deep in classical liberalism\" more so than in anarchism, \"are described as anarchist only on the basis of a misunderstanding of what anarchism is\". For Jennings, \"anarchism does not stand for the untrammelled freedom of the individual (as the 'anarcho-capitalists' appear to believe) but, as we have already seen, for the extension of individuality and community\". Similarly, Barbara Goodwin, Emeritus Professor of Politics at the University of East Anglia, Norwich, argues that anarcho-capitalism's \"true place is in the group of right-wing libertarians\", not in anarchism.\nSome right-libertarian scholars like Michael Huemer, who identify with the ideology, describe anarcho-capitalism as a \"variety of anarchism\". British author Andrew Heywood also believes that \"individualist anarchism overlaps with libertarianism and is usually linked to a strong belief in the market as a self-regulating mechanism, most obviously manifest in the form of anarcho-capitalism\". Frank H. Brooks, author of \"The Individualist Anarchists: An Anthology of Liberty (1881\u20131908)\", believes that \"anarchism has always included a significant strain of radical individualism, from the hyperrationalism of Godwin, to the egoism of Stirner, to the libertarians and anarcho-capitalists of today\".\nWhile both anarchism and anarcho-capitalism are in opposition to the state, it is a necessary but not sufficient condition because anarchists and anarcho-capitalists interpret state-rejection differently. Austrian school economist David Prychitko, in the context of anarcho-capitalism says that \"while society without a state is necessary for full-fledged anarchy, it is nevertheless insufficient\". According to Ruth Kinna, anarcho-capitalists are anti-statists who draw more on right-wing liberal theory and the Austrian School than anarchist traditions. Kinna writes that \"[i]n order to highlight the clear distinction between the two positions\", anarchists describe anarcho-capitalists as \"propertarians\". Anarcho-capitalism is usually seen as part of the New Right.\nSome anarcho-capitalists argue that, according to them, anarchists consider the word \"anarchy\" as to be the antithesis of hierarchy, and therefore, that \"anarcho-capitalism\" is sometimes considered to be a term with differences philosophically to what they personally consider to be true anarchism, as an anarcho-capitalist society would inherently contain hierarchy. Additionally, Rothbard discusses the difference between \"government\" and \"governance\" thus, proponents of anarcho-capitalism think the philosophy's common name is indeed consistent, as it promotes private governance, but is vehemently anti-government.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I define anarchist society as one where there is no legal possibility for coercive aggression against the person or property of any individual. Anarchists oppose the State because it has its very being in such aggression, namely, the expropriation of private property through taxation, the coercive exclusion of other providers of defense service from its territory, and all of the other depredations and coercions that are built upon these twin foci of invasions of individual rights.\" \u2014Murray Rothbard in \"Society Without a State\"\nClassical liberalism.\nHistorian and libertarian Ralph Raico argued that what liberal philosophers \"had come up with was a form of individualist anarchism, or, as it would be called today, anarcho-capitalism or market anarchism\". He also said that Gustave de Molinari was proposing a doctrine of the private production of security, a position which was later taken up by Murray Rothbard. Some anarcho-capitalists consider Molinari to be the first proponent of anarcho-capitalism. In the preface to the 1977 English translation by Murray Rothbard called \"The Production of Security\" the \"first presentation anywhere in human history of what is now called anarcho-capitalism\", although admitting that \"Molinari did not use the terminology, and probably would have balked at the name\". Hans-Hermann Hoppe said that \"the 1849 article 'The Production of Security' is probably the single most important contribution to the modern theory of anarcho-capitalism\". According to Hans-Hermann Hoppe, one of the 19th century precursors of anarcho-capitalism were philosopher Herbert Spencer, classical liberal Auberon Herbert and liberal socialist Franz Oppenheimer.\nRuth Kinna writes that \"anarcho-capitalism\" is a term coined by Murray Rothbard to describe \"a commitment to unregulated private property and laissez-faire economics, prioritizing the liberty-rights of individuals, unfettered by government regulation, to accumulate, consume and determine the patterns of their lives as they see fit\". According to Kinna, anarcho-capitalists \"will sometimes label themselves market anarchists because they recognize the negative connotations of 'capitalism'. But the literature of anarcho-capitalism draws on classical liberal theory, particularly the Austrian School \u2013 Friedrich von Hayek and Ludwig von Mises \u2013 rather than recognizable anarchist traditions. Ayn Rand's laissez-faire, anti-government, corporate philosophy \u2013 Objectivism \u2013 is sometimes associated with anarcho-capitalism\". Other scholars similarly associate anarcho-capitalism with anti-state classical liberalism, neo-classical liberalism, radical neoliberalism and right-libertarianism.\nPaul Dragos Aligica writes that there is a \"foundational difference between the classical liberal and the anarcho-capitalist positions\". Classical liberalism, while accepting critical arguments against collectivism, acknowledges a certain level of public ownership and collective governance as necessary to provide practical solutions to political problems. In contrast anarcho-capitalism, according to Aligica, denies any requirement for any form of public administration, and allows no meaningful role for the public sphere, which is seen as sub-optimal and illegitimate.\nIndividualist anarchism.\nMurray Rothbard, a student of Ludwig von Mises, stated that he was influenced by the work of the 19th-century American individualist anarchists. In the winter of 1949, Rothbard decided to reject minimal state \"laissez-faire\" and embrace his interpretation of individualist anarchism. In 1965, Rothbard wrote that \"Lysander Spooner and Benjamin R. Tucker were unsurpassed as political philosophers and nothing is more needed today than a revival and development of the largely forgotten legacy they left to political philosophy\". However, Rothbard thought that they had a faulty understanding of economics as the 19th-century individualist anarchists had a labor theory of value as influenced by the classical economists, while Rothbard was a student of Austrian School economics which does not agree with the labor theory of value. Rothbard sought to meld 19th-century American individualist anarchists' advocacy of economic individualism and free markets with the principles of Austrian School economics, arguing that \"[t]here is, in the body of thought known as 'Austrian economics', a scientific explanation of the workings of the free market (and of the consequences of government intervention in that market) which individualist anarchists could easily incorporate into their political and social Weltanschauung\". Rothbard held that the economic consequences of the political system they advocate would not result in an economy with people being paid in proportion to labor amounts, nor would profit and interest disappear as they expected. Tucker thought that unregulated banking and money issuance would cause increases in the money supply so that interest rates would drop to zero or near to it. Peter Marshall states that \"anarcho-capitalism overlooks the egalitarian implications of traditional individualist anarchists like Spooner and Tucker\". Stephanie Silberstein states that \"While Spooner was no free-market capitalist, nor an anarcho-capitalist, he was not as opposed to capitalism as most socialists were.\"\nIn \"The Spooner-Tucker Doctrine: An Economist's View\", Rothbard explained his disagreements. Rothbard disagreed with Tucker that it would cause the money supply to increase because he believed that the money supply in a free market would be self-regulating. If it were not, then Rothbard argued inflation would occur so it is not necessarily desirable to increase the money supply in the first place. Rothbard claimed that Tucker was wrong to think that interest would disappear regardless because he believed people, in general, do not wish to lend their money to others without compensation, so there is no reason why this would change just because banking was unregulated. Tucker held a labor theory of value and thought that in a free market people would be paid in proportion to how much labor they exerted and that exploitation or usury was taking place if they were not. As Tucker explained in \"State Socialism and Anarchism\", his theory was that unregulated banking would cause more money to be available and that this would allow the proliferation of new businesses which would, in turn, raise demand for labor. This led Tucker to believe that the labor theory of value would be vindicated and equal amounts of labor would receive equal pay. As an Austrian School economist, Rothbard did not agree with the labor theory and believed that prices of goods and services are proportional to marginal utility rather than to labor amounts in the free market. As opposed to Tucker he did not think that there was anything exploitative about people receiving an income according to how much \"buyers of their services value their labor\" or what that labor produces.\nWithout the labor theory of value, some argue that 19th-century individualist anarchists approximate the modern movement of anarcho-capitalism, although this has been contested or rejected. As economic theory changed, the popularity of the labor theory of classical economics was superseded by the subjective theory of value of neoclassical economics and Rothbard combined Mises' Austrian School of economics with the absolutist views of human rights and rejection of the state he had absorbed from studying the individualist American anarchists of the 19th century such as Tucker and Spooner. In the mid-1950s, Rothbard wrote an unpublished article named \"Are Libertarians 'Anarchists'?\" under the pseudonym \"Aubrey Herbert\", concerned with differentiating himself from communist and socialistic economic views of anarchists, including the individualist anarchists of the 19th century, concluding that \"we are \"not\" anarchists and that those who call us anarchists are not on firm etymological ground and are being completely unhistorical. On the other hand, it is clear that we are not archists either: we do not believe in establishing a tyrannical central authority that will coerce the noninvasive as well as the invasive. Perhaps, then, we could call ourselves by a new name: \"non\"archist.\" Joe Peacott, an American individualist anarchist in the mutualist tradition, criticizes anarcho-capitalists for trying to hegemonize the individualist anarchism label and make appear as if all individualist anarchists are in favor of capitalism. Peacott states that \"individualists, both past and present, agree with the communist anarchists that present-day capitalism is based on economic coercion, not on voluntary contract. Rent and interest are the mainstays of modern capitalism and are protected and enforced by the state. Without these two unjust institutions, capitalism could not exist\".\nAnarchist activists and scholars do not consider anarcho-capitalism as a part of the anarchist movement because anarchism has historically been an anti-capitalist movement and see it as incompatible with capitalist forms. Although some regard anarcho-capitalism as a form of individualist anarchism, many others disagree or contest the existence of an individualist\u2013socialist divide because individualist anarchism is largely libertarian socialist. In coming to terms that anarchists mostly identified with socialism, Rothbard wrote that individualist anarchism is different from anarcho-capitalism and other capitalist theories due to the individualist anarchists retaining the labor theory of value and socialist doctrines. Similarly, many writers deny that anarcho-capitalism is a form of anarchism or that capitalism is compatible with anarchism.\n\"The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism\" writes that \"[a]s Benjamin Franks rightly points out, individualisms that defend or reinforce hierarchical forms such as the economic-power relations of anarcho-capitalism are incompatible with practices of social anarchism based on developing immanent goods which contest such as inequalities\". Laurence Davis cautiously asks \"[I]s anarcho-capitalism really a form of anarchism or instead a wholly different ideological paradigm whose adherents have attempted to expropriate the language of anarchism for their own anti-anarchist ends?\" Davis cites Iain McKay, \"whom Franks cites as an authority to support his contention that 'academic analysis has followed activist currents in rejecting the view that anarcho-capitalism has anything to do with social anarchism'\", as arguing \"quite emphatically on the very pages cited by Franks that anarcho-capitalism is by no means a type of anarchism\". McKay writes that \"[i]t is important to stress that anarchist opposition to the so-called capitalist 'anarchists' does \"not\" reflect some kind of debate within anarchism, as many of these types like to pretend, but a debate between anarchism and its old enemy capitalism. ... Equally, given that anarchists and 'anarcho'-capitalists have fundamentally \"different\" analyses and goals it is hardly 'sectarian' to point this out\".\nDavis writes that \"Franks asserts without supporting evidence that most major forms of individualist anarchism have been largely anarcho-capitalist in content, and concludes from this premise that most forms of individualism are incompatible with anarchism\". Davis argues that \"the conclusion is unsustainable because the premise is false, depending as it does for any validity it might have on the further assumption that anarcho-capitalism is indeed a form of anarchism. If we reject this view, then we must also reject the individual anarchist versus the communal anarchist 'chasm' style of argument that follows from it\". Davis maintains that \"the ideological core of anarchism is the belief that society can and should be organised without hierarchy and domination. Historically, anarchists have struggles against a wide range of regimes of domination, from capitalism, the state system, patriarchy, heterosexism, and the domination of nature to colonialism, the war system, slavery, fascism, white supremacy, and certain forms of organised religion\". According to Davis, \"[w]hile these visions range from the predominantly individualistic to the predominantly communitarian, features common to virtually all include an emphasis on self-management and self-regulatory methods of organisation, voluntary association, decentralised society, based on the principle of free association, in which people will manage and govern themselves\". Finally, Davis includes a footnote stating that \"[i]ndividualist anarchism may plausibly be re regarded as a form of both socialism and anarchism. Whether the individualist anarchists were \"consistent\" anarchists (and socialists) is another question entirely. ... McKay comments as follows: 'any individualist anarchism which supports wage labour is \"inconsistent\" anarchism. It \"can\" easily be made \"consistent\" anarchism by applying its own principles consistently. In contrast 'anarcho'-capitalism rejects so many of the basic, underlying, principles of anarchism ... that it cannot be made consistent with the ideals of anarchism'\".\nHistorical precedents.\nSeveral anarcho-capitalists and right-libertarians have discussed historical precedents of what they believe were examples of anarcho-capitalism.\nFree cities of medieval Europe.\nEconomist and libertarian scholar Bryan Caplan considers the free cities of medieval Europe as examples of \"anarchist\" or \"nearly anarchistic\" societies, further arguing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One case that has inspired both sorts of anarchists is that of the free cities of medieval Europe. The first weak link in the chain of feudalism, these free cities became Europe's centers of economic development, trade, art, and culture. They provided a haven for runaway serfs, who could often legally gain their freedom if they avoided re-capture for a year and a day. And they offer many examples of how people can form mutual-aid associations for protection, insurance, and community. Of course, left-anarchists and anarcho-capitalists take a somewhat different perspective on the free cities: the former emphasize the communitarian and egalitarian concerns of the free cities, while the latter point to the relatively unregulated nature of their markets and the wide range of services (often including defense, security, and legal services) which were provided privately or semi-privately.\nMedieval Iceland.\nAccording to the libertarian theorist David D. Friedman, \"[m]edieval Icelandic institutions have several peculiar and interesting characteristics; they might almost have been invented by a mad economist to test the lengths to which market systems could supplant government in its most fundamental functions\". While not directly labeling it anarcho-capitalist, Friedman argues that the legal system of the Icelandic Commonwealth comes close to being a real-world anarcho-capitalist legal system. Although noting that there was a single legal system, Friedman argues that enforcement of the law was entirely private and highly capitalist, providing some evidence of how such a society would function. Friedman further wrote that \"[e]ven where the Icelandic legal system recognized an essentially 'public' offense, it dealt with it by giving some individual (in some cases chosen by lot from those affected) the right to pursue the case and collect the resulting fine, thus fitting it into an essentially private system\".\nFriedman and Bruce L. Benson argued that the Icelandic Commonwealth saw significant economic and social progress in the absence of systems of criminal law, an executive, or bureaucracy. This commonwealth was led by chieftains, whose position could be bought and sold like that of private property. Being a member of the chieftainship was also completely voluntary.\nAmerican Old West.\nAccording to Terry L. Anderson and P. J. Hill, the Old West in the United States in the period of 1830 to 1900 was similar to anarcho-capitalism in that \"private agencies provided the necessary basis for an orderly society in which property was protected and conflicts were resolved\" and that the common popular perception that the Old West was chaotic with little respect for property rights is incorrect. Since squatters had no claim to western lands under federal law, extra-legal organizations formed to fill the void. Benson explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The land clubs and claim associations each adopted their own written contract setting out the laws that provided the means for defining and protecting property rights in the land. They established procedures for registration of land claims, as well as for the protection of those claims against outsiders, and for adjudication of internal disputes that arose. The reciprocal arrangements for protection would be maintained only if a member complied with the association's rules and its court's rulings. Anyone who refused would be ostracized. A boycott by a land club meant that an individual had no protection against aggression other than what he could provide himself.\nAccording to Anderson, \"[d]efining anarcho-capitalist to mean minimal government with property rights developed from the bottom up, the western frontier was anarcho-capitalistic. People on the frontier invented institutions that fit the resource constraints they faced\".\nGaelic Ireland.\nIn his work \"For a New Liberty\", Murray Rothbard has claimed ancient Gaelic Ireland as an example of nearly anarcho-capitalist society. In his depiction, citing the work of Professor Joseph Peden, the basic political unit of ancient Ireland was the tuath, which is portrayed as \"a body of persons voluntarily united for socially beneficial purposes\" with its territorial claim being limited to \"the sum total of the landed properties of its members\". Civil disputes were settled by private arbiters called \"brehons\" and the compensation to be paid to the wronged party was insured through voluntary surety relationships. Commenting on the \"kings\" of tuaths, Rothbard stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLaw merchant, admiralty law, and early common law.\nSome libertarians have cited law merchant, admiralty law and early common law as examples of anarcho-capitalism.\nIn his work \"Power and Market\", Rothbard stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSomalia from 1991 to 2006.\nEconomist Alex Tabarrok argued that Somalia in its stateless period provided a \"unique test of the theory of anarchy\", in some aspects near of that espoused by anarcho-capitalists David D. Friedman and Murray Rothbard. Nonetheless, both anarchists and some anarcho-capitalists argue that Somalia was not an anarchist society.\nAnalysis and criticism.\nState, justice and defense.\nAnarchists such as Brian Morris argue that anarcho-capitalism does not in fact get rid of the state. He says that anarcho-capitalists \"simply replaced the state with private security firms, and can hardly be described as anarchists as the term is normally understood\". In \"Libertarianism: Bogus Anarchy\", anarchist Peter Sabatini notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Within Libertarianism, Rothbard represents a minority perspective that actually argues for the total elimination of the state. However, Rothbard's claim as an anarchist is quickly voided when it is shown that he only wants an end to the public state. In its place he allows countless private states, with each person supplying their own police force, army, and law, or else purchasing these services from capitalist vendors. ... Rothbard sees nothing at all wrong with the amassing of wealth, therefore those with more capital will inevitably have greater coercive force at their disposal, just as they do now.\nSimilarly, Bob Black argues that an anarcho-capitalist wants to \"abolish the state to his own satisfaction by calling it something else\". He states that they do not denounce what the state does, they just \"object to who's doing it\".\nPaul Birch argues that legal disputes involving several jurisdictions and different legal systems will be too complex and costly. He therefore argues that anarcho-capitalism is inherently unstable, and would evolve, entirely through the operation of free market forces, into either a single dominant private court with a natural monopoly of justice over the territory (a \"de facto\" state), a society of multiple city states, each with a territorial monopoly, or a 'pure anarchy' that would rapidly descend into chaos.\nRandall G. Holcombe argues that anarcho-capitalism turns justice into a commodity as private defense and court firms would favour those who pay more for their services. He argues that defense agencies could form cartels and oppress people without fear of competition. Philosopher Albert Meltzer argued that since anarcho-capitalism promotes the idea of private armies, it actually supports a \"limited State\". He contends that it \"is only possible to conceive of Anarchism which is free, communistic and offering no economic necessity for repression of countering it\".\nLibertarian Robert Nozick argues that a competitive legal system would evolve toward a monopoly government\u2014even without violating individuals' rights in the process. In \"Anarchy, State, and Utopia\", Nozick defends minarchism and argues that an anarcho-capitalist society would inevitably transform into a minarchist state through the eventual emergence of a monopolistic private defense and judicial agency that no longer faces competition. He argues that anarcho-capitalism results in an unstable system that would not endure in the real world. While anarcho-capitalists such as Roy Childs and Murray Rothbard have rejected Nozick's arguments, with Rothbard arguing that the process described by Nozick, with the dominant protection agency outlawing its competitors, in fact violates its own clients' rights, John Jefferson actually advocates Nozick's argument and states that such events would best operate in \"laissez-faire\". Robert Ellickson presented a Hayekian case against anarcho-capitalism, calling it a \"pipe-dream\" and stating that anarcho-capitalists \"by imagining a stable system of competing private associations, ignore both the inevitability of territorial monopolists in governance, and the importance of institutions to constrain those monopolists' abuses\".\nSome libertarians argue that anarcho-capitalism would result in different standards of justice and law due to relying too much on the market. Friedman responded to this criticism by arguing that it assumes the state is controlled by a majority group that has similar legal ideals. If the populace is diverse, different legal standards would therefore be appropriate.\nRights and freedom.\nNegative and positive rights are rights that oblige either action (positive rights) or inaction (negative rights). Anarcho-capitalists believe that negative rights should be recognized as legitimate, but positive rights should be rejected as an intrusion. Some critics reject the distinction between positive and negative rights. Peter Marshall also states that the anarcho-capitalist definition of freedom is entirely negative and that it cannot guarantee the positive freedom of individual autonomy and independence.\nAbout anarcho-capitalism, anarcho-syndicalist and anti-capitalist intellectual Noam Chomsky says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anarcho-capitalism, in my opinion, is a doctrinal system that, if ever implemented, would lead to forms of tyranny and oppression that have few counterparts in human history. There isn't the slightest possibility that its (in my view, horrendous) ideas would be implemented because they would quickly destroy any society that made this colossal error. The idea of \"free contract\" between the potentate and his starving subject is a sick joke, perhaps worth some moments in an academic seminar exploring the consequences of (in my view, absurd) ideas, but nowhere else.\nEconomics and property.\nSocial anarchists argue that anarcho-capitalism allows individuals to accumulate significant power through free markets and private property. Friedman responded by arguing that the Icelandic Commonwealth was able to prevent the wealthy from abusing the poor by requiring individuals who engaged in acts of violence to compensate their victims financially.\nAnarchists argue that certain capitalist transactions are not voluntary and that maintaining the class structure of a capitalist society requires coercion which violates anarchist principles. Anthropologist David Graeber noted his skepticism about anarcho-capitalism along the same lines, arguing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To be honest, I'm pretty skeptical about the idea of anarcho-capitalism. If a-caps imagine a world divided into property-holding employers and property-less wage laborers, but with no systematic coercive mechanisms[;] well, I just can't see how it would work. You always see a-caps saying \"if I want to hire someone to pick my tomatoes, how are you going to stop me without using coercion?\" Notice how you never see anyone say \"if I want to hire myself out to pick someone else's tomatoes, how are you going to stop me?\" Historically nobody ever did wage labor like that if they had pretty much [any] other option.\nSome critics argue that the anarcho-capitalist concept of voluntary choice ignores constraints due to both human and non-human factors such as the need for food and shelter as well as active restriction of both used and unused resources by those enforcing property claims. If a person requires employment in order to feed and house himself, the employer-employee relationship could be considered involuntary. Another criticism is that employment is involuntary because the economic system that makes it necessary for some individuals to serve others is supported by the enforcement of coercive private property relations. Some philosophies view any ownership claims on land and natural resources as immoral and illegitimate. Objectivist philosopher Harry Binswanger criticizes anarcho-capitalism by arguing that \"capitalism requires government\", questioning who or what would enforce treaties and contracts.\nSome right-libertarian critics of anarcho-capitalism who support the full privatization of capital such as geolibertarians argue that land and the raw materials of nature remain a distinct factor of production and cannot be justly converted to private property because they are not products of human labor. Some socialists, including market anarchists and mutualists, adamantly oppose absentee ownership. Anarcho-capitalists have strong abandonment criteria, namely that one maintains ownership until one agrees to trade or gift it. Anti-state critics of this view posit comparatively weak abandonment criteria, arguing that one loses ownership when one stops personally occupying and using it as well as the idea of perpetually binding original appropriation is anathema to traditional schools of anarchism.\nLiterature.\nThe following is a partial list of notable nonfiction works discussing anarcho-capitalism.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1026", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1026", "title": "Anarcho-capitalists", "text": ""}
{"id": "1027", "revid": "33412931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1027", "title": "August 9", "text": "Day of the yearAugust 9 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
