{"id": "9789", "revid": "45834183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9789", "title": "Earthdawn", "text": "Tabletop fantasy role-playing game\nEarthdawn is a fantasy role-playing game, originally produced by FASA in 1993. In 1999 it was licensed to Living Room Games, which produced the \"Second Edition\". It was licensed to RedBrick in 2003, who released the Classic Edition in 2005 and the game's Third Edition in 2009 (the latter through Mongoose Publishing's Flaming Cobra imprint). The license is now held by FASA Games, Inc. (from FASA), who have released the Fourth Edition, with updated mechanics and an advanced metaplot timeline. Vagrant Workshop released the \"Age of Legend\" edition in 2016 using alternative rules-lite mechanics.\nThe game is similar to fantasy games like \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", but draws more inspiration from games like \"RuneQuest\". The rules of the game are tightly bound to the underlying magical metaphysics, with the goal of creating a rich, logical fantasy world. Like many role-playing games from the nineties, \"Earthdawn\" focuses much of its detail on its setting, a province called Barsaive. It was also originally written as a prequel to \"Shadowrun\", mirroring its setting of returning magic with one where magic has just recently dropped from its peak. However, after \"Shadowrun\" was licensed out to a different publisher the ties between the two were deliberately severed (See Setting) and remain so.\nHistory.\nStarting in 1993, FASA released over 20 gaming supplements describing this universe; however, it closed down production of \"Earthdawn\" in January 1999. During that time several novels and short-story anthologies set in the \"Earthdawn\" universe were also released. In late 1999, FASA granted Living Room Games a licensing agreement to produce new material for the game.\nThe \"Second Edition\" did not alter the setting, though it did update the timeline to include events that took place in Barsaive. There were a few changes to the rules in the \"Second Edition\"; some classes were slightly different or altered abilities from the original. The changes were meant to allow for more rounded characters and better balance of play. Living Room Games last published in 2005 and they no longer have a license with FASA to publish Earthdawn material.\nIn 2003 a second license was granted to RedBrick, who developed their own edition based on the FASA products, in addition to releasing the original FASA books in PDF form. The \"Earthdawn Classic Player's Compendium\" and \"Earthdawn Classic Gamemaster's Compendium\" are essentially an alternative Second Edition, but without a version designation (since the material is compatible anyway). Each book has 524 pages and summarizes much of what FASA published\u2014not only the game mechanics, but also the setting, narrations, and stories. For example, each Discipline has its own chapter, describing it from the point of view of different adepts. Likewise, Barsaive gets a complete treatment, and the chapters contain a lot of log entries and stories in addition to the setting descriptions; the same applies to Horrors and Dragons. Errata was incorporated into the text, correcting previous edition errors and providing rules clarifications.\nWhile RedBrick tried to remain faithful to FASA's vision and visual style, they revised almost everything and introduced new material to fill the gaps. RedBrick began publishing new Earthdawn novels in 2007. In 2009, RedBrick announced the Third Edition of the game. To gain a larger audience for this edition, RedBrick published the book through Mongoose Publishing's Flaming Cobra imprint. The first two books were released in July 2009. In 2012, RedBrick ceased publishing and announced the transfer of the Earthdawn license to FASA Games, Inc.\nIn 2014, FASA Games announced the forthcoming publication of Earthdawn Fourth Edition and launched a successful Kickstarter to support the project. Fourth Edition is described as a reworking of the game mechanics, with redundancies eliminated, and a simpler success level system. The game world is advanced five years, past the end of the Barsaive-Thera War, in order to clear dangling threads in the metaplot and open the game world to new stories. The first Fourth Edition title\u2014the Player's Guide\u2014was released in early 2015. In 2014 FASA Corporation also gave permission for Impact Miniatures to return the original Heartbreaker Hobbies &amp; Games Official Earthdawn Miniatures range to production. In order to fund this, Impact Miniatures launched a successful Kickstarter project.\nIn 2016, Vagrant Workshop released the \"Age of Legend\" edition using a permutation of the rules-lite mechanics of the \"Freeform Universal\" RPG system. With its rules-lite mechanics the \"Age of Legend\" edition is marketed as being \"ideal for one-shots, convention games, and introductory games \u2014 even for kids!\"\nSetting.\nIn Barsaive, magic, like many things in nature, goes through cycles. As the magic level rises, it allows alien creatures called Horrors to cross from their distant, otherworldly dimension into our own. The Horrors come in an almost infinite variety\u2014from simple eating machines that devour all they encounter, to incredibly intelligent and cunning foes that feed off the negative emotions they inspire in their prey.\nIn the distant past of \"Earthdawn\"'s setting, an elf scholar discovered that the time of the Horrors was approaching, and founded the Eternal Library in order to discover a way to defeat them \u2014 or at the very least, survive them. The community that grew up around the library developed wards and protections against the Horrors, which they traded to other lands and eventually became the powerful Theran Empire, an extremely magically advanced civilization and the main antagonist of the \"Earthdawn\" setting.\nThe peoples of the world built kaers, underground towns and cities, which they sealed with the Theran wards to wait out the time of the Horrors, which was called the Scourge. Theran wizards and politicians warned many of the outlying nations around Thera of the coming of the Horrors, offering the protection of the kaers to those who would pledge their loyalty to the Empire. Most of these nations agreed at first though some became unwilling to fulfill their end of the bargain after the end of the Scourge, wanting to have nothing to do with the bureaucratic nation run on political conflict and powered by slavery. After four hundred years of hiding, the Scourge ended, and the people emerged to a world changed by the Horrors. The player characters explore this new world, discovering lost secrets of the past, and fighting Horrors that remain.\nThe primary setting of Earthdawn is Barsaive, a former province of the Theran Empire. Barsaive is a region of city-states, independent from the Therans since the dwarven Kingdom of Throal led a rebellion against their former overlords. The Theran presence in Barsaive has been limited to a small part of south-western Barsaive, located around the magical fortress of Sky Point and the city of Vivane.\nThe setting of Earthdawn is the same world as \"Shadowrun\" (i.e. a fictionalized version of Earth), but takes place millennia earlier. The map of Barsaive and its neighboring regions established that most of the game takes place where Ukraine and Russia are in our world. However, the topography other than coastlines and major rivers is quite different, and the only apparent reference to the real world besides the map may be the Blood Wood, known as \"Wyrm Wood\" before the Scourge and similar in location and extent to the Chernobyl (Ukrainian for \"wormwood\") zone of alienation. Note should be made that game world links between \"Earthdawn\" and \"Shadowrun\" were deliberately broken by the publisher when the \"Shadowrun\" property was licensed out, in order to avoid the necessity for coordination between publishing companies. FASA has announced since then, that there are no plans to return \"Shadowrun\" to in-house publication, nor to restore the links between the game worlds.\nTwo Earthdawn supplements cover territories outside Barsaive. \"The Theran Empire\" book (First Edition) covers the Theran Empire and its provinces (which roughly correspond to the territories of the Roman Empire, plus colonies in America and India). \"Cathay: The Five Kingdoms\" (Third Edition) covers the lands of Cathay (Far East).\nRaces.\nKnow as Namegivers, the setting of \"Earthdawn\" features several fantasy races for characters and Npcs:\nPolitical entities.\nBarsaive was once one of the Theran Empire's many provinces but a series of post-Scourge wars between Thera and various city-states of Barsaive have seen the former province secure its independence. Barsaive's people and governments represent a varied number of individual powers.\nCreana: An ancient land far to the South of Barsaive, Creana was once a mighty empire when Thera was still in its infancy. Ruled over by living Passion known as the Pharon, Creana is plagued by magical multi-coloured sandstorms and Horror-corruputed Mummies. Creana also includes several conquered cities from other parts of the Selestrean Basin including the Ulustan city of Okonopolis and Issyr as well as cities from deeper within Fekara such as Nuboz.\nIndrisa: Thera's newest province, Indrisa was discovered just before the Scourge. A land rich in resources and culture, the Indrisans have a complicated relationship with their Passions, who often send powerful creatures called Dhuna to punish those that transgress against them. Indrisa survived the Scourge using an ancient magical method that harnessed positive energy against the Horrors.\nMarac: A land of polished brass towers where science is as praised as magic, Marac is currently in the grip of a bloody revolt known as the Jinari Rebellion. The Sufik tribes of the desert have discovered how to control Horrors and have weaponized them against the invading Therans.\nRugaria: The lands immediately north of Thera, Rugaria is one of the empire's earliest provinces. The people of Rugaria are described as grim and dour and submitted to Theran rule without much resistance.\nTalea: Talea is a province of political intrigue and bizarre religious practices. Dozens of Dukes and Kings make war upon each other whilst waiting for the birth of Prima \u2013 the Passion yet to be.\nVasgothia: The empire's most western province, Vasgothia is where the Therans produce their crops that feed their vast empire, it is also home to savage tribes that hate the empire deeply. Vasgothia survived the Scourge because its Passions fought directly against the Horrors, dying in the process. The Scourge has affected Vasgothia is drastic ways, producing dozens of magical oddities in the process.\nVivane: The lands around the city of Vivane are also known as Vivane province. Whilst not a true province in an administrative or geographical sense, this portion of Southwest Barsaive is an important bulwark between Rugaria and those rebellions nations found in Barsaive proper.\n*The Western Kingdoms / Gwydenro: One of the Elven Nations, the Gwydenro once spread throughout the entire Roheline Wood, but the area was destroyed during the Scourge and it is now known as The Wastes. The Gwydenro consists of dozens of kingdoms known as \"gerryth\" that are bound together by the oaths of the \"lew teryn\". The largest and most powerful kingdom is Sereatha \u2013 The City of Spires.\n*Shosara: Another Elven Nation, Shosara was formally separated from the Elven Court in pre-Scourge times for adopting Human culture. Largely isolated from the rest of the world, Shosara is a culture of seafarers and traders with a 'relaxed' attitude to the Theran Empire.\n*Arancia: An independent nation next to the Theran province of Talea, very little is known or written about Arcancia. (This land will be explored fully in the upcoming 4th edition regional source-book; \"Arancia\")\n*The Slithering Wastes: The name given to a large region west of Arancia and north of Marac. Very little is known about the Slithering Wastes, but presumably it suffered greatly during the Scourge, leading to its current name.\n*Aznan: A land located to the south of Creana, Aznan is renowned for its huge Cloud Mountain and various medicinal plants that possess magical properties.\n*Aruacania: Aruacania lies to the far west of the Theran Empire and is a land of Feathered Dragons and unknown magical mysteries.\n*Fekara: The name of the continent where Creana, Marac, Nuboz and Aznan are located.\n*Cathay: A large and powerful group of kingdoms to the far East of Indrisa, Cathay was fully explored in \"Earthdawn: Third Edition\" with the \"Cathay: Player's Guide &amp; Cathay: Gamemaster's Guide\".\nMagic in \"Earthdawn\".\n\"Earthdawn\"'s magic system is highly varied but the essential idea is that all player characters (called Adepts) have access to magic, used to perform abilities attained through their Disciplines.\nEach Discipline is given a unique set of \"Talents\" which are used to access the world's magic. Legend points (the \"Earthdawn\" equivalent of experience points) can be spent to put up the characters level in the Talent, increasing his step level for the ability, making the user more proficient at using that specific type of magic.\nCaster Disciplines use the same Talent system as others, but also have access to \"spells\". How a player character obtains spells varies depending on his Game Master; but how they are used is universal. Casters all have special Talents called \"spell matrixes\" which they can place spells into. A spell \"attuned\" (placed into) to a matrix is easily accessible and can be cast at any time. Spells can be switched at the players will while out of combat. Once engaged in combat, however, they must use an action to do so (called re-attuning on the fly), which requires a set difficulty they must achieve, or risk losing their turn.\nIt is generally recommended that Casters only use attuned spells, but this is not required. Casting a spell that is not in a matrix is referred to as \"raw casting\". Raw casting is perhaps the most dangerous aspect of the Earthdawn magic system. If the spell is successfully cast, it has its normal effects along with added consequences. Raw casting has a very good chance of drawing the attention of a Horror, which can quickly turn into death for low level characters (and for high level characters as well in some cases).\nOne of the most innovative ideas in \"Earthdawn\" is how magical items work. At first, most magical items work exactly like a mundane item of the same type. As a character searches for information about the item's history, performs certain tasks relating to that history, and spends legend points to activate the item, he unlocks some of the magic in the item. As the character learns more about the item and its history, he can unlock more and more power within the item.\nEach magical item, therefore, is unique by virtue of its history and the scope of its powers. For example, one magical broadsword may have only 4 magical ranks and only increases the damage of the blade. On the other hand, the legendary sword Purifier, has 10 magical ranks and grants its wielder numerous powers.\nGame mechanics.\n\"Earthdawn\" stands out from other tabletop RPGs with a unique approach to skill tests. Players wanting to perform an action determine their level or \"step\" for the skill, talent, or ability to be used. This step can then be looked up in a list of dice to be thrown; it is the next-highest integer of the average roll of the dice(s) in question. For example, two six-sided dice will on average yield a result of 7, thus the step number 8 means that 2d6 will be rolled. The consequence is that each such dice roll has a 50% chance of yielding a result at least as high as the corresponding step number.\nThe result of each die is added (dice which reach their maximum value are thrown again, adding each maximum to the tally, along with the final result below maximum) and compared to a value decided by the game master/storyteller according to the difficulty of the task. This approach means it's always technically possible to succeed with a low step number, yet leaves room for failure on high step numbers. This will sometimes make combat last longer than in other games. As per the above, the difficulty value where the odds of success are perfectly even is identical to the step number.\nThe dice in steps 3 through 13 form the basis of an 11-Step cycle. To form Steps 14\u201324, add 1d20. To form Steps 25\u201335, further add 1d10 + 1d8. For higher cycles, continue alternating between the addition of 1d20 and 1d10 + 1d8. Step 2 is rolled as Step 3, but you subtract 1 from the result. This is notated as \"1d4 \u2013 1\". Step 1 is 1d4 \u2013 2.\nThe 3rd edition changes this by removing d4s and d20s from the system. Steps 6 through 12 (as listed above) form the basis of a 7-Step cycle. To add 7 Steps from then on, simply add 1d12.\nThe 4th edition changes this by making Steps 8 through 18 form the basis of an 11-Step cycle. To form Steps 19\u201329, add 1d20. To form Steps 30\u201341, add 2d20, and so on.\nThe \"Age of Legend\" edition departs from the Step System mechanics of previous Earthdawn editions and instead uses a permutation of the rules-lite mechanics of the \"Freeform Universal\" RPG system by Nathan Russell. In the \"Age of Legend\" permutation a six-sided die (\"d6\") is used with \"\"but...\" and \"and...\" situational modifiers added to four of the six die faces, and conditionally up to six additional Fudge dice of two differing colors which can alter the initial result of the main d6 die. (Alternatively, the \"Age of Legend\" edition can be played with just seven standard d6 dice, ideally of three differing colors.) Dice rolls in the \"Age of Legend\" edition answer closed yes-no questions, with the default question being \"Do you get what you want?\"\" subsequent to a character's attempt to elicit a desired outcome.\nReception.\nChris W. McCubbin reviewed \"Earthdawn\" in \"Pyramid\" #3 (Sept./Oct., 1993), and stated that \"Although it never becomes bogged down in cliches and avoids outmoded concepts, \"Earthdawn\" is, at heart, a very traditional heroic fantasy RPG.\"\nIn the February 1994 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 202), Rick Swan liked the high production values \"highlighted by striking illustrations and FASA\u2019s usual state-of-the-art graphics\", and found that \"Thanks to clear writing and sensible organization... it's an easy read.\" But Swan also found the game setting insubstantial compared to others. \"Despite workable rules and a clever setting, \"Earthdawn\" is more frosting than cake, with little of substance to distinguish it from the competition.\" Nevertheless, he found himself drawn to the game. \"In a greasy pizza, let\u2019s-not-take-this-too-seriously kind of way, \"Earthdawn\" holds its own.\"\nIn a 1996 reader poll conducted by \"Arcane\" magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time, \"Earthdawn\" was ranked 24th. Editor Paul Pettengale commented: \"Very good indeed. \"Earthdawn\" combined traditional fantasy with \"Call of Cthulhu\"-style horror and a detailed background to create an evocative and interesting setting. Combined with a clear, well-designed rules system and an impressive range of supporting supplements and adventures, this is an excellent fantasy game. It's also of special interest to fans of \"Shadowrun\", because it describes the past of the same gameworld.\"\nIn 1999 \"Pyramid\" magazine named \"Earthdawn\" as one of \"The Millennium's Most Underrated Games\". Editor Scott Haring noted (referring to the FASA edition) that \"\"Earthdawn\" had an original, inventive magic system (no mean trick given the hundreds of fantasy RPGs that came before), and a game world that gave you the classic \"monsters and dungeons\" sort of RPG experience, but made sense doing it.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9790", "revid": "40561892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9790", "title": "Electronic data interchange", "text": "Electronic communication method\nElectronic data interchange (EDI) is the concept of businesses electronically communicating information that was traditionally communicated on paper, such as purchase orders, advance ship notices, and invoices. Technical standards for EDI exist to facilitate parties transacting such instruments without having to make special arrangements.\nEDI has existed at least since the early 70s, and there are many EDI standards (including X12, EDIFACT, ODETTE, etc.), some of which address the needs of specific industries or regions. It also refers specifically to a family of standards. In 1996, the National Institute of Standards and Technology defined electronic data interchange as \"the computer-to-computer interchange of a standardized format for data exchange. EDI implies a sequence of messages between two parties, either of whom may serve as originator or recipient. The formatted data representing the documents may be transmitted from originator to recipient via telecommunications or physically transported on electronic storage media.\" It distinguished mere electronic communication or data exchange, specifying that \"in EDI, the usual processing of received messages is by computer only. Human intervention in the processing of a received message is typically intended only for error conditions, for quality review, and for special situations. For example, the transmission of binary or textual data is not EDI as defined here unless the data are treated as one or more data elements of an EDI message and are not normally intended for human interpretation as part of online data processing.\" In short, EDI can be defined as the transfer of structured data, by agreed message standards, from one computer system to another without human intervention.\nHistory.\nLike many other early information technologies, EDI was inspired by developments in military logistics. The complexity of the 1948 Berlin airlift required the development of concepts and methods to exchange, sometimes over a 300 baud teletype modem, vast quantities of data and information about transported goods. These initial concepts later shaped the first TDCC (Transportation Data Coordinating Committee) standards in the US. Among the first integrated systems using EDI were Freight Control Systems. One such real-time system was the London Airport Cargo EDP Scheme (LACES) at Heathrow Airport, London, UK, in 1971. Implementing the direct trader input (DTI) method, it allowed forwarding agents to enter information directly into the customs processing system, reducing the time for clearance. The increase of maritime traffic and problems at customs similar to those experienced at Heathrow Airport led to the implementation of DTI systems in individual ports or groups of ports in the 1980s.\nStandards.\nEDI provides a technical basis for automated commercial \"conversations\" between two entities, either internal or external. The term EDI encompasses the entire electronic data interchange process, including the transmission, message flow, document format, and software used to interpret the documents. However, EDI standards describe the rigorous format of electronic documents, and the EDI standards were designed, initially in the automotive industry, to be independent of communication and software technologies.\nEDI documents generally contain the same information that would normally be found in a paper document used for the same organizational function. For example, an EDI 940 ship-from-warehouse order is used by a manufacturer to tell a warehouse to ship a product to a retailer. It typically has a 'ship-to' address, a 'bill-to' address, and a list of product numbers (usually a UPC) and quantities. Another example is the set of messages between sellers and buyers, such as request for quotation (RFQ), bid in response to RFQ, purchase order, purchase order acknowledgement, shipping notice, receiving advice, invoice, and payment advice. However, EDI is not confined to just business data related to trade but encompasses all fields such as medicine (e.g., patient records and laboratory results), transport (e.g., container and modal information), engineering and construction, etc. In some cases, EDI will be used to create a new business information flow (that was not a paper flow before). This is the case in the Advanced Shipment Notification (ASN) which was designed to inform the receiver of a shipment, the goods to be received and how the goods are packaged. This is further complemented with the shipment's use of the shipping labels containing a GS1-128 barcode referencing the shipment's tracking number.\nSome major sets of EDI standards:\nMany of these standards first appeared in the early to mid-1980s. The standards prescribe the formats, character sets, and data elements used in the exchange of business documents and forms. The complete X12 Document List includes all major business documents, including purchase orders and invoices.\nThe EDI standard prescribes mandatory and optional information for a particular document and gives the rules for the structure of the document. The standards are like building codes. Just as two kitchens can be built \"to code\" but look completely different, two EDI documents can follow the same standard and contain different sets of information. For example, a food company may indicate a product's expiration date while a clothing manufacturer would choose to send colour and size information.\nTransmission protocols.\nEDI can be transmitted using any methodology agreed to by the sender and recipient, but as more trading partners began using the Internet for transmission, standardized protocols have emerged.\nThis includes various technologies such as:\nWhen some people compared the synchronous protocol 2400 bit/s modems, CLEO devices, and value-added networks used to transmit EDI documents to transmitting via the Internet, they equated the non-Internet technologies with EDI and predicted erroneously that EDI itself would be replaced along with the non-Internet technologies. In most cases, these non-internet transmission methods are simply being replaced by Internet protocols, such as FTP, HTTP, telnet, and e-mail, but the EDI documents themselves still remain.\nIn 2002, the IETF published RFC 3335, offering a standardized, secure method of transferring EDI data via e-mail. On July 12, 2005, an IETF working group ratified RFC4130 for MIME-based HTTP EDIINT (a.k.a. AS2) transfers, and the IETF has prepared a similar RFC for FTP transfers (a.k.a. AS3). EDI via web services (a.k.a. AS4) has also been standardized by the OASIS standards body. While some EDI transmission has moved to these newer protocols, the providers of value-added networks remain active.\nInternet.\nAs more organizations connected to the Internet, eventually most or all EDI was pushed onto it. Initially, this was through ad hoc conventions, such as unencrypted FTP of ASCII text files to a certain folder on a certain host, permitted only from certain IP addresses. However, the IETF has published several informational documents (the \"Applicability Statements\"; see below under Protocols) describing ways to use standard internet protocols for EDI.\nAs of 2002, Walmart has pushed AS2 for EDI. Because of its significant presence in the global supply chain, AS2 has become a commonly adopted approach for EDI.\nSpecifications.\nOrganizations that send or receive documents from each other are referred to as \"trading partners\" in EDI terminology. The trading partners agree on the specific information to be transmitted and how it should be used. This is done in human-readable specifications (also called Message Implementation Guidelines). While the standards are analogous to building codes, the specifications are analogous to blueprints. (The specification may also be called a \"mapping,\" but the term mapping is typically reserved for specific machine-readable instructions given to the translation software .) Larger trading \"hubs\" have existing Message Implementation Guidelines which mirror their business processes for processing EDI and they are usually unwilling to modify their EDI business practices to meet the needs of their trading partners. Often in a large company, these EDI guidelines will be written to be generic enough to be used by different branches or divisions and therefore will contain information not needed for a particular business document exchange. For other large companies, they may create separate EDI guidelines for each branch/division.\nTransmission: Direct EDI and VANs.\nTrading partners are free to use any method for the transmission of documents (as described above in the Transmission protocols section). Further, they can either interact directly or through an intermediary.\nDirect EDI: peer-to-peer.\nTrading partners can connect directly to each other. For example, an automotive manufacturer might maintain a modem-pool that all of its hundreds of suppliers are required to dial into to perform EDI. However, if a supplier does business with several manufacturers, it may need to acquire a different modem (or VPN device, etc.) and different software for each one.\nAs EDI and web technology have evolved, new EDI software technologies have emerged to facilitate direct (also known as point-to-point) EDI between trading partners. Modern EDI software can facilitate exchanges using any number of different file transmission protocols and EDI document standards, reducing costs and barriers to entry.\nValue-added networks.\nTo address the limitations in peer-to-peer adoption of EDI, VANs (value-added networks) were established decades ago. A VAN acts as a regional post office. It receives transactions, examines the 'from' and the 'to' information, and routes the transaction to the final recipient. VANs may provide a number of additional services, e.g. retransmitting documents, providing third party audit information, acting as a gateway for different transmission methods, and handling telecommunications support. Because of these and other services VANs provide, businesses frequently use a VAN even when both trading partners are using Internet-based protocols. Healthcare clearinghouses perform many of the same functions as a VAN, but have additional legal restrictions.\nVANs may be operated by various entities:\nCosts, trade-offs and implementation.\nIt is important to note that there are key trade-offs between VANs and Direct EDI, and in many instances, organizations exchanging EDI documents can in fact use both in concert, for different aspects of their EDI implementations. For example, in the U.S., the majority of EDI document exchanges use AS2, so a direct EDI setup for AS2 may make sense for a U.S.-based organization. But adding OFTP2 capabilities to communicate with a European partner may be difficult, so a VAN might make sense to handle those specific transactions, while direct EDI is used for the AS2 transactions. \u00a0\nIn many ways, a VAN acts as a service provider, simplifying much of the setup for organizations looking to initiate EDI. Due to the fact that many organizations first starting out with EDI often do so to meet a customer or partner requirement and therefore lack in-house EDI expertise, a VAN can be a valuable asset.\nHowever, VANs may come with high costs. VANs typically charge a per-document or even per-line-item transaction fee to process EDI transactions as a service on behalf of their customers. This is the predominant reason why many organizations also implement an EDI software solution or eventually migrate to one for some or all of their EDI.\nOn the other hand, implementing EDI software can be a challenging process, depending on the complexity of the use case, technologies involved and availability of EDI expertise. In addition, there are ongoing maintenance requirements and updates to consider. For example, EDI mapping is one of the most challenging EDI management tasks. Companies must develop and maintain EDI maps for each of their trading partners (and sometimes multiple EDI maps for each trading partner based on their order fulfilment requirements).\nInterpreting data.\n\"EDI translation software\" provides the interface between internal systems and the EDI format sent/received. For an \"inbound\" document, the EDI solution will receive the file (either via a value-added network or directly using protocols such as FTP or AS2), take the received EDI file (commonly referred to as an \"envelope\"), and validate that the trading partner who is sending the file is a valid trading partner, that the structure of the file meets the EDI standards, and that the individual fields of information conform to the agreed-upon standards. Typically, the translator will either create a file of either fixed length, variable length or XML tagged format or \"print\" the received EDI document (for non-integrated EDI environments). The next step is to convert/transform the file that the translator creates into a format that can be imported into a company's back-end business systems, applications or ERP. This can be accomplished by using a custom program, an integrated proprietary \"mapper\" or an integrated standards-based graphical \"mapper,\" using a standard data transformation language such as XSLT. The final step is to import the transformed file (or database) into the company's back-end system.\nFor an \"outbound\" document, the process for integrated EDI is to export a file (or read a database) from a company's information systems and transform the file to the appropriate format for the translator. The translation software will then \"validate\" the EDI file sent to ensure that it meets the standard agreed upon by the trading partners, convert the file into \"EDI\" format (adding the appropriate identifiers and control structures) and send the file to the trading partner (using the appropriate communications protocol).\nAnother critical component of any EDI translation software is a complete \"audit\" of all the steps to move business documents between trading partners. The audit ensures that any transaction (which in reality is a business document) can be tracked to ensure that they are not lost. In the case of a retailer sending a Purchase Order to a supplier, if the Purchase Order is \"lost\" anywhere in the business process, the effect is devastating to both businesses. To the supplier, they do not fulfil the order as they have not received it thereby losing business and damaging the business relationship with their retail client. For the retailer, they have a stock outage and the effect is lost sales, reduced customer service and ultimately lower profits.\nIn EDI terminology, \"inbound\" and \"outbound\" refer to the direction of transmission of an EDI document in relation to a particular system, not the direction of merchandise, money or other things represented by the document. For example, an EDI document that tells a warehouse to perform an outbound shipment is an inbound document in relation to the warehouse computer system. It is an outbound document in relation to the manufacturer or dealer that transmitted the document.\nAdvantages over paper systems.\nEDI and other similar technologies save the company money by providing an alternative to or replacing, information flows that require a great deal of human interaction and paper documents. Even when paper documents are maintained in parallel with EDI exchange, e.g. printed shipping manifests, electronic exchange and the use of data from that exchange reduces the handling costs of sorting, distributing, organizing, and searching paper documents. EDI and similar technologies allow a company to take advantage of the benefits of storing and manipulating data electronically without the cost of manual entry. Another advantage of EDI is the opportunity to reduce or eliminate manual data entry errors, such as shipping and billing errors, because EDI eliminates the need to re-key documents on the destination side. One very important advantage of EDI over paper documents is the speed at which the trading partner receives and incorporates the information into their system greatly reducing cycle times. For this reason, EDI can be an important component of just-in-time production systems.\nAccording to the 2008 Aberdeen report \"A Comparison of Supplier Enablement around the World\", only 34% of purchase orders are transmitted electronically in North America. In EMEA, 36% of orders are transmitted electronically and in APAC, 41% of orders are transmitted electronically. They also report that the average paper requisition to order costs a company $ in North America, $ in EMEA and $ in APAC. With an EDI requisition to order, costs are reduced to $ in North America, $ in EMEA and $ in APAC.\nBarriers to implementation.\nThere are a few barriers to adopting electronic data interchange. One of the most significant barriers is the accompanying business process change. Existing business processes built around paper handling may not be suited for EDI and would require changes to accommodate automated processing of business documents. For example, a business may receive the bulk of their goods by 1 or 2-day shipping and all of their invoices by mail. The existing process may, therefore, assume that goods are typically received before the invoice. With EDI, the invoice will typically be sent when the goods ship and will, therefore, require a process that handles large numbers of invoices whose corresponding goods have not yet been received.\nAnother significant barrier is the cost in time and money in the initial setup. The preliminary expenses and time that arise from the implementation, customization and training can be costly. It is important to select the correct level of integration to match the business requirement. For a business with relatively few transactions with EDI-based partners, it may make sense for businesses to implement inexpensive \"rip and read\" solutions, where the EDI format is printed out in human-readable form, and people \u2014 rather than computers \u2014 respond to the transaction. Another alternative is outsourced EDI solutions provided by EDI \"Service Bureaus\". For other businesses, the implementation of an integrated EDI solution may be necessary as increases in trading volumes brought on by EDI force them to re-implement their order processing business processes.\nThe key hindrance to a successful implementation of EDI is the perception many businesses have of the nature of EDI. Many view EDI from the technical perspective that EDI is a data format; it would be more accurate to take the business view that EDI is a system for exchanging business documents with external entities, and integrating the data from those documents into the company's internal systems. Successful implementations of EDI take into account the effect externally generated information will have on their internal systems and validate the business information received. For example, allowing a supplier to update a retailer's accounts payable system without appropriate checks and balances would put the company at significant risk. Businesses new to the implementation of EDI must understand the underlying business process and apply proper judgment.\nAcknowledgement.\nThere are several mechanisms used in EDI for acknowledgement, i.e. notifying the sender that an incoming transaction was received and handled by the recipient:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9791", "revid": "20398877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9791", "title": "Ecstacy", "text": ""}
{"id": "9792", "revid": "37017796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9792", "title": "Extravehicular activity", "text": "Activity done by an astronaut or cosmonaut outside a spacecraft\nExtravehicular activity (EVA) is any activity done by an astronaut in outer space outside a spacecraft. In the absence of a breathable Earthlike atmosphere, the astronaut is completely reliant on a space suit for environmental support. EVA includes spacewalks and lunar or planetary surface exploration (commonly known from 1969 to 1972 as moonwalks). In a stand-up EVA (SEVA), an astronaut stands through an open hatch but does not fully leave the spacecraft. EVA has been conducted by the Soviet Union/Russia, the United States, Canada, the European Space Agency and China.\nOn March 18, 1965, Alexei Leonov became the first human to perform a spacewalk, exiting the Voskhod 2 capsule for 12 minutes and 9 seconds. On July 20, 1969, Neil Armstrong became the first human to perform a moonwalk, outside his lunar lander on Apollo 11 for 2 hours and 31 minutes. On the last three Moon missions, astronauts also performed deep-space EVAs on the return to Earth, to retrieve film canisters from the outside of the spacecraft. American Astronauts Pete Conrad, Joseph Kerwin, and Paul Weitz also used EVA in 1973 to repair launch damage to Skylab, the United States' first space station.\nEVAs may be either tethered (the astronaut is connected to the spacecraft; oxygen and electrical power can be supplied through an umbilical cable; no propulsion is needed to return to the spacecraft), or untethered. Untethered spacewalks were only performed on three missions in 1984 using the Manned Maneuvering Unit (MMU), and on a flight test in 1994 of the Simplified Aid For EVA Rescue (SAFER), a safety device worn on tethered U.S. EVAs.\nDevelopment history.\nNASA planners invented the term \"extravehicular activity\" (abbreviated with the acronym EVA) in the early 1960s for the Apollo program to land humans on the Moon, because the astronauts would leave the spacecraft to collect lunar material samples and deploy scientific experiments. To support this, and other Apollo objectives, the Gemini program was spun off to develop the capability for astronauts to work outside a two-person Earth orbiting spacecraft. However, the Soviet Union was fiercely competitive in holding the early lead it had gained in crewed spaceflight, so the Soviet Communist Party, led by Nikita Khrushchev, ordered the conversion of its single-pilot Vostok capsule into a two- or three-person craft named Voskhod, in order to compete with Gemini and Apollo. The Soviets were able to launch two Voskhod capsules before U.S. was able to launch its first crewed Gemini.\nThe Voskhod's avionics required cooling by cabin air to prevent any kind of overheating, therefore an airlock was required for the spacewalking cosmonaut to exit and re-enter the cabin while it remained pressurized. Unusually, and by contrast, the Gemini avionics did not require air cooling, allowing the spacewalking astronaut to exit and re-enter the depressurized cabin through an open hatch. Because of this, the American and Soviet space programs developed different definitions for the duration of an EVA. The Soviet (now Russian) definition begins when the outer airlock hatch is open and the cosmonaut is in vacuum. An American EVA began when the astronaut had at least their head outside the spacecraft. The USA has changed its EVA definition since.\nFirst instance.\nThe first EVA was performed on March 18, 1965, by Soviet cosmonaut Alexei Leonov, who spent 12 minutes and 9 seconds outside the Voskhod 2 spacecraft. Carrying a white metal backpack containing 45 minutes' worth of breathing and pressurization oxygen, Leonov had no means to control his motion other than pulling on his tether. After the flight, he claimed this was easy, but his space suit ballooned from its internal pressure against the vacuum of space, stiffening so much that he could not activate the shutter on his chest-mounted camera.\nAt the end of his space walk, the suit stiffening caused a more serious problem: Leonov had to re-enter the capsule through the inflatable cloth airlock, in diameter and long. He improperly entered the airlock head-first and got stuck sideways. He could not get back in without reducing the pressure in his suit, risking \"the bends\". This added another 12 minutes to his time in vacuum, and he was overheated by from the exertion. It would be almost four years before the Soviets tried another EVA. They misrepresented to the press how difficult Leonov found it to work in weightlessness and concealed the problems encountered until after the end of the Cold War.\nProject Gemini.\nThe first American spacewalk was performed on June 3, 1965, by Ed White from the second crewed Gemini flight, Gemini IV, for 21 minutes. White was tethered to the spacecraft, and his oxygen was supplied through a umbilical, which also carried communications and biomedical instrumentation. He was the first to control his motion in space with a Hand-Held Maneuvering Unit, which worked well but only carried enough propellant for 20 seconds. White found his tether useful for limiting his distance from the spacecraft but difficult to use for moving around, contrary to Leonov's claim. However, a defect in the capsule's hatch latching mechanism caused difficulties opening and closing the hatch, which delayed the start of the EVA and put White and his crewmate at risk of not getting back to Earth alive.\nNo EVAs were planned on the next three Gemini flights. The next EVA was planned to be made by David Scott on Gemini VIII, but that mission had to be aborted due to a critical spacecraft malfunction before the EVA could be conducted. Astronauts on the next three Gemini flights (Eugene Cernan, Michael Collins, and Richard Gordon), performed several EVAs, but none was able to successfully work for long periods outside the spacecraft without tiring and overheating. Cernan attempted but failed to test an Air Force Astronaut Maneuvering Unit which included a self-contained oxygen system.\nOn November 13, 1966, Edwin \"Buzz\" Aldrin became the first to successfully work in space without tiring during Gemini XII, the last Gemini mission. Aldrin worked outside the spacecraft for 2 hours and 6 minutes, in addition to two stand-up EVAs in the spacecraft hatch for an additional 3 hours and 24 minutes. Aldrin's interest in scuba diving inspired the use of underwater EVA training to simulate weightlessness, which has been used ever since to allow astronauts to practice techniques of avoiding wasted muscle energy.\nFirst crew transfer.\nOn January 16, 1969, Soviet cosmonauts Aleksei Yeliseyev and Yevgeny Khurnov transferred from Soyuz 5 to Soyuz 4, which were docked together. This was the second Soviet EVA, and it would be almost another nine years before the Soviets performed their third.\nApollo missions.\nAmerican astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin performed the first EVA on the lunar surface on July 21, 1969 (UTC), after landing their Apollo 11 Lunar Module spacecraft. This first Moon walk, using self-contained portable life support systems, lasted 2 hours and 36 minutes. A total of fifteen Moon walks were performed among six Apollo crews, including Charles \"Pete\" Conrad, Alan Bean, Alan Shepard, Edgar Mitchell, David Scott, James Irwin, John Young, Charles Duke, Eugene Cernan, and Harrison \"Jack\" Schmitt. Cernan was the last Apollo astronaut to step off the surface of the Moon.\nApollo 15 command module pilot Al Worden made an EVA on August 5, 1971, on the return trip from the Moon, to retrieve a film and data recording canister from the service module. He was assisted by Lunar Module Pilot James Irwin standing up in the Command Module hatch. This procedure was repeated by Ken Mattingly and Charles Duke on Apollo 16, and by Ronald Evans and Harrison Schmitt on Apollo 17.\nPost-Apollo.\nThe first EVA repairs of a spacecraft were made by Charles \"Pete\" Conrad, Joseph Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz on May 26, June 7, and June 19, 1973, on the Skylab 2 mission. They rescued the functionality of the launch-damaged Skylab space station by freeing a stuck solar panel, deploying a solar heating shield, and freeing a stuck circuit breaker relay. The Skylab 2 crew made three EVAs, and a total of ten EVAs were made by the three Skylab crews. They found that activities in weightlessness required about 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 times longer than on Earth because many astronauts suffered spacesickness early in their flights.\nAfter Skylab, no more EVAs were made by the United States until the advent of the Space Shuttle program in the early 1980s. In this period, the Soviets resumed EVAs, making four from the Salyut 6 and Salyut 7 space stations between December 20, 1977, and July 30, 1982.\nWhen the United States resumed EVAs on April 7, 1983, astronauts started using an Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) for self-contained life support independent of the spacecraft. STS-6 was the first Space Shuttle mission during which a spacewalk was conducted. Also, for the first time, American astronauts used an airlock to enter and exit the spacecraft like the Soviets. Accordingly, the American definition of EVA start time was redefined to when the astronaut switches the EMU to battery power.\nNumerous EVAs were conducted during the assembly of the ISS, often using the Quest Joint Airlock, designed to support both US EMUs, and Russian Orlan space suits.\nBy China.\nChina became the third country to independently carry out an EVA on September 27, 2008, during the Shenzhou 7 mission. Chinese taikonaut Zhai Zhigang completed a 22-minute spacewalk wearing the Chinese-developed Feitian space suit, with taikonaut Liu Boming wearing the Russian-derived Orlan space suit assisting him in the process. Zhai completely exited the craft, while Liu stood by at the airlock, straddling the portal.\nSince 2021, China has carried out several more extravehicular activities lasting several hours for the construction of the Tiangong space station.\nCommemoration.\nThe first spacewalk, made by Soviet cosmonaut Alexei Leonov, was commemorated in 1965 with several Eastern Bloc stamps (see Alexei Leonov#Stamps). Since the Soviet Union did not publish details of the Voskhod spacecraft at the time, the spaceship depiction in the stamps was purely fictional.\nThe U.S. Post Office issued a postage stamp in 1967 commemorating Ed White's first American spacewalk. The engraved image has an accurate depiction of the Gemini IV spacecraft and White's space suit.\nDesignations.\nNASA \"spacewalkers\" during the Space Shuttle program were designated as EV-1, EV-2, EV-3 and EV-4 (assigned to mission specialists for each mission, if applicable).\nCamp-out procedure.\nFor EVAs from the International Space Station, NASA employed a \"camp-out\" procedure to reduce the risk of decompression sickness. This was first tested by the Expedition 12 crew. During a camp-out, astronauts sleep overnight in the airlock prior to an EVA, lowering the air pressure to , compared to the normal station pressure of . Spending a night at the lower air pressure helps flush nitrogen from the body, thereby preventing \"the bends\". More recently astronauts have been using the In-Suit Light Exercise protocol rather than camp-out to prevent decompression sickness.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9794", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9794", "title": "Evolutionary tree", "text": ""}
{"id": "9797", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9797", "title": "Evolutionary tree/Chordata", "text": ""}
{"id": "9799", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9799", "title": "Erin Brockovich", "text": "American environmental activist\nErin Brockovich (n\u00e9e Pattee; born June 22, 1960) is an American paralegal, consumer advocate, and environmental activist who was instrumental in building a case against Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Company (PG&amp;E) involving groundwater contamination in Hinkley, California with the help of attorney Ed Masry in 1993. Their successful lawsuit was the subject of an Oscar-winning film, \"Erin Brockovich\" (2000), starring Julia Roberts as Brockovich and Albert Finney as Masry. Since then, Brockovich has become a media personality as well, hosting the TV series \"Challenge America with Erin Brockovich\" on ABC and \"Final Justice\" on Zone Reality. She is the president of Brockovich Research &amp; Consulting. She also works as a consultant for the New York law firm of Weitz &amp; Luxenberg, which has a focus on personal injury claims for asbestos exposure, and Shine Lawyers in Australia. She worked as a consultant for the now-defunct California law firm Girardi &amp; Keese.\nEarly life.\nBrockovich was born Erin Pattee in Lawrence, Kansas, the daughter of Betty Jo (born O'Neal; c. 1923\u20132008), a journalist, and Frank Pattee (1924\u20132011), an industrial engineer and football player. She has two brothers, Frank Jr. and Thomas (1954\u20131992), and a sister, Jodie. She graduated from Lawrence High School, then attended Kansas State University, in Manhattan, Kansas, and graduated with an Associate in Applied Arts Degree from Wade College in Dallas, Texas.\nBrockovich is dyslexic.\nPacific Gas &amp; Electric litigation.\nIn 1993, Brockovich became a whistleblower when she spoke out against PG&amp;E after finding widespread unexplained illness in the town of Hinkley, California. She became instrumental in suing the utility company on behalf of the town.\nThe case (\"Anderson, et al. v. Pacific Gas &amp; Electric,\" file BCV 00300) alleged contamination of drinking water with hexavalent chromium (also written as \"chromium 6\", \"chromium VI\", \"Cr-VI\" or \"Cr-6\") in the town. At the center of the case was a facility, the Hinkley compressor station, built in 1952 as a part of a natural-gas pipeline connecting to the San Francisco Bay Area. Between 1952 and 1966, PG&amp;E used hexavalent chromium in a cooling tower system to fight corrosion. The waste water was discharged to unlined ponds at the site, and some of the waste water percolated into the groundwater, affecting an area of approximately near the plant. The Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) put the PG&amp;E site under its regulations in 1968.\nThe case was settled in 1996 for (US) $333 million, the largest settlement ever paid in a direct-action lawsuit in United States history to that date. Masry &amp; Vititoe, the law firm for which Brockovich was a legal clerk, received $133.6 million of that settlement, and Brockovich received $2.5 million as part of her fee.\nA study released in 2010 by the California Cancer Registry suggested that cancer rates in Hinkley \"remained unremarkable from 1988 to 2008\". John W. Morgan, an epidemiologist involved in the study said that the 196 cases of cancer reported during the most recent survey of 1996 through 2008 were fewer than what he would expect based on demographics and the regional rate of cancer. However, in June 2013, \"Mother Jones\" magazine featured a critique from the Center for Public Integrity of the author's work on the later epidemiological studies, pointing out, for example, that the affected area of Hinkley had been bulldozed by 1996.\nAs of 2019[ [update]], average Cr-6 levels for water from wells in Hinkley were still peaking at 100 times California's maximum contaminant level for the compound at over 1,000 parts per billion.\nIn 2021, PG&amp;E said that they had cleaned up 70% of the contamination. An independent consultant responsible for monitoring the cleanup on behalf of the residents said that groundwater cleanups take 30 to 50 years to complete.\nIn October 2022, the EPA announced Cr-6 was likely carcinogenic if consumed in drinking water. The American Chemistry Council disputed their finding.\nOther litigation.\nWorking with Edward L. Masry, a lawyer based in Thousand Oaks, California, Brockovich went on to participate in other anti-pollution lawsuits. One suit accused the Whitman Corporation of chromium contamination in Willits, California. Another, which listed 1,200 plaintiffs, alleged contamination near PG&amp;E's Kettleman Hills compressor station in Kings County, California, along the same pipeline as the Hinkley site. The Kettleman suit was settled for $335 million in 2006.\nIn 2003, after experiencing problems with mold contamination in her own home in the Conejo Valley, Brockovich received settlements of $430,000 from two parties, and an undisclosed amount from a third party, to settle her lawsuit alleging toxic mold in her Agoura Hills, California, home. Brockovich then became a prominent activist and educator in the area as well.\nBrockovich and Masry filed suit against the Beverly Hills Unified School District in 2003, in which the district was accused of harming the health and safety of its students by allowing a contractor to operate a cluster of oil wells on campus. Brockovich and Masry alleged that 300 cancer cases were linked to the oil wells. Subsequent testing and epidemiological investigation failed to corroborate a substantial link, and Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Wendell Mortimer granted summary judgment against the plaintiffs. In May 2007, the school district announced that it was to be paid $450,000 as reimbursement for legal expenses.\nBrockovich assisted in the filing of a lawsuit against Prime Tanning Corp. of St. Joseph, Missouri, in April 2009. The lawsuit claims that waste sludge from the production of leather, containing high levels of hexavalent chromium, was distributed to farmers in northwest Missouri to use as fertilizer on their fields. It is believed to be a potential cause of an abnormally high number of brain tumors around the town of Cameron, Missouri. Prior to the lawsuit, the site was investigated by the EPA and at the time, the agency found \"no detections of total chromium\", and added, \"we would like to get any specific information from this law firm as soon as we can so we can evaluate it, and we intend to ask for that directly.\" The EPA, Missouri Department of Natural Resources, Missouri Department of Health and a state epidemiologist had been investigating what residents believed were a high number of brain tumors in the area \u2014 more than 70 since 1996. The epidemiologist had stated the numbers did not seem abnormally high. \nIn June 2009, Brockovich began investigating a case of contaminated water in Midland, Texas. \"Significant amounts\" of hexavalent chromium were found in the water of more than 40 homes in the area, some of which have now been fitted with state-monitored filters on their water supply. Brockovich said: \"The only difference between here and Hinkley is that I saw higher levels here than I saw in Hinkley.\"\nIn 2012, Brockovich became involved in the mysterious case of 14 students from LeRoy, New York, who began reporting perplexing medical symptoms, including tics and speech difficulties. Brockovich believed environmental pollution from the 1970 Lehigh Valley Railroad derailment was the cause and conducted testing in the area. Brockovich was supposed to return to LeRoy to present her findings, but never did; in the meantime, the students' doctors determined the cause was mass psychogenic illness, and that the media exposure was exacerbating the symptoms. No environmental causes were found after repeat testing, and the students improved once the media attention died down.\nIn early 2016, Brockovich became involved in potential litigation against Southern California Gas for a large methane leak from its underground storage facility near the community of Porter Ranch, north of Los Angeles.\nIn early 2023, within hours of the Feb. 3 Norfolk Southern train derailment in East Palestine, Ohio, Brockovich started getting calls for assistance from the community about the toxic chemical fires. She has been interviewed on various news outlets, from independent media to national networks. A few weeks later, Brockovich traveled to East Palestine, where she was interviewed by local media, and appeared at one of several high-profile town hall meetings on Friday night, Feb. 24th. At the meeting, Brockovich and an attorney highlighted decades of toxic chemical train derailments. Among Brockovich's many concerns is the potential groundwater contamination after chemicals were, as she describes it, dumped in a big hole in the ground and burned off. A recurring theme from her appearances is that the nation has, for decades, in the name of profits over people, continued to put off necessary infrastructure improvements, tighter regulations and better response to protect the health, safety and welfare of communities from long-term bodily harm and environmental damage. Brockovich continues to cite the Hinkley case and Flint water crisis, as well as the 2013 Lac-Megantic, Canada oil train catastrophe.\nMovies and television.\nBrockovich's work in bringing litigation against Pacific Gas &amp; Electric was the focus of the 2000 feature film \"Erin Brockovich\", starring Julia Roberts in the title role. The film was nominated for five Academy Awards: Best Actress in a Leading Role, Best Actor in a Supporting Role, Best Director, Best Picture, and Best Writing in a Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen. Roberts won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of Erin Brockovich. Brockovich herself had a cameo role as a waitress named Julia R.\nBrockovich had a more extensive role in the 2012 documentary \"Last Call at the Oasis\", which focused on not only water pollution but also the overall state of water scarcity as it relates to water policy in the United States.\nOn April 8, 2021, \"Rebel\", a television series which creator Krista Vernoff loosely based on Brockovich's life, premiered on ABC.\nBooks and articles.\nBrockovich's first book, \"Take It from Me: Life's a Struggle But You Can Win\" (), was published in 2001. A second book, \"Superman's Not Coming\", was released on August 25, 2020.\nIn 2021, Brockovich wrote about hormone-disrupting chemicals (such as PFAS) eroding human fertility at an alarming rate.\nOn February 8, 2022, Brockovich wrote an article talking about the case of Steven Donziger, a lawyer who won a $18 billion judgment against Chevron before being jailed for contempt of court after refusing to turn his phone and computer over to Chevron's legal team.\nPersonal life.\nBrockovich has three children: a son, Matthew, and a daughter, Katie, from her first marriage to Shawn Brown, and a daughter, Elizabeth (\"Beth\"), from her second marriage to Steven Brockovich. Her third husband was actor and country-musician DJ, Eric L. Ellis. As of 2016, Brockovich resides in Agoura Hills, California, in a house she purchased in 1996 with her US$2.5 million bonus after the Hinkley settlement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9804", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9804", "title": "Electric charge", "text": "Physical property that quantifies an object's interaction with an electric field\nElectric charge is the physical property of matter that causes it to experience a force when placed in an electromagnetic field. Electric charge can be \"positive\" or \"negative\" (commonly carried by protons and electrons respectively, by convention). Like charges repel each other and unlike charges attract each other. An object with no net charge is referred to as electrically neutral. Early knowledge of how charged substances interact is now called classical electrodynamics, and is still accurate for problems that do not require consideration of quantum effects.\nElectric charge is a conserved property; the net charge of an isolated system, the amount of positive charge minus the amount of negative charge, cannot change. Electric charge is carried by subatomic particles. In ordinary matter, negative charge is carried by electrons, and positive charge is carried by the protons in the nuclei of atoms. If there are more electrons than protons in a piece of matter, it will have a negative charge, if there are fewer it will have a positive charge, and if there are equal numbers it will be neutral. Charge is \"quantized\"; it comes in integer multiples of individual small units called the elementary charge, \"e\", about , which is the smallest charge that can exist freely. Particles called quarks have smaller charges, multiples of \"e\", but they are found only combined in particles that have a charge that is an integer multiple of \"e\". In the Standard Model, charge is an absolutely conserved flavour quantum number. The proton has a charge of +\"e\", and the electron has a charge of \u2212\"e\".\nElectric charges produce electric fields. A moving charge also produces a magnetic field. The interaction of electric charges with an electromagnetic field (a combination of an electric and a magnetic field) is the source of the electromagnetic (or Lorentz) force, which is one of the four fundamental interactions in physics. The study of photon-mediated interactions among charged particles is called quantum electrodynamics.\nThe SI derived unit of electric charge is the coulomb (C) named after French physicist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb. In electrical engineering it is also common to use the ampere-hour (A\u22c5h). In physics and chemistry it is common to use the elementary charge (\"e\") as a unit. Chemistry also uses the Faraday constant, which is the charge of one mole of elementary charges. The lowercase symbol \"q\" often denotes charge.\nOverview.\nCharge is the fundamental property of matter that exhibits electrostatic attraction or repulsion in the presence of other matter with charge. Electric charge is a characteristic property of many subatomic particles. The charges of free-standing particles are integer multiples of the elementary charge \"e\"; we say that electric charge is \"quantized\". Michael Faraday, in his electrolysis experiments, was the first to note the discrete nature of electric charge. Robert Millikan's oil drop experiment demonstrated this fact directly, and measured the elementary charge. It has been discovered that one type of particle, quarks, have fractional charges of either \u2212 or +, but it is believed they always occur in multiples of integral charge; free-standing quarks have never been observed.\nBy convention, the charge of an electron is negative, \"\u2212e\", while that of a proton is positive, \"+e\". Charged particles whose charges have the same sign repel one another, and particles whose charges have different signs attract. Coulomb's law quantifies the electrostatic force between two particles by asserting that the force is proportional to the product of their charges, and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The charge of an antiparticle equals that of the corresponding particle, but with opposite sign.\nThe electric charge of a macroscopic object is the sum of the electric charges of the particles that it's made up of. This charge is often small, because matter is made of atoms, and atoms typically have equal numbers of protons and electrons, in which case their charges cancel out, yielding a net charge of zero, thus making the atom neutral.\nAn \"ion\" is an atom (or group of atoms) that has lost one or more electrons, giving it a net positive charge (cation), or that has gained one or more electrons, giving it a net negative charge (anion). \"Monatomic ions\" are formed from single atoms, while \"polyatomic ions\" are formed from two or more atoms that have been bonded together, in each case yielding an ion with a positive or negative net charge.\nDuring the formation of macroscopic objects, constituent atoms and ions usually combine to form structures composed of neutral \"ionic compounds\" electrically bound to neutral atoms. Thus macroscopic objects tend toward being neutral overall, but macroscopic objects are rarely perfectly net neutral.\nSometimes macroscopic objects contain ions distributed throughout the material, rigidly bound in place, giving an overall net positive or negative charge to the object. Also, macroscopic objects made of conductive elements can more or less easily (depending on the element) take on or give off electrons, and then maintain a net negative or positive charge indefinitely. When the net electric charge of an object is non-zero and motionless, the phenomenon is known as static electricity. This can easily be produced by rubbing two dissimilar materials together, such as rubbing amber with fur or glass with silk. In this way, non-conductive materials can be charged to a significant degree, either positively or negatively. Charge taken from one material is moved to the other material, leaving an opposite charge of the same magnitude behind. The law of \"conservation of charge\" always applies, giving the object from which a negative charge is taken a positive charge of the same magnitude, and vice versa.\nEven when an object's net charge is zero, the charge can be distributed non-uniformly in the object (e.g., due to an external electromagnetic field, or bound polar molecules). In such cases, the object is said to be polarized. The charge due to polarization is known as bound charge, while the charge on an object produced by electrons gained or lost from outside the object is called \"free charge\". The motion of electrons in conductive metals in a specific direction is known as electric current.\nUnit.\nThe SI unit of quantity of electric charge is the coulomb (symbol: C). The coulomb is defined as the quantity of charge that passes through the cross section of an electrical conductor carrying one ampere for one second. This unit was proposed in 1946 and ratified in 1948. The lowercase symbol \"q\" is often used to denote a quantity of electric charge. The quantity of electric charge can be directly measured with an electrometer, or indirectly measured with a ballistic galvanometer.\nThe elementary charge (the electric charge of the proton) is defined as a fundamental constant in the SI. The value for elementary charge, when expressed in SI units, is exactly .\nAfter discovering the quantized character of charge, in 1891 George Stoney proposed the unit 'electron' for this fundamental unit of electrical charge. J. J. Thomson subsequently discovered the particle that we now call the electron in 1897. The unit is today referred to as elementary charge, fundamental unit of charge, or simply denoted \"e\", with the charge of an electron being \u2212\"e\". The charge of an isolated system should be a multiple of the elementary charge \"e\", even if at large scales charge seems to behave as a continuous quantity. In some contexts it is meaningful to speak of fractions of an elementary charge; for example, in the fractional quantum Hall effect.\nThe unit faraday is sometimes used in electrochemistry. One faraday is the magnitude of the charge of one mole of elementary charges, i.e. \u00a0C.\nHistory.\nFrom ancient times, people were familiar with four types of phenomena that today would all be explained using the concept of electric charge: (a) lightning, (b) the torpedo fish (or electric ray), (c) St Elmo's Fire, and (d) that amber rubbed with fur would attract small, light objects. The first account of the amber effect is often attributed to the ancient Greek mathematician Thales of Miletus, who lived from c. 624 to c. 546 BC, but there are doubts about whether Thales left any writings; his account about amber is known from an account from early 200s. This account can be taken as evidence that the phenomenon was known since at least c. 600 BC, but Thales explained this phenomenon as evidence for inanimate objects having a soul. In other words, there was no indication of any conception of electric charge. More generally, the ancient Greeks did not understand the connections among these four kinds of phenomena. The Greeks observed that the charged amber buttons could attract light objects such as hair. They also found that if they rubbed the amber for long enough, they could even get an electric spark to jump, but there is also a claim that no mention of electric sparks appeared until late 17th century. This property derives from the triboelectric effect.\nIn late 1100s, the substance jet, a compacted form of coal, was noted to have an amber effect, and in the middle of the 1500s, Girolamo Fracastoro, discovered that diamond also showed this effect. Some efforts were made by Fracastoro and others, especially Gerolamo Cardano to develop explanations for this phenomenon.\nIn contrast to astronomy, mechanics, and optics, which had been studied quantitatively since antiquity, the start of ongoing qualitative and quantitative research into electrical phenomena can be marked with the publication of \"De Magnete\" by the English scientist William Gilbert in 1600. In this book, there was a small section where Gilbert returned to the amber effect (as he called it) in addressing many of the earlier theories, and coined the Neo-Latin word \"electrica\" (from (\u0113lektron), the Greek word for \"amber\"). The Latin word was translated into English as electrics. Gilbert is also credited with the term \"electrical\", while the term \"electricity\" came later, first attributed to Sir Thomas Browne in his Pseudodoxia Epidemica from 1646. (For more linguistic details see Etymology of electricity.) Gilbert hypothesized that this amber effect could be explained by an effluvium (a small stream of particles that flows from the electric object, without diminishing its bulk or weight) that acts on other objects. This idea of a material electrical effluvium was influential in the 17th and 18th centuries. It was a precursor to ideas developed in the 18th century about \"electric fluid\" (Dufay, Nollet, Franklin) and \"electric charge\".\nAround 1663 Otto von Guericke invented what was probably the first electrostatic generator, but he did not recognize it primarily as an electrical device and only conducted minimal electrical experiments with it. Other European pioneers were Robert Boyle, who in 1675 published the first book in English that was devoted solely to electrical phenomena. His work was largely a repetition of Gilbert's studies, but he also identified several more \"electrics\", and noted mutual attraction between two bodies.\nIn 1729 Stephen Gray was experimenting with static electricity, which he generated using a glass tube. He noticed that a cork, used to protect the tube from dust and moisture, also became electrified (charged). Further experiments (e.g., extending the cork by putting thin sticks into it) showed\u2014for the first time\u2014that electrical effluvia (as Gray called it) could be transmitted (conducted) over a distance. Gray managed to transmit charge with twine (765 feet) and wire (865 feet). Through these experiments, Gray discovered the importance of different materials, which facilitated or hindered the conduction of electrical effluvia. John Theophilus Desaguliers, who repeated many of Gray's experiments, is credited with coining the terms conductors and insulators to refer to the effects of different materials in these experiments. Gray also discovered electrical induction (i.e., where charge could be transmitted from one object to another without any direct physical contact). For example, he showed that by bringing a charged glass tube close to, but not touching, a lump of lead that was sustained by a thread, it was possible to make the lead become electrified (e.g., to attract and repel brass filings). He attempted to explain this phenomenon with the idea of electrical effluvia.\nGray's discoveries introduced an important shift in the historical development of knowledge about electric charge. The fact that electrical effluvia could be transferred from one object to another, opened the theoretical possibility that this property was not inseparably connected to the bodies that were electrified by rubbing. In 1733 Charles Fran\u00e7ois de Cisternay du Fay, inspired by Gray's work, made a series of experiments (reported in \"M\u00e9moires de l'Acad\u00e9mie Royale des Sciences\"), showing that more or less all substances could be 'electrified' by rubbing, except for metals and fluids and proposed that electricity comes in two varieties that cancel each other, which he expressed in terms of a two-fluid theory. When glass was rubbed with silk, du Fay said that the glass was charged with \"vitreous electricity\", and, when amber was rubbed with fur, the amber was charged with \"resinous electricity\". In contemporary understanding, positive charge is now defined as the charge of a glass rod after being rubbed with a silk cloth, but it is arbitrary which type of charge is called positive and which is called negative. Another important two-fluid theory from this time was proposed by Jean-Antoine Nollet (1745).\nUp until about 1745, the main explanation for electrical attraction and repulsion was the idea that electrified bodies gave off an effluvium.\nBenjamin Franklin started electrical experiments in late 1746, and by 1750 had developed a one-fluid theory of electricity, based on an experiment that showed that a rubbed glass received the same, but opposite, charge strength as the cloth used to rub the glass. Franklin imagined electricity as being a type of invisible fluid present in all matter and coined the term charge itself (as well as battery and some others); for example, he believed that it was the glass in a Leyden jar that held the accumulated charge. He posited that rubbing insulating surfaces together caused this fluid to change location, and that a flow of this fluid constitutes an electric current. He also posited that when matter contained an excess of the fluid it was positively charged and when it had a deficit it was negatively charged. He identified the term positive with vitreous electricity and negative with resinous electricity after performing an experiment with a glass tube he had received from his overseas colleague Peter Collinson. The experiment had participant A charge the glass tube and participant B receive a shock to the knuckle from the charged tube. Franklin identified participant B to be positively charged after having been shocked by the tube. There is some ambiguity about whether William Watson independently arrived at the same one-fluid explanation around the same time (1747). Watson, after seeing Franklin's letter to Collinson, claims that he had presented the same explanation as Franklin in spring 1747. Franklin had studied some of Watson's works prior to making his own experiments and analysis, which was probably significant for Franklin's own theorizing. One physicist suggests that Watson first proposed a one-fluid theory, which Franklin then elaborated further and more influentially. A historian of science argues that Watson missed a subtle difference between his ideas and Franklin's, so that Watson misinterpreted his ideas as being similar to Franklin's. In any case, there was no animosity between Watson and Franklin, and the Franklin model of electrical action, formulated in early 1747, eventually became widely accepted at that time. After Franklin's work, effluvia-based explanations were rarely put forward.\nIt is now known that the Franklin model was fundamentally correct. There is only one kind of electrical charge, and only one variable is required to keep track of the amount of charge.\nUntil 1800 it was only possible to study conduction of electric charge by using an electrostatic discharge. In 1800 Alessandro Volta was the first to show that charge could be maintained in continuous motion through a closed path.\nIn 1833, Michael Faraday sought to remove any doubt that electricity is identical, regardless of the source by which it is produced. He discussed a variety of known forms, which he characterized as common electricity (e.g., static electricity, piezoelectricity, magnetic induction), voltaic electricity (e.g., electric current from a voltaic pile), and animal electricity (e.g., bioelectricity).\nIn 1838, Faraday raised a question about whether electricity was a fluid or fluids or a property of matter, like gravity. He investigated whether matter could be charged with one kind of charge independently of the other. He came to the conclusion that electric charge was a relation between two or more bodies, because he could not charge one body without having an opposite charge in another body.\nIn 1838, Faraday also put forth a theoretical explanation of electric force, while expressing neutrality about whether it originates from one, two, or no fluids. He focused on the idea that the normal state of particles is to be nonpolarized, and that when polarized, they seek to return to their natural, nonpolarized state.\nIn developing a field theory approach to electrodynamics (starting in the mid-1850s), James Clerk Maxwell stops considering electric charge as a special substance that accumulates in objects, and starts to understand electric charge as a consequence of the transformation of energy in the field. This pre-quantum understanding considered magnitude of electric charge to be a continuous quantity, even at the microscopic level.\nThe role of charge in static electricity.\nStatic electricity refers to the electric charge of an object and the related electrostatic discharge when two objects are brought together that are not at equilibrium. An electrostatic discharge creates a change in the charge of each of the two objects.\nElectrification by friction.\nWhen a piece of glass and a piece of resin\u2014neither of which exhibit any electrical properties\u2014are rubbed together and left with the rubbed surfaces in contact, they still exhibit no electrical properties. When separated, they attract each other.\nA second piece of glass rubbed with a second piece of resin, then separated and suspended near the former pieces of glass and resin causes these phenomena:\nThis attraction and repulsion is an \"electrical phenomenon\", and the bodies that exhibit them are said to be \"electrified\", or \"electrically charged\". Bodies may be electrified in many other ways, as well as by friction. The electrical properties of the two pieces of glass are similar to each other but opposite to those of the two pieces of resin: The glass attracts what the resin repels and repels what the resin attracts.\nIf a body electrified in any manner whatsoever behaves as the glass does, that is, if it repels the glass and attracts the resin, the body is said to be \"vitreously\" electrified, and if it attracts the glass and repels the resin it is said to be \"resinously\" electrified. All electrified bodies are either vitreously or resinously electrified.\nAn established convention in the scientific community defines vitreous electrification as positive, and resinous electrification as negative. The exactly opposite properties of the two kinds of electrification justify our indicating them by opposite signs, but the application of the positive sign to one rather than to the other kind must be considered as a matter of arbitrary convention\u2014just as it is a matter of convention in mathematical diagram to reckon positive distances towards the right hand.\nNo force, either of attraction or of repulsion, can be observed between an electrified body and a body not electrified.\nThe role of charge in electric current.\nElectric current is the flow of electric charge through an object. The most common charge carriers are the positively charged proton and the negatively charged electron. The movement of any of these charged particles constitutes an electric current. In many situations, it suffices to speak of the \"conventional current\" without regard to whether it is carried by positive charges moving in the direction of the conventional current or by negative charges moving in the opposite direction. This macroscopic viewpoint is an approximation that simplifies electromagnetic concepts and calculations.\nAt the opposite extreme, if one looks at the microscopic situation, one sees there are many ways of carrying an electric current, including: a flow of electrons; a flow of electron holes that act like positive particles; and both negative and positive particles (ions or other charged particles) flowing in opposite directions in an electrolytic solution or a plasma.\nBeware that, in the common and important case of metallic wires, the direction of the conventional current is opposite to the drift velocity of the actual charge carriers; i.e., the electrons. This is a source of confusion for beginners.\nConservation of electric charge.\nThe total electric charge of an isolated system remains constant regardless of changes within the system itself. This law is inherent to all processes known to physics and can be derived in a local form from gauge invariance of the wave function. The conservation of charge results in the charge-current continuity equation. More generally, the rate of change in charge density \"\u03c1\" within a volume of integration \"V\" is equal to the area integral over the current density J through the closed surface \"S\" = \u2202\"V\", which is in turn equal to the net current \"I\":\nformula_1 formula_2 formula_3\nThus, the conservation of electric charge, as expressed by the continuity equation, gives the result:\nformula_4\nThe charge transferred between times formula_5 and formula_6 is obtained by integrating both sides:\nformula_7\nwhere \"I\" is the net outward current through a closed surface and \"q\" is the electric charge contained within the volume defined by the surface.\nRelativistic invariance.\nAside from the properties described in articles about electromagnetism, charge is a relativistic invariant. This means that any particle that has charge \"q\" has the same charge regardless of how fast it is travelling. This property has been experimentally verified by showing that the charge of one helium nucleus (two protons and two neutrons bound together in a nucleus and moving around at high speeds) is the same as two deuterium nuclei (one proton and one neutron bound together, but moving much more slowly than they would if they were in a helium nucleus).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9805", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9805", "title": "Electric Charge", "text": ""}
{"id": "9806", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9806", "title": "Ellis Island", "text": "Island in New York Harbor in New York and New Jersey, United States\nEllis Island is a federally owned island in New York Harbor, situated within the U.S. states of New Jersey and New York, that was the busiest immigrant inspection and processing station in the United States. From 1892 to 1954, nearly 12 million immigrants arriving at the Port of New York and New Jersey were processed there under federal law. Today, it is part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument and is accessible to the public only by ferry. The north side of the island is the site of the main building, now a national museum of immigration. The south side of the island, including the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital, is open to the public only through guided tours.\nIn the 19th century, Ellis Island was the site of Fort Gibson and later became a naval magazine. The first inspection station opened in 1892 and was destroyed by fire in 1897. The second station opened in 1900 and housed facilities for medical quarantines and processing immigrants. After 1924, Ellis Island was used primarily as a detention center for migrants. During both World War I and World War II, its facilities were also used by the US military to detain prisoners of war. After the immigration station's closure, the buildings languished for several years until they were partially reopened in 1976. The main building and adjacent structures were completely renovated in 1990.\nThe island was greatly expanded by land reclamation between the late 1890s and the 1930s. Jurisdictional disputes between New Jersey and New York State persisted until the 1998 US Supreme Court ruling in \"New Jersey v. New York\".\nGeography and access.\nEllis Island is in Upper New York Bay, east of Liberty State Park and north of Liberty Island. While most of the island is in Jersey City, New Jersey, a small section is an exclave of New York City. The island has a land area of , much of which is from land reclamation. The natural island and contiguous areas comprise within New York, and are located on the northern portion of the present-day island. The artificial land is part of New Jersey. The island has been owned and administered by the federal government of the United States since 1808 and operated by the National Park Service since 1965.\nLand expansion.\nInitially, much of the Upper New York Bay's western shore consisted of large tidal flats with vast oyster beds, which were a major source of food for the Lenape. Ellis Island was one of three \"Oyster Islands,\" the other two being Liberty Island and the now-subsumed Black Tom Island. In the late 19th century, the federal government began expanding the island by land reclamation to accommodate its immigration station, and the expansions continued until 1934.\nThe fill was acquired from the ballast of ships, as well as material excavated from the first line of the New York City Subway. It also came from the railyards of the Lehigh Valley Railroad and the Central Railroad of New Jersey. It eventually obliterated the oyster beds, engulfed one of the Oyster Islands, and brought the shoreline much closer to the others.\nThe current island is shaped like a \"C\", with two landmasses of equal size on the northeastern and southwestern sides, separated by what was formerly a ferry pier. It was originally three separate islands. The current north side, formerly called island 1, contains the original island and the fill around it. The current south side was composed of island 2, created in 1899, and island 3, created in 1906. Two eastward-facing ferry docks separated the three numbered landmasses.\nThe fill was retained with a system of wood piles and cribbing, and later encased with more than 7,700 linear feet of concrete and granite sea wall. It was placed atop either wood piles, cribbing, or submerged bags of concrete. In the 1920s, the second ferry basin between islands 2 and 3 was infilled to create the great lawn, forming the current south side of Ellis Island. As part of the project, a concrete and granite seawall was built to connect the tip of these landmasses.\nState sovereignty dispute.\nThe circumstances which led to an exclave of New York being located within New Jersey began in the colonial era, after the British takeover of New Netherland in 1664. A clause in the colonial land grant outlined the territory that the proprietors of New Jersey would receive as being \"westward of Long Island, and Manhitas Island and bounded on the east part by the main sea, and part by Hudson's river.\"\nAs early as 1804, attempts were made to resolve the status of the state line. The City of New York claimed the right to regulate trade on all waters. This was contested in \"Gibbons v. Ogden\", which decided that the regulation of interstate commerce fell under the authority of the federal government, thus influencing competition in the newly developing steam ferry service in New York Harbor. In 1830, New Jersey planned to bring suit to clarify the border, but the case was never heard. The matter was resolved with a compact between the states, ratified by U.S. Congress in 1834. This set the boundary line at the middle of the Hudson River and New York Harbor; however, New York was guaranteed \"exclusive jurisdiction of and over all the waters of Hudson River lying west of Manhattan and to the south of the mouth of Spuytenduyvil Creek; and of and over the lands covered by the said waters, to the low-water mark on the New Jersey shore.\" This was later confirmed in other cases by the U.S. Supreme Court.\nNew Jersey contended that the artificial portions of the island were part of New Jersey, since they were outside New York's border. In 1956, after the closure of the U.S. immigration station two years prior, the Mayor of Jersey City Bernard J. Berry commandeered a U.S. Coast Guard cutter and led a contingent of New Jersey officials on an expedition to claim the island.\nJurisdictional disputes reemerged in the 1980s with the renovation of Ellis Island, and then again in the 1990s with the proposed redevelopment of the south side. New Jersey sued in 1997. The lawsuit was escalated to the Supreme Court, which ruled in \"New Jersey v. New York\". 523 U.S. 767 (1998) The border was redrawn using geographic information science data: It was decided that of the land fill area are territory of New Jersey and that , including the original island, are territory of New York. This caused some initial confusion, as some buildings straddled the interstate border. The ruling had no effect on the status of Liberty Island.\nAlthough the island remained under federal ownership after the lawsuit, New Jersey and New York agreed to share jurisdiction over the land itself. Neither state took any fiscal or physical responsibility for the maintenance, preservation, or improvement of any of the historic properties, and each state has jurisdiction over its respective land areas. Jersey City and New York City then gave separate tax lot numbers to their respective claims.\nPublic access.\nTwo ferry slips are located on the northern side of the basin that bisects Ellis Island. No charge is made for entrance to the Statue of Liberty National Monument, but there is a cost for the ferry service. A concession was granted in 2007 to Statue Cruises to operate the transportation and ticketing facilities, replacing Circle Line, which had operated the service since 1953. The ferries travel from Liberty State Park in Jersey City and the Battery in Lower Manhattan. The NPS also offers guided public tours of the south side as part of the \"Hard Hat Tour\".\nA bridge to Liberty State Park was built in 1986 for transporting materials and personnel during the island's late-1980s restoration. Originally slated to be torn down in 1992, it remained after construction was complete. It is not open to the public. The city of New York and the island's private ferry operator have opposed proposals to use it or replace it with a pedestrian bridge, and a 1995 proposal for a new pedestrian bridge to New Jersey was voted down in the United States House of Representatives. The bridge is not strong enough to be classified as a permanent bridge, and any action to convert it into a pedestrian passageway would require renovations.\nHistory.\nPrecolonial and colonial use.\nThe present-day Ellis Island was created by retreating glaciers at the end of the Wisconsin glaciation about 15,000 years ago. The island was described as a \"hummock along a plain fronting the west side of the Hudson River estuary,\" and when the glaciers melted, the water of the Upper New York Bay surrounded the mass. The native Mohegan name for the island was \"Kioshk\", meaning \"Gull Island\", in reference to Ellis Island's former large population of seagulls. Kioshk was composed mostly of marshy, brackish lowlands that disappeared underwater at high tide. The Native American tribes who lived nearby are presumed to have been hunter-gatherers who used the island to hunt for fish and oysters, as well as to build transient hunting and fishing communities there. It is unlikely that the Native Americans established permanent settlements on Kioshk, since the island would have been submerged at high tide.\nIn 1630, the Dutch bought Kioshk as a gift for Michael Reyniersz Pauw, who had helped found New Netherland. When the Dutch settled the area as part of New Netherland, the three islands in Upper New York Bay\u2014Liberty, Black Tom, and Ellis Islands\u2014were given the name Oyster Islands, alluding to the large oyster population nearby. The present-day Ellis Island was thus called \"Little Oyster Island\", a name that persisted through at least the early 1700s. Little Oyster Island was then sold to Captain William Dyre c.\u20091674, then to Thomas Lloyd on April 23, 1686. The island was then sold several more times, including to Enoch and Mary Story. During colonial times, Little Oyster Island became a popular spot for hosting oyster roasts, picnics, and clambakes because of its rich oyster beds. Evidence of recreational uses on the island was visible by the mid-18th century with the addition of commercial buildings to the northeast shore.\nBy the 1760s, Little Oyster Island became a public execution site for pirates, with executions occurring at one tree in particular, the \"Gibbet Tree\". However, there is scant evidence that this was common practice. Little Oyster Island was acquired by Samuel Ellis, a colonial New Yorker and merchant from Wrexham, Wales, in 1774. He unsuccessfully attempted to sell the island nine years later. Ellis died in 1794, and as per his will, the ownership of Ellis Island passed to his daughter Catherine Westervelt's unborn son, who was also named Samuel. When the junior Samuel died shortly after birth, ownership passed to the senior Samuel's other two daughters, Elizabeth Ryerson and Rachel Cooder.\nMilitary use and Fort Gibson.\nEllis Island was also used by the military for almost 80 years. By the mid-1790s, as a result of the United States' increased military tensions with Britain and France, a U.S. congressional committee drew a map of possible locations for the First System of fortifications to protect major American urban centers such as New York Harbor.A small part of Ellis Island from \"the soil from high to low waters mark around Ellis's Island\" was owned by the city. On April 21, 1794, the city deeded that land to the state for public defense purposes. The following year, the state allotted $100,000 for fortifications on Bedloe's, Ellis, and Governors Islands, as well as the construction of Castle Garden (now Castle Clinton) along the Battery on Manhattan island. Batteries and magazines were built on Ellis Island in preparation for a war. A jetty was added to the northwestern extremity of the island, possibly from soil excavated from an inlet at the northeastern corner; the inlet was infilled by 1813. Though the military threat never materialized, further preparations were made in the late 1790s, when the Quasi War sparked fears of war with France; these new preparations were supervised by Ebenezer Stevens. The military conflict also failed to occur, and by 1805, the fort had become rundown.\nStevens, who observed that the Ellis family still owned most of the island, suggested selling off the land to the federal government. Samuel Ryerson, one of Samuel Ellis's grandsons, deeded the island to John A. Berry in 1806. The remaining portion of the island was acquired by condemnation the next year, and it was ceded to the United States on June 30, 1808, for $10,000. Lieutenant Colonel Jonathan Williams, placed in charge of New York Harbor defenses in the early 1800s, proposed several new fortifications around the harbor as part of the Second System of fortifications. The new fortifications included increased firepower and improved weaponry. The War Department established a circular stone 14-gun battery, a mortar battery (possibly of six mortars), magazine, and barracks. The fort was initially called Crown Fort, but by the end of the War of 1812 the battery was named Fort Gibson, in honor of Colonel James Gibson of the 4th Regiment of Riflemen, who was killed in the war during the Siege of Fort Erie. The fort was not used in combat during the war, and instead served as a barracks for the 11th Regiment, as well as a jail for British prisoners of war.\nImmediately after the end of the War of 1812, Fort Gibson was largely used as a recruiting depot. The fort went into decline due to under-utilization, and it was being jointly administered by the U.S. Army and Navy by the mid-1830s. Around this time, in 1834, the extant portions of Ellis Island was declared to be an exclave of New York within the waters of New Jersey. The era of joint administration was short-lived: the Army took over the fort's administration in 1841, demoted the fort to an artillery battery, and stopped garrisoning the fort, leaving a small Navy guard outside the magazine. By 1854, Battery Gibson contained an 11-gun battery, three naval magazines, a short railroad line, and several auxiliary structures such as a cookhouse, gun carriage house, and officers' quarters. The Army continued to maintain the fort until 1860, when it abandoned the weapons at Battery Gibson. The artillery magazine was expanded in 1861, during the American Civil War, and part of the parapet was removed.\nAt the end of the Civil War, the fort declined again, this time to an extent that the weaponry was rendered unusable. Through the 1870s, the Navy built additional buildings for its artillery magazine on Ellis Island, eventually constructing 11 buildings in total. Complaints about the island's magazines started to form, and by the 1870s, \"The New York Sun\" was publishing \"alarming reports\" about the magazines. The guns were ordered removed in 1881, and the island passed under the complete control of the Navy's Bureau of Ordnance.\nFirst immigration station.\nThe Army had unsuccessfully attempted to use Ellis Island \"for the convalescence for immigrants\" as early as 1847. Across New York Harbor, Castle Clinton had been used as an immigration station since 1855, processing more than eight million immigrants during that time. The individual states had their own varying immigration laws until 1875, but the federal government regarded Castle Clinton as having \"varied charges of mismanagement, abuse of immigrants, and evasion of the laws\", and as such, wanted it to be completely replaced. The federal government assumed control of immigration in early 1890 and commissioned a study to determine the best place for the new immigration station in New York Harbor. Among members of the United States Congress, there were disputes about whether to build the station on Ellis, Governors, or Liberty Islands. Initially, Liberty Island was selected as the site for the immigration station, but due to opposition for immigration stations on both Liberty and Governors Islands, the committee eventually decided to build the station on Ellis Island. Since Castle Clinton's lease was about to expire, Congress approved a bill to build an immigration station on Ellis Island.\nOn April 11, 1890, the federal government ordered the magazine at Ellis Island be torn down to make way for the U.S.'s first federal immigration station at the site. The Department of the Treasury, which was in charge of constructing federal buildings in the U.S., officially took control of the island that May 24. Congress initially allotted $75,000 to construct the station and later doubled that appropriation. While the building was under construction, the Barge Office at the Battery was used for immigrant processing. During construction, most of the old Battery Gibson buildings were demolished, and Ellis Island's land size was almost doubled to . The main structure was a two-story structure of Georgia Pine, which was described in \"Harper's Weekly\" as \"a latterday watering place hotel\" measuring . Its outbuildings included a hospital, detention building, laundry building, and utility plant that were all made of wood. Some of the former stone magazine structures were reused for utilities and offices. Additionally, a ferry slip with breakwater was built to the south of Ellis Island. Following further expansion, the island measured by the end of 1892.\nThe station opened on January 1, 1892, and its first immigrant was Annie Moore, a 17-year-old girl from Cork, Ireland, who was traveling with her two brothers to meet their parents in the U.S. On the first day, almost 700 immigrants passed over the docks. Over the next year, over 400,000 immigrants were processed at the station. The processing procedure included a series of medical and mental inspection lines, and through this process, some 1% of potential immigrants were deported. Additional building improvements took place throughout the mid-1890s, and Ellis Island was expanded to by 1896. The last improvements, which entailed the installation of underwater telephone and telegraph cables to Governors Island, were completed in early June 1897. On June 15, 1897, the wooden structures on Ellis Island were razed in a fire of unknown origin. While there were no casualties, the wooden buildings had completely burned down after two hours, and all immigration records from 1855 had been destroyed. Over five years of operation, the station had processed 1.5 million immigrants.\nSecond immigration station.\nDesign and construction.\nFollowing the fire, passenger arrivals were again processed at the Barge Office, which was soon unable to handle the large volume of immigrants. Within three days of the fire, the federal government made plans to build a new, fireproof immigration station. Legislation to rebuild the station was approved on June 30, 1897, and appropriations were made in mid-July. By September, the Treasury's Supervising Architect, James Knox Taylor, opened an architecture competition to rebuild the immigration station. The competition was the second to be conducted under the Tarsney Act of 1893, which had permitted private architects to design federal buildings, rather than government architects in the Supervising Architect's office. The contest rules specified that a \"main building with annexes\" and a \"hospital building\", both made of fireproof materials, should be part of each nomination. Furthermore, the buildings had to be able to host a daily average of 1,000 and maximum of 4,000 immigrants.Several prominent architectural firms filed proposals, and by December, it was announced that Edward Lippincott Tilton and William A. Boring had won the competition. Tilton and Boring's plan called for four new structures: a main building in the French Renaissance style, as well as the kitchen/laundry building, powerhouse, and the main hospital building. The plan also included the creation of a new island called island 2, upon which the hospital would be built, south of the existing island (now Ellis Island's north side). A construction contract was awarded to the R. H. Hood Company in August 1898, with the expectation that construction would be completed within a year, but the project encountered delays because of various obstacles and disagreements between the federal government and the Hood Company. A separate contract to build the island 2 had to be approved by the War Department because it was in New Jersey's waters; that contract was completed in December 1898. The construction costs ultimately totaled $1.5 million.\nEarly expansions.\nThe new immigration station opened on December 17, 1900, without ceremony. On that day, 2,251 immigrants were processed. Almost immediately, additional projects commenced to improve the main structure, including an entrance canopy, baggage conveyor, and railroad ticket office. The kitchen/laundry and powerhouse started construction in May 1900 and were completed by the end of 1901. A ferry house was also built between islands 1 and 2 c.\u20091901. The hospital, originally slated to be opened in 1899, was not completed until November 1901, mainly due to various funding delays and construction disputes. The facilities proved barely able to handle the flood of immigrants that arrived, and as early as 1903, immigrants had to remain in their transatlantic boats for several days due to inspection backlogs. Several wooden buildings were erected by 1903, including waiting rooms and a 700-bed barracks, and by 1904, over a million dollars' worth of improvements were proposed. The hospital was expanded from 125 to 250 beds in February 1907, and a new psychopathic ward debuted in November of the same year. Also constructed was an administration building adjacent to the hospital.\nImmigration commissioner William Williams made substantial changes to Ellis Island's operations, and during his tenure from 1902 to 1905 and 1909\u20131913, Ellis Island processed its peak number of immigrants. Williams also made changes to the island's appearance, adding plants and grading paths upon the once-barren landscape of Ellis Island. Under Williams's supervision, a third island was built to accommodate a proposed contagious-diseases ward, separated from existing facilities by of water. Island 3, as it was called, was located to the south of island 2 and separated from that island by a now-infilled ferry basin. The government bought the underwater area for island 3 from New Jersey in 1904, and a contract was awarded in April 1905. The islands were all connected via a cribwalk on their western sides (later covered with wood canopy), giving Ellis Island an overall \"E\"-shape. Upon the completion of island 3 in 1906, Ellis Island covered . A baggage and dormitory building was completed c.\u20091908\u20131909, and the main hospital was expanded in 1909. Alterations were made to the registry building and dormitories as well, but even this was insufficient to accommodate the high volume of immigrants. In 1911, Williams alleged that Congress had allocated too little for improvements to Ellis Island, even though the improvement budget that year was $868,000.\nAdditional improvements and routine maintenance work were completed in the early 1910s. A greenhouse was built in 1910, and the contagious-diseases ward on island 3 opened the following June. In addition, the incinerator was replaced in 1911, and a recreation center operated by the American Red Cross was also built on island 2 by 1915. These facilities generally followed the design set by Tilton and Boring. When the Black Tom explosion occurred on Black Tom Island in 1916, the complex suffered moderate damage; though all immigrants were evacuated safely, the main building's roof collapsed, and windows were broken. The main building's roof was replaced with a Guastavino-tiled arched ceiling by 1918. The immigration station was temporarily closed during World War I in 1917\u20131919, during which the facilities were used as a jail for suspected enemy combatants, and later as a treatment center for wounded American soldiers. Immigration inspections were conducted aboard ships or at docks. During the war, immigration processing at Ellis Island declined by 97%, from 878,000 immigrants per year in 1914 to 26,000 per year in 1919.\nEllis Island's immigration station was reopened in 1920, and processing had rebounded to 560,000 immigrants per year by 1921. There were still ample complaints about the inadequate condition of Ellis Island's facilities. However, despite a request for $5.6 million in appropriations in 1921, aid was slow to materialize, and initial improvement work was restricted to smaller projects such as the infilling of the basin between islands 2 and 3. Other improvements included rearranging features such as staircases to improve pedestrian flow. These projects were supported by president Calvin Coolidge, who in 1924 requested that Congress approve $300,000 in appropriations for the island. The allocations were not received until the late 1920s.\nConversion to detention center.\nWith the passing of the Emergency Quota Act of 1921, the number of immigrants being allowed into the United States declined greatly, ending the era of mass immigration. Following the Immigration Act of 1924, strict immigration quotas were enacted, and Ellis Island was downgraded from a primary inspection center to an immigrant-detention center, hosting only those that were to be detained or deported (see ). Final inspections were now instead conducted on board ships in New York Harbor. The Wall Street Crash of 1929 further decreased immigration, as people were now discouraged from immigrating to the U.S. Because of the resulting decline in patient counts, the hospital closed in 1930.\nEdward Corsi, who himself was an immigrant, became Ellis Island commissioner in 1931 and commenced an improvement program for the island. The initial improvements were utilitarian, focusing on such aspects as sewage, incineration, and power generation. In 1933, a federal committee led by the Secretary of Labor, Frances Perkins, was established to determine what operations and facilities needed improvement. The committee's report, released in 1934, suggested the construction of a new class-segregated immigration building, recreation center, ferry house, verandas, and doctors/nurses' quarters, as well as the installation of a new seawall around the island. These works were undertaken using Public Works Administration funding and Works Progress Administration labor, and were completed by the late 1930s. As part of the project, the surgeon's house and recreation center were demolished, and Edward Laning commissioned some murals for the island's buildings. Other improvements included the demolition of the greenhouse, the completion of the infilling of the basin between islands 2 and 3, and various landscaping activities such as the installation of walkways and plants. However, because of the steep decline in immigration, the immigration building went underused for several years, and it started to deteriorate.\nWith the start of World War II in 1939, Ellis Island was again utilized by the military, this time being used as a United States Coast Guard base. As during World War I, the facilities were used to detain enemy soldiers in addition to immigrants, and the hospital was used for treating injured American soldiers. So many combatants were detained at Ellis Island that administrative offices were moved to mainland Manhattan in 1943, and Ellis Island was used solely for detainment.\nBy 1947, shortly after the end of World War II, there were proposals to close Ellis Island due to the massive expenses needed for the upkeep of a relatively small detention center. The hospital was closed in 1950\u20131951 by the United States Public Health Service, and by the early 1950s, there were only 30 to 40 detainees left on the island. The island's closure was announced in mid-1954, when the federal government announced that it would construct a replacement facility on Manhattan. Ellis Island closed on November 12, 1954, with the departure of its last detainee, Norwegian merchant seaman Arne Pettersen, who had been arrested for overstaying his shore leave. At the time, it was estimated that the government would save $900,000 a year from closing the island. The ferryboat \"Ellis Island\", which had operated since 1904, stopped operating two weeks later.\nPost-closure.\nInitial redevelopment plans.\nAfter the immigration station closed, the buildings fell into disrepair and were abandoned, and the General Services Administration (GSA) took over the island in March 1955. The GSA wanted to sell off the island as \"surplus property\" and contemplated several options, including selling the island back to the city of New York or auctioning it to a private buyer. In 1959, real estate developer Sol Atlas unsuccessfully bid for the island, with plans to turn it into a $55 million resort with a hotel, marina, music shell, tennis courts, swimming pools, and skating rinks. The same year, Frank Lloyd Wright designed the $100 million \"Key Project\", which included housing, hotels, and large domes along the edges. However, Wright died before presenting the project. Other attempts at redeveloping the site, including a college, a retirement home, an alcoholics' rehabilitation center, and a world trade center were all unsuccessful. In 1963, the Jersey City Council voted to rezone the island's area within New Jersey for high-rise residential, monument/museum, or recreational use, though the new zoning ordinance banned \"Coney Island\"-style amusement parks.\nIn June 1964, the National Park Service published a report that proposed making Ellis Island part of a national monument. This idea was approved by Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall in October 1964. Ellis Island was added to the Statue of Liberty National Monument on May 11, 1965, and that August, President Lyndon B. Johnson approved the redevelopment of the island as a museum and park.\nThe initial master plan for the redevelopment of Ellis Island, designed by Philip Johnson, called for the construction of the Wall, a large \"stadium\"-shaped monument to replace the structures on the island's northwest side, while preserving the main building and hospital. However, no appropriations were immediately made, other than a $250,000 allocation for emergency repairs in 1967. By the late 1960s, the abandoned buildings were deteriorating severely. Johnson's plan was never implemented due to public opposition and a lack of funds. Another master plan was proposed in 1968, which called for the rehabilitation of the island's northern side and the demolition of all buildings, including the hospital, on the southern side. The Jersey City Jobs Corpsmen started rehabilitating part of Ellis Island the same year, in accordance with this plan. This was soon halted indefinitely because of a lack of funding. In 1970, a squatters' club called the National Economic Growth and Reconstruction Organization (NEGRO) started refurbishing buildings as part of a plan to turn the island into an addiction rehabilitation center, but were evicted after less than two weeks. NEGRO's permit to renovate the island were ultimately terminated in 1973.\nRestoration and reopening of north side.\nIn the 1970s, the NPS started restoring the island by repairing seawalls, eliminating weeds, and building a new ferry dock. Simultaneously, Peter Sammartino launched the Restore Ellis Island Committee to raise awareness and money for repairs. The north side of the island, comprising the main building and surrounding structures, was rehabilitated and partially reopened for public tours in May 1976. The plant was left unrepaired to show the visitors the extent of the deterioration. The NPS limited visits to 130 visitors per boat, or less than 75,000 visitors a year. Initially, only parts of three buildings were open to visitors. Further repairs were stymied by a lack of funding, and by 1982, the NPS was turning to private sources for funds.\nIn May 1982, President Ronald Reagan announced the formation of the Statue of Liberty\u2013Ellis Island Centennial Commission, led by Chrysler Corporation chair Lee Iacocca with former President Gerald Ford as honorary chairman, to raise the funds needed to complete the work. The plan for Ellis Island was to cost $128 million, and by the time work commenced in 1984, about $40 million had been raised. Through its fundraising arm, the Statue of Liberty\u2013Ellis Island Foundation, Inc., the group eventually raised more than $350 million in donations for the renovations of both the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island. Initial restoration plans included renovating the main building, baggage and dormitory building, and the hospital, as well as possibly adding a bandshell, restaurant, and exhibits. Two firms, Notter Finegold &amp; Alexander and Beyer Blinder Belle, designed the renovation. In advance of the renovation, public tours ceased in 1984, and work started the following year. As part of the restoration, the powerhouse was renovated, while the incinerator, greenhouse, and water towers were removed. The kitchen/laundry and baggage/dormitory buildings were restored to their original condition while the main building was restored to its 1918\u20131924 appearance.\nThe main building opened as a museum on September 10, 1990. Further improvements were made after the north side's renovation was completed. The Wall of Honor, a monument to raise money for the restoration, was completed in 1990 and reconstructed starting in 1993. A research facility with online database, the American Family Immigration History Center, was opened in April 2001. Subsequently, the ferry building was restored for $6.4 million and reopened in 2007. The north side was temporarily closed after being damaged in Hurricane Sandy in October 2012, though the island and part of the museum reopened exactly a year later, after major renovations.\nStructures.\nThe current complex was designed by Edward Lippincott Tilton and William A. Boring, who performed the commission under the direction of the Supervising Architect for the U.S. Treasury, James Knox Taylor. Their plan, submitted in 1898, called for structures to be located on both the northern and southern portions of Ellis Island. The plan stipulated a large main building, a powerhouse, and a new baggage/dormitory and kitchen building on the north side of Ellis Island; a hospital on the south side; and a ferry dock with covered walkways at the head of the ferry basin, on the west side of the island. The plan roughly corresponds to what was ultimately built.\nNorth side.\nThe northern half of Ellis Island is composed of the former island 1. Only the areas associated with the original island, including much of the main building, are in New York; the remaining area is in New Jersey.\nMain building.\nThe present three-story main structure was designed in French Renaissance style. It is made of a steel frame, with a facade of red brick in Flemish bond ornamented with limestone trim. The structure is located above the mean waterline to prevent flooding. The building was initially composed of a three-story center section with two-story east and west wings, though the third stories of each wing were completed in the early 1910s. Atop the corners of the building's central section are four towers capped by cupolas of copper cladding. Some 160 rooms were included within the original design to separate the different functions of the building. Namely, the first floor was initially designed to handle baggage, detention, offices, storage and waiting rooms; the second floor, primary inspection; and the third floor, dormitories. However, in practice, these spaces generally served multiple functions throughout the immigration station's operating history. At opening, it was estimated that the main building could inspect 5,000 immigrants per day. The main building's design was highly acclaimed; at the 1900 Paris Exposition, it received a gold medal, and other architectural publications such as the \"Architectural Record\" lauded the design.\nThe first floor contained detention rooms, social service offices, and waiting rooms on its west wing, a use that remained relatively unchanged. The central space was initially a baggage room until 1907, but was subsequently subdivided and later re-combined into a single records room. The first floor's east wing also contained a railroad waiting room and medical offices, though much of the wing was later converted to record rooms. A railroad ticket office annex was added to the north side of the first floor in 1905\u20131906. The south elevation of the first floor contains the current immigration museum's main entrance, approached by a slightly sloped passageway covered by a glass canopy. Though the canopy was added in the 1980s, it evokes the design of an earlier glass canopy on the site that existed from 1902 to 1932.\nA registry room, with a ceiling, is located on the central section of the second floor. The room was used for primary inspections. Initially, there were handrails within the registry room that separated the primary inspection into several queues, but c. 1911 these were replaced with benches. A staircase from the first floor formerly rose into the middle of the registry room, but this was also removed around 1911. When the room's roof collapsed during the Black Tom explosion of 1916, the current Guastavino-tiled arched ceiling was installed, and the asphalt floor was replaced with red Ludowici tile. There are three large arched openings each on the northern and southern walls, filled-in with grilles of metal-and-glass. The southern elevation retains its original double-height arches, while the lower sections of the arches on the northern elevations were modified to make way for the railroad ticket office. On all four sides of the room, above the level of the third floor, is a clerestory of semicircular windows. The east wing of the second floor was used for administrative offices, while the west wing housed the special inquiry and deportation divisions, as well as dormitories.\nOn the third floor is a balcony surrounding the entire registry room. There were also dormitories for 600 people on the third floor. Between 1914 and 1918, several rooms were added to the third floor. These rooms included offices as well as an assembly room that were later converted to detention.\nThe remnants of Fort Gibson still exist outside the main building. Two portions are visible to the public, including the remnants of the lower walls around the fort.\nKitchen and laundry.\nThe kitchen and laundry structure is a two-and-a-half-story structure located west of the main building. It is made of a steel frame and terracotta blocks, with a granite base and a facade of brick in Flemish bond. Originally designed as two separate structures, it was redesigned in 1899 as a single structure with kitchen-restaurant and laundry-bathhouse components, and was subsequently completed in 1901. A one-and-a-half-story ice plant on the northern elevation was built between 1903 and 1908, and was converted into a ticket office in 1935. It has a facade of brick in English and stretcher bond. Today, the kitchen and laundry contains NPS offices as well as the museum's \"Peopling of America\" exhibit.\nThe building has a central portion with a narrow gable roof, as well as pavilions on the western and eastern sides with hip roofs; the roof tiling was formerly of slate and currently of terracotta. The larger eastern pavilion, which contained the laundry-bathhouse, had hipped dormers. The exterior-facing window and door openings contain limestone features on the facade, while the top of the building has a modillioned copper cornice. Formerly, there was also a two-story porch on the southern elevation. Multiple enclosed passageways connect the kitchen and laundry to adjacent structures.\nBakery and carpentry shop.\nThe bakery and carpentry shop is a two-story structure located west of the kitchen and laundry building. It is roughly rectangular and oriented north\u2013south. It is made of a steel frame with a granite base, a flat roof, and a facade of brick in Flemish bond. The building was constructed in 1914\u20131915 to replace the separate wooden bakery and carpentry shop buildings, as well as two sheds and a frame waiting room. There are no exterior entrances, and the only access is via the kitchen and laundry. The first floor generally contained oven rooms, baking areas and storage while the second floor contained the carpentry shop.\nBaggage and dormitory.\nThe baggage and dormitory structure is a three-story structure located north of the main building. It is made of a steel frame and terracotta blocks, with a limestone base and a facade of brick in Flemish bond. Completed as a two-story structure c.\u20091908\u20131909, the baggage and dormitory building replaced a 700-bed wooden barracks nearby that operated between 1903 and 1911. The baggage and dormitory initially had baggage collection on its first floor, dormitories and detention rooms on its second floor, and a tiled garden on its roof. The building received a third story, and a two-story annex to the north side, in 1913\u20131914. Initially, the third floor included additional dormitory space while the annex provided detainees with outdoor porch space. A detainee dining room on the first floor was expanded in 1951.\nThe building is mostly rectangular except for its northern annex and contains an interior courtyard, skylighted at the second floor. On its facade the first story has rectangular windows in arched window openings while the second and third stories have rectangular windows and window openings. There are cornices below the second and third stories. The annex contains wide window openings with narrow brick piers outside them. The roof's northwest corner contains a one-story extension. Multiple wings connect the baggage and laundry to its adjacent buildings.\nPowerhouse.\nThe powerhouse of Ellis Island is a two-story structure located north of the kitchen and laundry building and west of the baggage and dormitory building. It is roughly rectangular and oriented north\u2013south. Like the kitchen and laundry, it was completed in 1901. It is made of a steel frame with a granite base, a facade of brick in Flemish bond, and decorative bluestone and limestone elements. The hip roof contains dormers and is covered with terracotta tiling. A brick smokestack rises from ground level.\nFormerly, the powerhouse provided almost all power for Ellis Island. A coal trestle at the northwest end was used to transport coal for power generation from 1901 to 1932, when the powerhouse started using fuel oil. The powerhouse also generated steam for the island. After the immigration station closed, the powerhouse deteriorated and was left unrepaired until the 1980s renovation. The powerhouse is no longer operational; instead, the island receives power from 13,200-volt cables that lead from a Public Service Electric &amp; Gas substation in Liberty State Park. The powerhouse contains sewage pumps that can dispose of up to to the Jersey City Sewage Authority sewage system. A central heating plant was installed during the 1980s renovation.\nSouth side.\nThe southern side of Ellis Island, located across the ferry basin from the northern side, is composed of island 2 (created in 1899) and island 3 (created in 1906). The entire southern side of the island is in New Jersey, and the majority of the site is occupied by the hospital buildings. A central corridor runs southward from the ferry building on the west side of the island. Two additional corridors split eastward down the centers of islands 2 and 3.\nIsland 2.\nIsland 2 comprises the northern part of Ellis Island's southern portion. The structures share the same design: a brick facade in Flemish bond, quoins, and limestone ornamentation. All structures were internally connected via covered passageways.The laundry-hospital outbuilding is south of the ferry terminal, and was constructed in 1900\u20131901 along with the now-demolished surgeon's house. The structure is one and a half stories tall with a hip roof and skylights facing to the north and south. Repaired repeatedly throughout its history, the laundry-outbuilding was last restored in 2002. It had linen, laundry, and disinfecting rooms; a boiler room; a morgue with autopsy room; and quarters for the laundry staff on the second floor.\nTo the east is the psychopathic ward, a two-story building erected 1906\u20131907. The building is the only structure in the hospital complex to have a flat roof, and formerly also had a porch to its south. It housed 25 to 30 beds and was intended for the temporary treatment of immigrants suspected of being insane or having mental disorders, pending their deportation, hospitalization, or commitment to sanatoria. Male and female patients were segregated, and there were also a dayroom, veranda, nurse's office, and small pantry on each floor. In 1952 the psychopathic ward was converted into a Coast Guard brig.\nThe main building is directly east of the psychopathic ward. It is composed of three similarly designed structures: from west to east, they are Hospital Building No. 1 (built 1900\u20131901), the Administration Building (1905\u20131907), and Hospital Building No. 2 (1908\u20131909). The 3.5-story building no. 1 is shaped like an inverted \"C\" with two 2.5-story rectangular wings facing southward; the wings contain two-story-tall porches. The administration building is smaller but also 3.5 stories. The 3.5-story building no. 2 is similar to building no. 1, but also has a three-story porch at the south elevation of the central pavilion. All three buildings have stone-stoop entrances on their north facades and courtyards on their south.\nRecreation hall.\nThe recreation hall and one of the island's two recreation shelters are located between islands 2 and 3 on the western side of Ellis Island, at the head of the former ferry basin between the two landmasses. Built in 1937 in the Colonial Revival style, the structures replaced an earlier recreation building at the northeast corner of island 2.\nThe recreation hall is a two-story building with a limestone base, a facade of brick in Flemish bond, a gable roof, and terracotta ornamentation. The first floor contained recreational facilities, while the second floor was used mostly for offices. It contains wings on the north, south, and west. The recreation shelter, a one-story brick pavilion, is located directly to the east. A second shelter of similar design was located adjacent to the power plant on the island's north side.\nIsland 3.\nAs part of the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital, the contagious disease hospital comprised 17 pavilions, connected with a central connecting corridor. Each pavilion contained separate hospital functions that could be sealed off from each other. Most of the structures were completed in 1911. The pavilions included eight measles wards, three isolation wards, a power house/sterilizer/autopsy theater, mortuary, laboratory, administration building, kitchen, and staff house. All structures were designed by James Knox Taylor in the Italian Renaissance style and are distinguished by red-tiled hip roofs, roughcast walls of stucco, and ornamentation of brick and limestone.\nThe office building and laboratory is a 2.5-story structure located at the west end of island 3. It housed doctors' offices and a dispensary on the first floor, along with a laboratory and pharmacists' quarters on the second floor. In 1924, the first floor offices were converted into male nurses' quarters. A one-story morgue is located east of the office building, and was converted to the \"Animal House\" circa 1919.\nAn \"L\"-shaped powerhouse and laundry building, built in 1908, is also located on the west side of island 3. It has a square north wing with boiler, coal, and pump rooms, as well as a rectangular south wing with laundry and disinfection rooms, staff kitchen, and staff pantry. The powerhouse and laundry also had a distinctive yellow-brick smokestack. Part of the building was converted into a morgue and autopsy room in the 1930s.\nTo the east are the eight measles pavilions (also known as wards A-H), built in phases from 1906 to 1909 and located near the center of island 3. There are four pavilions each to the west and east of island 3's administration building. All of the pavilions are identical, two-story rectangular structures. Each pavilion floor had a spacious open ward with large windows on three sides and independent ventilation ducts. A hall leading to the connecting corridor was flanked by bathrooms, nurses' duty room, offices, and a serving kitchen.\nThe administration building is a 3.5-story structure located on the north side of island 3's connecting corridor, in the center of the landmass. It included reception rooms, offices, and a staff kitchen on the first floor; nurses' quarters and operating rooms on the second floor; and additional staff quarters on the third floor. A one-story kitchen with a smokestack is located opposite the administration building to the south.\nThe eastern end of island 3 contained three isolation pavilions (wards I-K) and a staff building. The isolation pavilions were intended for patients for more serious diseases, including scarlet fever, diphtheria, and a combination of either of these diseases with measles and whooping cough. Each pavilion is a 1.5-story rectangular structure. Wards I and K are located to the south of the connecting corridor while ward J is located to the north; originally, all three pavilions were freestanding structures, but covered ways were built between wards I and K and the center corridor in 1914. There were also nurses' quarters in each attic. The staff building. located at the extreme east end of island 3's connecting corridor, is a 2.5-story building for high-ranking hospital staff. Living and dining rooms, a kitchen, and a library were located on the first floor while bedrooms were located on the second floor.\nFerry building.\nThe ferry building is at the western end of the ferry basin, within New Jersey. The current structure was built in 1936 and is the third ferry landing to occupy the site. It is made of a steel-and-concrete frame with a facade of red brick in Flemish bond, and limestone and terracotta ornamentation, in the Moderne architectural style. The building's central pavilion is mostly one story tall, except for a two-story central section that is covered by a hip roof with cupola. Two rectangular wings are located to the north and south and are oriented east\u2013west. The south wing was originally reserved for U.S. Customs while the north wing contained a lunchroom and restrooms. A wooden dock extends east from the ferry building. The ferry building is connected to the kitchen and laundry to the north, and the hospital to the south, via covered walkways. The structure was completely restored in 2007.\nImmigration procedures.\nBy the time Ellis Island's immigration station closed, almost 12 million immigrants had been processed by the U.S. Bureau of Immigration. It is estimated that 10.5 million immigrants departed for points across the United States from the Central Railroad of New Jersey Terminal nearby. Others would have used one of the other terminals along the North River/Hudson River at that time. At the time of closure, it was estimated that closer to 20 million immigrants had been processed or detained at Ellis Island.\nInitial immigration policy provided for the admission of most immigrants to the United States, other than those with mental or physical disabilities, or a moral, racial, religious, or economic reason for exclusion. At first, the majority of immigrants arriving were Northern and Western Europeans, with the largest numbers coming from the German Empire, the Russian Empire and Finland, the United Kingdom, and Italy. Eventually, these groups of peoples slowed in the rates that they were coming in, and immigrants came in from Southern and Eastern Europe, including Jews. These people immigrated for a variety of reasons including escaping political and economic oppression, as well as persecution, destitution, and violence. Often among these groups were Poles, Hungarians, Czechs, Serbs, Slovaks, Greeks, Syrians, Turks, and Armenians.\nImmigration through Ellis Island peaked in the first decade of the 20th century. Between 1905 and 1914, an average of one million immigrants per year arrived in the United States. Immigration officials reviewed about 5,000 immigrants per day during peak times at Ellis Island. Two-thirds of those individuals emigrated from eastern, southern and central Europe. The peak year for immigration at Ellis Island was 1907, with 1,004,756 immigrants processed, and the all-time daily high occurred on April 17 of that year, when 11,747 immigrants arrived. Following the Immigration Act of 1924, which both greatly reduced immigration and allowed processing overseas, Ellis Island was only used by those who had problems with their immigration paperwork, as well as displaced persons and war refugees. This affected both nationwide and regional immigration processing: only 2.34 million immigrants passed through the Port of New York from 1925 to 1954, compared to the 12 million immigrants processed from 1900 to 1924. Average annual immigration through the Port of New York from 1892 to 1924 typically numbered in the hundreds of thousands, though after 1924, annual immigration through the port was usually in the tens of thousands.\nInspections.\nMedical inspection.\nBeginning in the 1890s, initial medical inspections were conducted by steamship companies at the European ports of embarkation; further examinations and vaccinations occurred on board ship during the voyage to New York. On arrival at the port of New York, ships halted at the New York state quarantine station near the Narrows. Those with serious contagious diseases (such as cholera and typhus) were quarantined at Hoffman Island or Swinburne Island, two artificial islands off the shore of Staten Island to the south. The islands ceased to be used for quarantine by the 1920s due to the decline in inspections at Ellis Island. For the vast majority of passengers, since most transatlantic ships could not dock at Ellis Island due to shallow water, the ships unloaded at Manhattan first, and steerage passengers were then taken to Ellis Island for processing. First- and second-class passengers typically bypassed the Ellis Island processing altogether.\nTo support the activities of the United States Bureau of Immigration, the United States Public Health Service operated an extensive medical service. The medical force at Ellis Island started operating when the first immigration station opened in 1892, and was suspended when the station burned down in 1897. Between 1897 and 1902, medical inspections took place both at other facilities in New York City and on ships in the New York Harbor. A second hospital called U.S. Marine Hospital Number 43 or the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital was built in 1902 and operated through 1930. Uniformed military surgeons staffed the medical division, which was active in the hospital wards, the Battery's Barge Office, and Ellis Island's Main Building. Immigrants were brought to the island via barge from their transatlantic ships.\nA \"line inspection\" was conducted in the main building. In the line inspection, the immigrants were split into several single-file lines, and inspectors first checked for any visible physical disabilities. Each immigrant was inspected by two inspectors: one to catch any initial physical disabilities, and another to check for any other ailments that the first inspector did not notice. The doctors then observed immigrants as they walked, to determine any irregularities in their gait. Immigrants were asked to drop their baggage and walk up the stairs to the second floor.\nThe line inspection at Ellis Island was unique because of the volume of people it processed, and as such, used several unconventional methods of medical examination. For example, after an initial check for physical disabilities, inspectors used special forceps or the buttonhook to examine immigrants for signs of eye diseases such as trachoma. Following each examination, inspectors used chalk to draw symbols on immigrants who were suspected to be sick. Some immigrants supposedly wiped the chalk marks off surreptitiously or inverted their clothes to avoid medical detention. Chalk-marked immigrants and those with suspected mental disabilities were then sent to rooms for further inspection, according to a 1917 account.\nThe symbols used for chalk markings were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrimary inspection.\nOnce immigrants had completed and passed the medical examination, they were sent to the Registry Room to undergo what was called primary inspection. This consisted of interrogations conducted by U.S. Immigrant Inspectors to determine if each newcomer was eligible for admission. In addition, any medical certificates issued by physicians were taken into account. Aside from the U.S. immigrant inspectors, the Bureau of Immigration work force included interpreters, watchmen, matrons, clerks and stenographers. According to a reconstruction of immigration processes in 1907, immigrants who passed the initial inspections spent two to five hours at Ellis Island to do these interviews. Arrivals were asked a couple dozen questions, including name, occupation, and the amount of money they carried. The government wanted to determine whether new arrivals would be self-sufficient upon arrival, and on average, wanted the immigrants to have between $18 and $25 (worth between $ and $ as of 2022). Some immigrants were also given literacy tests in their native languages, though children under 16 were exempt. The determination of admissibility was relatively arbitrary and determined by the individual inspector.\nU.S. Immigrant Inspectors used some other symbols or marks as they interrogated immigrants in the Registry Room to determine whether to admit or detain them, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThose who were cleared were given a medical certificate or an affidavit. According to a 1912 account by physician Alfred C. Reed, immigrants were medically cleared only after three on-duty physicians signed an affidavit. Those with visible illnesses were deported or held in the island's hospital. Those who were admitted often met with relatives and friends at the Kissing Post, a wooden column outside the registry room.\nBetween 1891 and 1930, Ellis Island reviewed over 25 million attempted immigrants, of which 700,000 were given certificates of disability or disease and of these 79,000 were barred from entry. Approximately 4.4% of immigrants between 1909 and 1930 were classified as disabled or diseased, and one percent of immigrants were deported yearly due to medical causes. The proportion of \"diseased\" increased to 8.0% during the Spanish flu of 1918\u20131919. More than 3,000 attempted immigrants died in the island's hospital. Some unskilled workers were deemed \"likely to become a public charge\" and so were rejected; about 2% of immigrants were deported. Immigrants could also be excluded if they were disabled and previously rejected; if they were Chinese, regardless of their citizenship status; or if they were contract laborers, stowaways, and workaways. However, immigrants were exempt from deportation if they had close family ties to a U.S. permanent resident or citizen, or if they were seamen. Ellis Island was sometimes known as the \"Island of Tears\" or \"Heartbreak Island\" for these deportees. If immigrants were rejected, appeals could be made to a three-member board of inquiry.\nMass detentions and deportations.\nEllis Island's use as a detention center dates from World War I, when it was used to house those who were suspected of being enemy soldiers. During the war, six classes of \"enemy aliens\" were established, including officers and crewmen from interned ships; three classes of Germans; and suspected spies. After the American entry into World War I, about 1,100 German and Austrian naval officers and crewmen in the Ports of New York and New London were seized and held in Ellis Island's baggage and dormitory building. A commodious stockade was built for the seized officers. A 1917 \"New York Times\" article depicted the conditions of the detention center as being relatively hospitable.\nAnti-immigrant sentiments developed in the U.S. during and after World War I, especially toward Southern and Eastern Europeans who were entering the country in large numbers. Following the Immigration Act of 1924, primary inspection was moved to New York Harbor, and Ellis Island only hosted immigrants that were to be detained or deported. After the passage of the 1924 act, the Immigration Service established multiple classes of people who were said to be \"deportable\". This included immigrants who entered in violation of previous exclusion acts; Chinese immigrants in violation of the 1924 act; those convicted of felonies or other \"crimes of moral turpitude\"; and those involved in prostitution.\nDuring and immediately following World War II, Ellis Island was used to hold German merchant mariners and \"enemy aliens\"\u2014Axis nationals detained for fear of spying, sabotage, and other fifth column activity. When the U.S. entered the war in December 1941, Ellis Island held 279 Japanese, 248 Germans, and 81 Italians removed from the East Coast. Unlike other wartime immigration detention stations, Ellis Island was designated as a permanent holding facility and was used to hold foreign nationals throughout the war. A total of 7,000 Germans, Italians and Japanese were ultimately detained at Ellis Island.\nThe Internal Security Act of 1950 barred members of communist or fascist organizations from immigrating to the United States. Two notable communists known to have been imprisoned on Ellis Island include Billy Strachan, a pioneer of black civil rights in Britain, and Ferdinand Smith who co-founded the first desegregated union in the history of the United States. Ellis Island saw detention peak at 1,500, but by 1952, after changes to immigration laws and policies, only 30 to 40 detainees remained. One of the last detainees was the Indonesian Aceh separatist Hasan di Tiro who, while a student in New York in 1953, declared himself the \"foreign minister\" of the rebellious Darul Islam movement and was subsequently stripped of his Indonesian citizenship and held as an \"illegal alien\".\nEugenic influence.\nWhen immigration through Ellis Island peaked, eugenic ideals gained broad popularity and made heavy impact on immigration to the United States by way of exclusion of disabled and \"morally defective\" people. Eugenicists of the late 19th and early 20th century believed human reproductive selection should be carried out by the state as a collective decision. For many eugenicists, this was considered a patriotic duty as they held an interest in creating a greater national race. Henry Fairfield Osborn's opening words to the \"New York Evening Journal\" in 1911 were, \"As a biologist as well as a patriot...,\" on the subject on advocating for tighter inspections of immigrants of the United States.\nEugenic selection occurred on two distinguishable levels:\nAt the time, it was a broadly popular idea that immigration policies had ought to be based on eugenics principles in order to help create a \"superior race\" in America. To do this, defective persons needed to be screened by immigration officials and denied entry on the basis of their disability.\nDuring the line inspection process, ailments were marked using chalk. There were three types of illness that were screened for:\nThe people with moral or mental disability, who were of higher concern to officials and under the law, were required to be excluded from entry to the United States. Persons with physical disability were under higher inspection and could be turned away on the basis of their disability. Much of this came in part of the eugenicist belief that defects are hereditary, especially those of the moral and mental nature those these are often outwardly signified by physical deformity as well. As Chicago surgeon Eugene S. Talbot wrote in 1898, \"crime is hereditary, a tendency which is, in most cases, associated with bodily defects.\" Likewise, George Lydston, a medicine and criminal anthropology professor, wrote in 1906 that people with \"defective physique\" were not just criminally associated but that defectiveness was a primary factor \"in the causation of crime.\"\nLeadership.\nWithin the U.S. Bureau of Immigration, there were fifteen commissioners assigned to oversee immigration procedures at the Port of New York, and thus, operations at Ellis Island. The twelve commissioners through 1940 were political appointees selected by the U.S. president; the political parties listed are those of the president who appointed each commissioner. One man, William Williams, served twice as commissioner.\nThe final three commissioners held a non-partisan position of \"district director\". The district directors were:\nName-change myth.\nAccording to a myth, immigrants were unwillingly forced to take new names, though there are no historical records of this. Rather, immigration officials simply used the names from the manifests of steamship companies, which served as the only immigration records for those entering the United States. Records show that immigration officials often actually corrected mistakes in immigrants' names, since inspectors knew three languages on average and each worker was usually assigned to process immigrants who spoke the same languages.\nMany immigrant families Americanized their surnames afterward, either immediately following the immigration process or gradually after assimilating into American culture. Because the average family changed their surname five years after immigration, the Naturalization Act of 1906 required documentation of name changes. The myth of name changes at Ellis Island still persists, likely because of the perception of the immigration center as a formidable port of arrival.\nCurrent use.\nThe island is administered by the National Park Service, though fire protection and medical services are also provided by the Jersey City Fire Department. In extreme medical emergencies, there is also a helicopter for medical evacuations.\nMuseum and Wall of Honor.\nThe Ellis Island Immigration Museum opened on September 10, 1990, replacing the American Museum of Immigration on Liberty Island, which closed in 1991. The museum contains several exhibits across three floors of the main building, with a first-floor expansion into the kitchen-laundry building. The first floor houses the main lobby within the baggage room, the Family Immigration History Center, \"Peopling of America\", and \"New Eras of Immigration\". The second floor includes the registry room, the hearing room, \"Through America's Gate\", and \"Peak Immigration Years\". The third floor contains a dormitory room, \"Restoring a Landmark\", \"Silent Voices\", \"Treasures from Home\", and \"Ellis Island Chronicles\", as well as rotating exhibits. There are also three theaters used for film and live performances. The third floor contains a library, reading room, and \"oral history center\", while the theaters are located on the first and second floors. There are auditoriums on all floors. On the ground floor is a gift shop and bookstore, as well as a booth for audio tours.\nIn 2008, by act of Congress and despite opposition from the NPS, the museum's library was officially renamed the Bob Hope Memorial Library in honor of one of the station's most famous immigrants, comedian Bob Hope. On May 20, 2015, the Ellis Island Immigration Museum was officially renamed the Ellis Island National Museum of Immigration, coinciding with the opening of the new Peopling of America galleries in the first floor of the kitchen-laundry building. The expansion tells the entire story of American immigration, including before and after the periods that Ellis Island processed immigrants.\nThe Wall of Honor outside of the main building contains a list of 775,000 names inscribed on 770 panels, including slaves, Native Americans, and immigrants that were not processed on the island. The Wall of Honor originated in the late 1980s as a means to pay for Ellis Island's renovation, and initially included 75,000 names. The wall originally opened in 1990 and consisted of copper panels. Shortly afterward it was reconstructed in two phases: a circular portion that started in 1993, and a linear portion that was built between 1998 and 2001. The Statue of Liberty-Ellis Island Foundation requires potential honorees to pay a fee for inscription. By 2019, the wall was mostly full and only five panels remained to be inscribed.\nNPS offers several educational opportunities, including self-guided tours and immersive, role-playing activities. These educational programs and resources cater to over 650,000 students per year and aim to promote discussion while fostering a climate of tolerance and understanding.\nSouth side.\nThe south side of the island, home to the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital, is abandoned and remains unrenovated. Disagreements over its proposed use have precluded any development on the south side for several decades. The NPS held a competition for proposals to redevelop the south side in 1981 and ultimately selected a plan for a conference center and a 250-to-300-room Sheraton hotel on the site of the hospital. In 1985, while restoration of the north side of Ellis Island was underway, Interior Secretary Donald P. Hodel convened a long-inactive federal commission to determine how the south side of Ellis Island should be used. Though the hotel proposal was dropped in 1986 for lack of funds, the NPS allowed developer William Hubbard to redevelop the south side as a convention center, though Hubbard was not able to find investors. The south side was proposed for possible future development even through the late 1990s.\nSave Ellis Island led preservation efforts of the south side of the island. The ferry building remains only partially accessible to the general public. As part of the National Park Service's Centennial Initiative, the south side of the island was to be the target of a project to restore the 28 buildings that have not yet been rehabilitated.\nIn 2014, the NPS started offering guided public tours of the south side as part of the \"Hard Hat Tour\", which charges an additional fee that is used to support Save Ellis Island's preservation efforts. The south side also includes \"Unframed \u2013 Ellis Island\", an art installation by the French street artist JR, which includes murals of figures who would have occupied each of the respective hospital buildings.\nCultural impact.\nCommemorations.\nThe Ellis Island Medal of Honor is awarded annually to American citizens, both native-born and naturalized. According to the award's sponsors, the medal is given to those who \"have distinguished themselves within their own ethnic groups while exemplifying the values of the American way of life.\" Past medalists include seven U.S. presidents, several world leaders, several Nobel Prize winners, and other leaders and pioneers.\nThe USPS issued an Ellis Island commemorative stamp on February 3, 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.\nHistorical designations.\nEllis Island has been part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument, which also includes the Statue of Liberty and Liberty Island, since 1965. It has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places since 1966. Ellis Island has also been on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places since 1971, and the main building was made a New York City designated landmark in 1993. In addition, it was placed on UNESCO's list of tentative World Heritage Sites in 2017.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVideos.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther archives.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChildren's books.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9807", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9807", "title": "Early Helladic", "text": ""}
{"id": "9808", "revid": "31260886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9808", "title": "Euripides", "text": "5th-century BC Athenian playwright\nEuripides (c.\u2009480\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009406 BC) was a tragedian of classical Athens. Along with Aeschylus and Sophocles, he is one of the three ancient Greek tragedians for whom any plays have survived in full. Some ancient scholars attributed ninety-five plays to him, but the \"Suda\" says it was ninety-two at most. Of these, eighteen or nineteen have survived more or less complete (\"Rhesus\" is suspect). There are many fragments (some substantial) of most of his other plays. More of his plays have survived intact than those of Aeschylus and Sophocles together, partly because his popularity grew as theirs declined\u2014he became, in the Hellenistic Age, a cornerstone of ancient literary education, along with Homer, Demosthenes, and Menander.\nEuripides is identified with theatrical innovations that have profoundly influenced drama down to modern times, especially in the representation of traditional, mythical heroes as ordinary people in extraordinary circumstances. This new approach led him to pioneer developments that later writers adapted to comedy, some of which are characteristic of romance. He also became \"the most tragic of poets\", focusing on the inner lives and motives of his characters in a way previously unknown. He was \"the creator of ... that cage which is the theatre of Shakespeare's \"Othello\", Racine's \"Ph\u00e8dre\", of Ibsen and Strindberg,\" in which \"imprisoned men and women destroy each other by the intensity of their loves and hates\". But he was also the literary ancestor of comic dramatists as diverse as Menander and George Bernard Shaw.\nHis contemporaries associated him with Socrates as a leader of a decadent intellectualism. Both were frequently lampooned by comic poets such as Aristophanes. Socrates was eventually put on trial and executed as a corrupting influence. Ancient biographies hold that Euripides chose a voluntary exile in old age, dying in Macedonia, but recent scholarship casts doubt on these sources.\nLife.\nTraditional accounts of the author's life are found in many commentaries, and include details such as these: He was born on Salamis Island around 480 BC, with parents Cleito (mother) and Mnesarchus (father), a retailer from the deme of Phlya. On receiving an oracle that his son was fated to win \"crowns of victory\", Mnesarchus insisted that the boy should train for a career in athletics. But the boy was destined for a career on the stage (where he was to win only five victories, one of these posthumously). He served for a short time as both dancer and torch-bearer at the rites of Apollo Zosterius. His education was not confined to athletics, studying also painting and philosophy under the masters Prodicus and Anaxagoras. He had two disastrous marriages, and both his wives\u2014Melite and Choerine (the latter bearing him three sons)\u2014were unfaithful. He became a recluse, making a home for himself in a cave on Salamis (the Cave of Euripides, where a cult of the playwright developed after his death). \"There he built an impressive library and pursued daily communion with the sea and sky\". The details of his death are uncertain. It was traditionally held that he retired to the \"rustic court\" of King Archelaus in Macedonia, where he died in 406 BC, but modern scholarship is sceptical of these claims. It is possible that in reality he never visited Macedonia at all, or if he did, he might have been drawn there by King Archelaus with incentives that were also offered to other artists.\nSuch biographical details derive almost entirely from three unreliable sources:\nThe next three sections expand on the claims of each of these sources, respectively.\nA fabled life.\nEuripides was the youngest in a group of three great tragedians, who were almost contemporaries: his first play was staged thirteen years after Sophocles' debut, and three years after Aeschylus's \"Oresteia\". The identity of the trio is neatly underscored by a patriotic account of their roles during Greece's great victory over Persia at the Battle of Salamis\u2014Aeschylus fought there, Sophocles was just old enough to celebrate the victory in a boys' chorus, and Euripides was born on the very day of the battle. The apocryphal account, that he composed his works in a cave on Salamis island, was a late tradition, probably symbolizing the isolation of an intellectual ahead of his time. Much of his life, and his whole career, coincided with the struggle between Athens and Sparta for hegemony in Greece, but he did not live to see the final defeat of his city. It is said that he died in Macedonia after being attacked by the Molossian hounds of King Archelaus, and that his cenotaph near Piraeus was struck by lightning\u2014signs of his unique powers, whether for good or ill (according to one modern scholar, his death might have been caused instead by the harsh Macedonian winter). In an account by Plutarch, the catastrophic failure of the Sicilian expedition led Athenians to trade renditions of Euripides' lyrics to their enemies in return for food and drink (\"Life of Nicias\" 29). Plutarch also provides the story that the victorious Spartan generals, having planned the demolition of Athens and the enslavement of its people, grew merciful after being entertained at a banquet by lyrics from Euripides' play \"Electra\": \"they felt that it would be a barbarous act to annihilate a city which produced such men\" (\"Life of Lysander\").\nA comic life.\nTragic poets were often mocked by comic poets during the dramatic festivals Dionysia and Lenaia, and Euripides was travestied more than most. Aristophanes scripted him as a character in at least three plays: \"The Acharnians\", \"Thesmophoriazusae\" and \"The Frogs\". But Aristophanes also borrowed, rather than merely satirized, some of the tragedian's methods; he was himself ridiculed by Cratinus, another comic poet, as: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to another comic poet, Teleclides, the plays of Euripides were co-authored by the philosopher Socrates:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAristophanes alleged that the co-author was a celebrated actor, Cephisophon, who also shared the tragedian's house and his wife, while Socrates taught an entire school of quibblers like Euripides:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn \"The Frogs\", written when Euripides and Aeschylus were dead, Aristophanes has the god Dionysus venturing down to Hades in search of a good poet to bring back to Athens. After a debate between the shades of Aeschylus and Euripides, the god brings Aeschylus back to life, as more useful to Athens, for his wisdom, rejecting Euripides as merely clever. Such comic 'evidence' suggests that Athenians admired Euripides even while they mistrusted his intellectualism, at least during the long war with Sparta. Aeschylus had written his own epitaph commemorating his life as a warrior fighting for Athens against Persia, without any mention of his success as a playwright; and Sophocles was celebrated by his contemporaries for his social gifts, and contributions to public life as a state official; but there are no records of Euripides' public life except as a dramatist\u2014he could well have been \"a brooding and bookish recluse\". He is presented as such in \"The Acharnians\", where Aristophanes shows him to be living morosely in a precarious house, surrounded by the tattered costumes of his disreputable characters (and yet Agathon, another tragic poet, is discovered in a later play, \"Thesmophoriazusae\", to be living in circumstances almost as bizarre). Euripides' mother was a humble vendor of vegetables, according to the comic tradition, yet his plays indicate that he had a liberal education and hence a privileged background.\nA tragedian's life.\nEuripides first competed in the City Dionysia, the famous Athenian dramatic festival, in 455 BC, one year after the death of Aeschylus; and did not win first prize until 441 BC. His final competition in Athens was in 408 BC. \"The Bacchae\" and \"Iphigenia in Aulis\" were performed in 405 BC, and first prize was awarded posthumously. He won first prize only five times.\nHis plays, and those of Aeschylus and Sophocles, indicate a difference in outlook between the three\u2014a generation gap probably due to the Sophistic enlightenment in the middle decades of the 5th century: Aeschylus still looked back to the archaic period, Sophocles was in transition between periods, and Euripides was fully imbued with the new spirit of the classical age. When Euripides' plays are sequenced in time, they also reveal that his outlook might have changed, providing a \"spiritual biography\", along these lines:\nHowever, about 80% of his plays have been lost, and even the extant plays do not present a fully consistent picture of his 'spiritual' development (for example, \"Iphigenia in Aulis\" is dated with the 'despairing' \"Bacchae\", yet it contains elements that became typical of New Comedy). In the \"Bacchae\", he restores the chorus and messenger speech to their traditional role in the tragic plot, and the play appears to be the culmination of a regressive or archaizing tendency in his later works (for which see Chronology below). Believed to have been composed in the wilds of Macedonia, \"Bacchae\" also dramatizes a primitive side to Greek religion, and some modern scholars have interpreted this particular play biographically, therefore, as:\nOne of his earliest extant plays, \"Medea\", includes a speech that he seems to have written in defence of himself as an intellectual ahead of his time (spoken by Medea):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u03c3\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03bf\u1fd6\u03c3\u03b9 \u03bc\u1f72\u03bd \u03b3\u1f70\u03c1 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03bd\u1f70 \u03c0\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03c6\u03ad\u03c1\u03c9\u03bd \u03c3\u03bf\u03c6\u1f70&lt;br&gt;\u03b4\u03cc\u03be\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2 \u1f00\u03c7\u03c1\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03c2 \u03ba\u03bf\u1f50 \u03c3\u03bf\u03c6\u1f78\u03c2 \u03c0\u03b5\u03c6\u03c5\u03ba\u03ad\u03bd\u03b1\u03b9\u00b7&lt;br&gt;\u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd \u03b4\u1fbf \u03b1\u1f56 \u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u03bf\u03cd\u03bd\u03c4\u03c9\u03bd \u03b5\u1f30\u03b4\u03ad\u03bd\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c4\u03b9 \u03c0\u03bf\u03b9\u03ba\u03af\u03bb\u03bf\u03bd&lt;br&gt;\u03ba\u03c1\u03b5\u03af\u03c3\u03c3\u03c9\u03bd \u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03b9\u03c3\u03b8\u03b5\u1f76\u03c2 \u1f10\u03bd \u03c0\u03cc\u03bb\u03b5\u03b9 \u03bb\u03c5\u03c0\u03c1\u1f78\u03c2 \u03c6\u03b1\u03bd\u1fc7.&lt;br&gt;\u1f10\u03b3\u1f7c \u03b4\u1f72 \u03ba\u03b1\u1f50\u03c4\u1f74 \u03c4\u1fc6\u03c3\u03b4\u03b5 \u03ba\u03bf\u03b9\u03bd\u03c9\u03bd\u1ff6 \u03c4\u03cd\u03c7\u03b7\u03c2 [298\u2013302].&lt;br&gt;If you bring novel wisdom to fools, you will be regarded as useless, not wise; and if the city regards you as greater than those with a reputation for cleverness, you will be thought vexatious. I myself am a sharer in this lot.\nWork.\nAthenian tragedy in performance during Euripides' lifetime was a public contest between playwrights. The state funded it and awarded prizes. The language was metrical, spoken and sung. The performance area included a circular floor (called orchestra) where the chorus could dance, a space for actors (three speaking actors in Euripides' time), a backdrop or skene, and some special effects: an ekkyklema (used to bring the skene's \"indoors\" outdoors) and a mechane (used to lift actors in the air, as in deus ex machina). With the introduction of the third actor (attributed to Aeschylus by Themistius; to Sophocles by Aristotle), acting also began to be regarded as a skill worth prizes, requiring a long apprenticeship in the chorus. Euripides and other playwrights accordingly composed more and more arias for accomplished actors to sing, and this tendency became more marked in his later plays: tragedy was a \"living and ever-changing genre\" (cf. previous section, and Chronology; a list of his plays is below).\nThe comic poet Aristophanes is the earliest known critic to characterize Euripides as a spokesman for destructive, new ideas associated with declining standards in both society and tragedy (see Reception for more). But fifth-century tragedy was a social gathering for \"carrying out quite publicly the maintenance and development of mental infrastructure\", and it offered spectators a \"platform for an utterly unique form of institutionalized discussion\". The dramatist's role was not only to entertain but also educate fellow citizens\u2014he was expected to have a message. Traditional myth provided the subject matter, but the dramatist was meant to be innovative, which led to novel characterizations of heroic figures and use of the mythical past as a tool for discussing present issues. The difference between Euripides and his older colleagues was one of degree: his characters talked about the present more controversially and pointedly than those of Aeschylus and Sophocles, sometimes even challenging the democratic order. Thus, for example, Odysseus is represented in \"Hecuba\" (lines 131\u201332) as \"agile-minded, sweet-talking, demos-pleasing\", i.e. similar to the war-time demagogues that were active in Athens during the Peloponnesian War. Speakers in the plays of Aeschylus and Sophocles sometimes distinguish between slaves who are servile by nature and those servile by circumstance, but Euripides' speakers go further, positing an individual's mental, rather than social or physical, state as a true indication of worth. For example, in \"Hippolytus\", a love-sick queen rationalizes her position and, reflecting on adultery, arrives at this comment on intrinsic merit:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u1f10\u03ba \u03b4\u1f72 \u03b3\u03b5\u03bd\u03bd\u03b1\u03af\u03c9\u03bd \u03b4\u03cc\u03bc\u03c9\u03bd&lt;br&gt;\u03c4\u03cc\u03b4\u1fbf \u1f26\u03c1\u03be\u03b5 \u03b8\u03b7\u03bb\u03b5\u03af\u03b1\u03b9\u03c3\u03b9 \u03b3\u03af\u03b3\u03bd\u03b5\u03c3\u03b8\u03b1\u03b9 \u03ba\u03b1\u03ba\u03cc\u03bd\u00b7&lt;br&gt;\u1f45\u03c4\u03b1\u03bd \u03b3\u1f70\u03c1 \u03b1\u1f30\u03c3\u03c7\u03c1\u1f70 \u03c4\u03bf\u1fd6\u03c3\u03b9\u03bd \u1f10\u03c3\u03b8\u03bb\u03bf\u1fd6\u03c3\u03b9\u03bd \u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u1fc7,&lt;br&gt;\u1f26 \u03ba\u03ac\u03c1\u03c4\u03b1 \u03b4\u03cc\u03be\u03b5\u03b9 \u03c4\u03bf\u1fd6\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03ba\u03bf\u1fd6\u03c2 \u03b3\u1fbf \u03b5\u1f36\u03bd\u03b1\u03b9 \u03ba\u03b1\u03bb\u03ac. &lt;br&gt;[...] \u03bc\u03cc\u03bd\u03bf\u03bd \u03b4\u1f72 \u03c4\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c4\u03cc \u03c6\u03b1\u03c3\u1fbf \u1f01\u03bc\u03b9\u03bb\u03bb\u1fb6\u03c3\u03b8\u03b1\u03b9 \u03b2\u03af\u1ff3,&lt;br&gt;\u03b3\u03bd\u03ce\u03bc\u03b7\u03bd \u03b4\u03b9\u03ba\u03b1\u03af\u03b1\u03bd \u03ba\u1f00\u03b3\u03b1\u03b8\u1f74\u03bd \u1f45\u03c4\u1ff3 \u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u1fc7 [409\u2013427].&lt;br&gt;This contagion began for the female sex with the nobility. For when those of noble station resolve on base acts, surely the base-born will regard such acts as good. [...] One thing only, they say, competes in value with life, the possession of a heart blameless and good.\nEuripides' characters resembled contemporary Athenians rather than heroic figures of myth.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For achieving his end Euripides' regular strategy is a very simple one: retaining the old stories and the great names, as his theatre required, he imagines his people as contemporaries subjected to contemporary kinds of pressures, and examines their motivations, conduct and fate in the light of contemporary problems, usages and ideals.\nAs mouthpieces for contemporary issues, they \"all seem to have had at least an elementary course in public speaking\". The dialogue often contrasts so strongly with the mythical and heroic setting that it can seem like Euripides aimed at parody. For example, in \"The Trojan Women\", the heroine's rationalized prayer elicits comment from Menelaus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0395\u039a\u0391\u0392\u0397: [...] \u0396\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2, \u03b5\u1f34\u03c4\u1fbf \u1f00\u03bd\u03ac\u03b3\u03ba\u03b7 \u03c6\u03cd\u03c3\u03b5\u03bf\u03c2 \u03b5\u1f34\u03c4\u03b5 \u03bd\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c2 \u03b2\u03c1\u03bf\u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd,&lt;br&gt;\u03c0\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03b7\u03c5\u03be\u03ac\u03bc\u03b7\u03bd \u03c3\u03b5\u00b7 \u03c0\u03ac\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1 \u03b3\u1f70\u03c1 \u03b4\u03b9\u1fbf \u1f00\u03c8\u03cc\u03c6\u03bf\u03c5&lt;br&gt;\u03b2\u03b1\u03af\u03bd\u03c9\u03bd \u03ba\u03b5\u03bb\u03b5\u03cd\u03b8\u03bf\u03c5 \u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u1f70 \u03b4\u03af\u03ba\u03b7\u03bd \u03c4\u1f70 \u03b8\u03bd\u03ae\u03c4\u1fbf \u1f04\u03b3\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2.&lt;br&gt;\u039c\u0395\u039d\u0395\u039b\u0391\u039f\u03a3: \u03c4\u03af \u03b4\u1fbf \u1f14\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd; \u03b5\u1f50\u03c7\u1f70\u03c2 \u1f61\u03c2 \u1f10\u03ba\u03b1\u03af\u03bd\u03b9\u03c3\u03b1\u03c2 \u03b8\u03b5\u1ff6\u03bd [886\u2013889].&lt;br&gt;Hecuba: [...] Zeus, whether you are the necessity of nature or the mind of mortal men, I address you in prayer! For proceeding on a silent path you direct all mortal affairs toward justice!&lt;br&gt;Menelaus: What does this mean? How strange your prayer to the gods is!\nAthenian citizens were familiar with rhetoric in the assembly and law courts, and some scholars believe that Euripides was more interested in his characters as speakers with cases to argue than as characters with lifelike personalities. They are self-conscious about speaking formally, and their rhetoric is shown to be flawed, as if Euripides were exploring the problematical nature of language and communication: \"For speech points in three different directions at once, to the speaker, to the person addressed, to the features in the world it describes, and each of these directions can be felt as skewed\". For example, in the quotation above, Hecuba presents herself as a sophisticated intellectual describing a rationalized cosmos, but the speech is ill-suited to her audience, the unsophisticated listener Menelaus, and is found to not suit the cosmos either (her grandson is murdered by the Greeks). In \"Hippolytus\", speeches appear verbose and ungainly, as if to underscore the limitations of language.\nLike Euripides, both Aeschylus and Sophocles created comic effects, contrasting the heroic with the mundane, but they employed minor supporting characters for that purpose. Euripides was more insistent, using major characters as well. His comic touches can be thought to intensify the overall tragic effect, and his realism, which often threatens to make his heroes look ridiculous, marks a world of debased heroism: \"The loss of intellectual and moral substance becomes a central tragic statement\". Psychological reversals are common and sometimes happen so suddenly that inconsistency in characterization is an issue for many critics, such as Aristotle, who cited \"Iphigenia in Aulis\" as an example (\"Poetics\" 1454a32). For others, psychological inconsistency is not a stumbling block to good drama: \"Euripides is in pursuit of a larger insight: he aims to set forth the two modes, emotional and rational, with which human beings confront their own mortality.\" Some think unpredictable behaviour realistic in tragedy: \"everywhere in Euripides a preoccupation with individual psychology and its irrational aspects is evident...In his hands tragedy for the first time probed the inner recesses of the human soul and let \"passions spin the plot\".\" The tension between reason and passion is symbolized by his characters' relationship with the gods: For example, Hecuba's prayer is answered not by Zeus, nor by the law of reason, but by Menelaus, as if speaking for the old gods. And the perhaps most famous example is in \"Bacchae\" where the god Dionysus savages his own converts. When the gods do appear (in eight of the extant plays), they appear \"lifeless and mechanical\". Sometimes condemned by critics as an unimaginative way to end a story, the spectacle of a \"god\" making a judgement or announcement from a theatrical crane might actually have been intended to provoke scepticism about the religious and heroic dimension of his plays. Similarly, his plays often begin in a banal manner that undermines theatrical illusion. Unlike Sophocles, who established the setting and background of his plays in the introductory dialogue, Euripides used a monologue in which a divinity or human character simply tells the audience all it needs to know to understand what follows.\nAeschylus and Sophocles were innovative, but Euripides had arrived at a position in the \"ever-changing genre\" where he could easily move between tragic, comic, romantic, and political effects. This versatility appears in individual plays and also over the course of his career. Potential for comedy lay in his use of 'contemporary' characters, in his sophisticated tone, his relatively informal Greek (see In Greek below), and in his ingenious use of plots centred on motifs that later became standard in Menander's New Comedy (for example the 'recognition scene'). Other tragedians also used recognition scenes, but they were heroic in emphasis, as in Aeschylus's \"The Libation Bearers\", which Euripides parodied in \"Electra\" (Euripides was unique among the tragedians in incorporating theatrical criticism in his plays). Traditional myth with its exotic settings, heroic adventures, and epic battles offered potential for romantic melodrama as well as for political comments on a war theme, so that his plays are an extraordinary mix of elements. \"The Trojan Women\", for example, is a powerfully disturbing play on the theme of war's horrors, apparently critical of Athenian imperialism (it was composed in the aftermath of the Melian massacre and during the preparations for the Sicilian Expedition), yet it features the comic exchange between Menelaus and Hecuba quoted above, and the chorus considers Athens, the \"blessed land of Theus\", to be a desirable refuge\u2014such complexity and ambiguity are typical both of his \"patriotic\" and \"anti-war\" plays.\nTragic poets in the fifth century competed against one another at the City Dionysia, each with a tetralogy of three tragedies and a satyr play. The few extant fragments of satyr plays attributed to Aeschylus and Sophocles indicate that these were a loosely structured, simple, and jovial form of entertainment. But in \"Cyclops\" (the only complete satyr-play that survives), Euripides structured the entertainment more like a tragedy and introduced a note of critical irony typical of his other work. His genre-bending inventiveness is shown above all in \"Alcestis\", a blend of tragic and satyric elements. This fourth play in his tetralogy for 438 BC (i.e., it occupied the position conventionally reserved for satyr plays) is a \"tragedy\", featuring Heracles as a satyric hero in conventional satyr-play scenes: an arrival, a banquet, a victory over an ogre (in this case, death), a happy ending, a feast, and a departure for new adventures. Most of the big innovations in tragedy were made by Aeschylus and Sophocles, but \"Euripides made innovations on a smaller scale that have impressed some critics as cumulatively leading to a radical change of direction\".\nEuripides is also known for his use of irony. Many Greek tragedians make use of dramatic irony to bring out the emotion and realism of their characters or plays, but Euripides uses irony to foreshadow events and occasionally amuse his audience. For example, in his play \"Heracles\", Heracles comments that all men love their children and wish to see them grow. The irony here is that Heracles will be driven into madness by Hera and will kill his children. Similarly, in \"Helen\", Theoclymenus remarks how happy he is that his sister has the gift of prophecy and will warn him of any plots or tricks against him (the audience already knows that she has betrayed him). In this instance, Euripides uses irony not only for foreshadowing but also for comic effect\u2014which few tragedians did. Likewise, in the \"Bacchae\", Pentheus's first threat to the god Dionysus is that if Pentheus catches him in his city, he will 'chop off his head', whereas it is Pentheus who is beheaded at the end of the play.\nIn Greek.\nThe spoken language of the plays is not fundamentally different in style from that of Aeschylus or Sophocles\u2014it employs poetic meters, a rarefied vocabulary, fullness of expression, complex syntax, and ornamental figures, all aimed at representing an elevated style. But its rhythms are somewhat freer, and more natural, than that of his predecessors, and the vocabulary has been expanded to allow for intellectual and psychological subtleties. Euripides has been hailed as a great lyric poet. In \"Medea\", for example, he composed for his city, Athens, \"the noblest of her songs of praise\". His lyrical skills are not just confined to individual poems: \"A play of Euripides is a musical whole...one song echoes motifs from the preceding song, while introducing new ones.\" For some critics, the lyrics often seem dislocated from the action, but the extent and significance of this is \"a matter of scholarly debate\". See Chronology for details about his style.\nReception.\nEuripides has aroused, and continues to arouse, strong opinions for and against his work:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was a problem to his contemporaries and he is one still; over the course of centuries since his plays were first produced he has been hailed or indicted under a bewildering variety of labels. He has been described as 'the poet of the Greek enlightenment' and also as 'Euripides the irrationalist'; as a religious sceptic if not an atheist, but on the other hand, as a believer in divine providence and the ultimate justice of divine dispensation. He has been seen as a profound explorer of human psychology and also a rhetorical poet who subordinated consistency of character to verbal effect; as a misogynist and a feminist; as a realist who brought tragic action down to the level of everyday life and as a romantic poet who chose unusual myths and exotic settings. He wrote plays which have been widely understood as patriotic pieces supporting Athens' war against Sparta and others which many have taken as the work of the anti-war dramatist \"par excellence,\" even as attacks on Athenian imperialism. He has been recognized as the precursor of New Comedy and also what Aristotle called him: 'the most tragic of poets' (\"Poetics\" 1453a30). And not one of these descriptions is entirely false. \u2014 Bernard Knox\nAeschylus gained thirteen victories as a dramatist; Sophocles at least twenty; Euripides only four in his lifetime; and this has often been taken as indication of the latter's unpopularity. But a first place might not have been the main criterion for success (the system of selecting judges appears to have been flawed), and merely being chosen to compete was a mark of distinction. Moreover, to have been singled out by Aristophanes for so much comic attention is proof of popular interest in his work. Sophocles was appreciative enough of the younger poet to be influenced by him, as is evident in his later plays \"Philoctetes\" and \"Oedipus at Colonus\". According to Plutarch, Euripides had been very well received in Sicily, to the extent that after the failure of the Sicilian Expedition, many Athenian captives were released, simply for being able to teach their captors whatever fragments they could remember of his work. Less than a hundred years later, Aristotle developed an almost \"biological' theory of the development of tragedy in Athens: the art form grew under the influence of Aeschylus, matured in the hands of Sophocles, then began its precipitous decline with Euripides. However, \"his plays continued to be applauded even after those of Aeschylus and Sophocles had come to seem remote and irrelevant\"; they became school classics in the Hellenistic period (as mentioned in the introduction) and, due to Seneca's adaptation of his work for Roman audiences, \"it was Euripides, not Aeschylus or Sophocles, whose tragic muse presided over the rebirth of tragedy in Renaissance Europe.\"\nIn the seventeenth century, Racine expressed admiration for Sophocles, but was more influenced by Euripides (\"Iphigenia in Aulis\" and \"Hippolytus\" were the models for his plays \"Iphig\u00e9nie\" and \"Ph\u00e8dre\"). Euripides' reputation was to take a beating in the early 19th century, when Friedrich Schlegel and his brother August Wilhelm Schlegel championed Aristotle's 'biological' model of theatre history, identifying Euripides with the moral, political, and artistic degeneration of Athens. August Wilhelm's Vienna lectures on dramatic art and literature went through four editions between 1809 and 1846; and, in them, he opined that Euripides \"not only destroyed the external order of tragedy but missed its entire meaning\". This view influenced Friedrich Nietzsche, who seems, however, not to have known the Euripidean plays well. But literary figures, such as the poet Robert Browning and his wife Elizabeth Barrett Browning, could study and admire the Schlegels, while still appreciating Euripides as \"our Euripides the human\" (\"Wine of Cyprus\" stanza 12). Classicists such as Arthur Verrall and Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff reacted against the views of the Schlegels and Nietzsche, constructing arguments sympathetic to Euripides, which involved Wilamowitz in this restatement of Greek tragedy as a genre: \"A [Greek] tragedy does not have to end 'tragically' or be 'tragic'. The only requirement is a serious treatment.\" In the English-speaking world, the pacifist Gilbert Murray played an important role in popularizing Euripides, influenced perhaps by his anti-war plays. Today, as in the time of Euripides, traditional assumptions are constantly under challenge, and audiences therefore have a natural affinity with the Euripidean outlook, which seems nearer to ours, for example, than the Elizabethan. As stated above, however, opinions continue to diverge, so that modern readers might actually \"seem to feel a special affinity with Sophocles\"; one recent critic might dismiss the debates in Euripides' plays as \"self-indulgent digression for the sake of rhetorical display\"; and one spring to the defence: \"His plays are remarkable for their range of tones and the gleeful inventiveness, which morose critics call cynical artificiality, of their construction.\"\nUnique among writers of ancient Athens, Euripides demonstrated sympathy towards the underrepresented members of society. His male contemporaries were frequently shocked by the heresies he put into the mouths of characters, such as these words of his heroine Medea:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] \u1f61\u03c2 \u03c4\u03c1\u1f76\u03c2 \u1f02\u03bd \u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u1fbf \u1f00\u03c3\u03c0\u03af\u03b4\u03b1&lt;br&gt;\n\u03c3\u03c4\u1fc6\u03bd\u03b1\u03b9 \u03b8\u03ad\u03bb\u03bf\u03b9\u03bc\u1fbf \u1f02\u03bd \u03bc\u1fb6\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03bd \u1f22 \u03c4\u03b5\u03ba\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd \u1f05\u03c0\u03b1\u03be [250\u2013251].&lt;br&gt;\nI would rather stand three times with a shield in battle than give birth once.\nTexts.\nTransmission.\nThe textual transmission of the plays, from the 5th century BC, when they were first written, until the era of the printing press, was a largely haphazard process. Much of Euripides' work was lost and corrupted; but the period also included triumphs by scholars and copyists, thanks to whom much was recovered and preserved. Summaries of the transmission are often found in modern editions of the plays, three of which are used as sources for this summary.\nThe plays of Euripides, like those of Aeschylus and Sophocles, circulated in written form. But literary conventions that we take for granted today had not been invented\u2014there was no spacing between words; no consistency in punctuation, nor elisions; no marks for breathings and accents (guides to pronunciation, and word recognition); no convention to denote change of speaker; no stage directions; and verse was written straight across the page, like prose. Possibly, those who bought texts supplied their own interpretative markings. Papyri discoveries have indicated, for example, that a change in speakers was loosely denoted with a variety of signs, such as equivalents of the modern dash, colon, and full-stop. The absence of modern literary conventions (which aid comprehension), was an early and persistent source of errors, affecting transmission. Errors were also introduced when Athens replaced its old Attic alphabet with the Ionian alphabet, a change sanctioned by law in 403\u2013402 BC, adding a new complication to the task of copying. Many more errors came from the tendency of actors to interpolate words and sentences, producing so many corruptions and variations that a law was proposed by Lycurgus of Athens in 330 BC \"that the plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides should be written down and preserved in a public office; and that the town clerk should read the text over with the actors; and that all performances which did not comply with this regulation should be illegal.\" The law was soon disregarded, and actors continued to make changes until about 200 BC, after which the habit ceased. It was about then that Aristophanes of Byzantium compiled an edition of all the extant plays of Euripides, collated from pre-Alexandrian texts, furnished with introductions and accompanied by a commentary that was \"published\" separately. This became the \"standard edition\" for the future, and it featured some of the literary conventions that modern readers expect: there was still no spacing between words; little or no punctuation; and no stage directions; but abbreviated names denoted changes of speaker; lyrics were broken into \"cola\" and \"strophai\", or lines and stanzas; and a system of accentuation was introduced.\nAfter this creation of a standard edition, the text was fairly safe from errors, besides slight and gradual corruption introduced with tedious copying. Many of these trivial errors occurred in the Byzantine period, following a change in script (from uncial to minuscule), and many were \"homophonic\" errors\u2014equivalent, in English, to substituting \"right\" for \"write\"; except that there were more opportunities for Byzantine scribes to make these errors, because \u03b7, \u03b9, \u03bf\u03b9 and \u03b5\u03b9, were pronounced similarly in the Byzantine period.\nAround 200 AD, ten of the plays of Euripides began to be circulated in a select edition, possibly for use in schools, with some commentaries or scholia recorded in the margins. Similar editions had appeared for Aeschylus and Sophocles\u2014the only plays of theirs that survive today. Euripides, however, was more fortunate than the other tragedians, with a second edition of his work surviving, compiled in alphabetical order as if from a set of his collect works; but without scholia attached. This \"Alphabetical\" edition was combined with the \"Select\" edition by some unknown Byzantine scholar, bringing together all the nineteen plays that survive today. The \"Select\" plays are found in many medieval manuscripts, but only two manuscripts preserve the \"Alphabetical\" plays\u2014often denoted L and P, after the Laurentian Library at Florence, and the Bibliotheca Palatina in the Vatican, where they are stored. It is believed that P derived its Alphabet plays and some Select plays from copies of an ancestor of L, but the remainder is derived from elsewhere. P contains all the extant plays of Euripides, L is missing \"The Trojan Women\" and latter part of \"The Bacchae\".\nIn addition to L, P, and many other medieval manuscripts, there are fragments of plays on papyrus. These papyrus fragments are often recovered only with modern technology. In June 2005, for example, classicists at the University of Oxford worked on a joint project with Brigham Young University, using multi-spectral imaging technology to retrieve previously illegible writing (see References). Some of this work employed infrared technology\u2014previously used for satellite imaging\u2014to detect previously unknown material by Euripides, in fragments of the Oxyrhynchus papyri, a collection of ancient manuscripts held by the university.\nIt is from such materials that modern scholars try to piece together copies of the original plays. Sometimes the picture is almost lost. Thus, for example, two extant plays, \"The Phoenician Women\" and \"Iphigenia in Aulis\", are significantly corrupted by interpolations (the latter possibly being completed post mortem by the poet's son); and the very authorship of \"Rhesus\" is a matter of dispute. In fact, the very existence of the Alphabet plays, or rather the absence of an equivalent edition for Sophocles and Aeschylus, could distort our notions of distinctive Euripidean qualities\u2014most of his least \"tragic\" plays are in the Alphabet edition; and, possibly, the other two tragedians would appear just as genre-bending as this \"restless experimenter\", if we possessed more than their \"select\" editions.\n\"See Extant plays below for listing of \"Select\" and \"Alphabetical\" plays.\"\nChronology.\nOriginal production dates for some of Euripides' plays are known from ancient records, such as lists of prize-winners at the Dionysia; and approximations are obtained for the remainder by various means. Both the playwright and his work were travestied by comic poets such as Aristophanes, the known dates of whose own plays can serve as a terminus ad quem for those of Euripides (though the gap can be considerable: twenty-seven years separate \"Telephus\", known to have been produced in 438 BC, from its parody in \"Thesmophoriazusae\" in 411 BC.). References in Euripides' plays to contemporary events provide a terminus a quo, though sometimes the references might even precede a datable event (e.g. lines 1074\u201389 in \"Ion\" describe a procession to Eleusis, which was probably written before the Spartans occupied it during the Peloponnesian War). Other indications of dating are obtained by stylometry.\nGreek tragedy comprised lyric and dialogue, the latter mostly in iambic trimeter (three pairs of iambic feet per line). Euripides sometimes 'resolved' the two syllables of the iamb (\u02d8\u00af) into three syllables (\u02d8\u02d8\u02d8), and this tendency increased so steadily over time that the number of resolved feet in a play can indicate an approximate date of composition (see Extant plays below for one scholar's list of resolutions per hundred trimeters). Associated with this increase in resolutions was an increasing vocabulary, often involving prefixes to refine meanings, allowing the language to assume a more natural rhythm, while also becoming ever more capable of psychological and philosophical subtlety.\nThe trochaic tetrameter catalectic\u2014four pairs of trochees per line, with the final syllable omitted\u2014was identified by Aristotle as the original meter of tragic dialogue (\"Poetics\" 1449a21). Euripides employs it here and there in his later plays, but seems not to have used it in his early plays at all, with \"The Trojan Women\" being the earliest appearance of it in an extant play\u2014it is symptomatic of an archaizing tendency in his later works.\nThe later plays also feature extensive use of stichomythia (i.e. a series of one-liners). The longest such scene comprises one hundred and five lines in \"Ion\" (lines 264\u2013369). In contrast, Aeschylus never exceeded twenty lines of stichomythia; Sophocles' longest such scene was fifty lines, and that is interrupted several times by \u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03b9\u03bb\u03b1\u03b2\u03ae (\"Electra\", lines 1176\u20131226).\nEuripides' use of lyrics in sung parts shows the influence of Timotheus of Miletus in the later plays\u2014the individual singer gained prominence, and was given additional scope to demonstrate his virtuosity in lyrical duets, as well as replacing some of the chorus's functions with monodies. At the same time, choral odes began to take on something of the form of dithyrambs reminiscent of the poetry of Bacchylides, featuring elaborate treatment of myths. Sometimes these later choral odes seem to have only a tenuous connection with the plot, linked to the action only in their mood. The \"Bacchae\", however, shows a reversion to old forms, possibly as a deliberate archaic effect, or because there were no virtuoso choristers in Macedonia (where it is said to have been written).\nExtant plays.\nKey:\nDate indicates date of first production.\nPrize indicates a place known to have been awarded in festival competition.\nLineage: S denotes plays surviving from a 'Select' or 'School' edition, A plays surviving from an 'Alphabetical' edition\u2014see Transmission above for details.\nResolutions: Number of resolved feet per 100 trimeters, Ceadel's list\u2014see Chronology above for details.\nGenre: Generic orientation (see 'Transmission' section) with additional notes in brackets.\nLost and fragmentary plays.\nThe following plays have come down to us in fragmentary form, if at all. They are known through quotations in other works (sometimes as little as a single line); pieces of papyrus; partial copies in manuscript; part of a collection of hypotheses (or summaries); and through being parodied in the works of Aristophanes. Some of the fragments, such as those of \"Hypsipyle\", are extensive enough to allow tentative reconstructions to be proposed.\nA two-volume selection from the fragments, with facing-page translation, introductions, and notes, was published by Collard, Cropp, Lee, and Gibert; as were two Loeb Classical Library volumes derived from them; and there are critical studies in T. B. L. Webster's older \"The Tragedies of Euripides\", based on what were then believed to be the most likely reconstructions of the plays.\nThe following lost and fragmentary plays can be dated, and are arranged in roughly chronological order:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe following lost and fragmentary plays are of uncertain date, and are arranged in English alphabetical order.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9809", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9809", "title": "Electromagnetic force", "text": ""}
{"id": "9810", "revid": "19168177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9810", "title": "Emily Bront\u00eb", "text": "English novelist and poet (1818\u20131848)\nEmily Jane Bront\u00eb (, ; 30 July 1818 \u2013 19 December 1848) was an English novelist and poet who is best known for her only novel, \"Wuthering Heights\", now considered a classic of English literature. She also published a book of poetry with her sisters Charlotte and Anne titled \"Poems by Currer, Ellis and Acton Bell\" with her own poems finding regard as poetic genius. Emily was the second-youngest of the four surviving Bront\u00eb siblings, between the youngest Anne and her brother Branwell. She published under the pen name Ellis Bell.\nEarly life.\nEmily Bront\u00eb was born on 30 July 1818 to Maria Branwell and an Irish father, Patrick Bront\u00eb. The family was living on Market Street in the village of Thornton on the outskirts of Bradford, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, England. Emily was the second youngest of six siblings, preceded by Maria, Elizabeth, Charlotte and Branwell. In 1820, Emily's younger sister Anne, the last Bront\u00eb child, was born. Shortly thereafter, the family moved eight miles away to Haworth, where Patrick was employed as perpetual curate. In Haworth, the children would have opportunities to develop their literary talents.\nWhen Emily was only three, and all six children under the age of eight, she and her siblings lost their mother, Maria, to cancer on 15 September 1821. The younger children were to be cared for by Elizabeth Branwell, their aunt and Maria's sister.\nEmily's three elder sisters, Maria, Elizabeth, and Charlotte, were sent to the Clergy Daughters' School at Cowan Bridge. At the age of six, on 25 November 1824, Emily joined her sisters at school for a brief period. At school, however, the children suffered abuse and privations, and when a typhoid epidemic swept the school, Maria and Elizabeth became ill. Maria, who may actually have had tuberculosis, was sent home, where she died. Elizabeth died shortly after.\nThe four youngest Bront\u00eb children, all under ten years of age, had suffered the loss of the three eldest women in their immediate family.\nCharlotte maintained that the school's poor conditions permanently affected her health and physical development and that it had hastened the deaths of Maria (born 1814) and Elizabeth (born 1815), who both died in 1825. After the deaths of his older daughters, Patrick removed Charlotte and Emily from the school. Charlotte would use her experiences and knowledge of the school as the basis for Lowood School in \"Jane Eyre\".\nThe three remaining sisters and their brother Branwell were thereafter educated at home by their father and aunt Elizabeth Branwell. A shy girl, Emily was very close to her siblings and was known as a great animal lover, especially for befriending stray dogs she found wandering around the countryside. Despite the lack of formal education, Emily and her siblings had access to a wide range of published material; favourites included Sir Walter Scott, Byron, Shelley, and \"Blackwood's Magazine\".\nInspired by a box of toy soldiers Branwell had received as a gift, the children began to write stories, which they set in a number of invented imaginary worlds populated by their soldiers as well as their heroes, the Duke of Wellington and his sons, Charles and Arthur Wellesley. Little of Emily's work from this period survives, except for poems spoken by characters. Initially, all four children shared in creating stories about a world called Angria.\nHowever, when Emily was 13, she and Anne withdrew from participation in the Angria story and began a new one about Gondal, a fictional island whose myths and legends were to preoccupy the two sisters throughout their lives. With the exception of their Gondal poems and Anne's lists of Gondal's characters and place-names, Emily and Anne's Gondal writings were largely not preserved. Among those that did survive are some \"diary papers,\" written by Emily in her twenties, which describe current events in Gondal. The heroes of Gondal tended to resemble the popular image of the Scottish Highlander, a sort of British version of the \"noble savage\": romantic outlaws capable of more nobility, passion, and bravery than the denizens of \"civilization\". Similar themes of romanticism and noble savagery are apparent across the Bront\u00ebs' juvenilia, notably in Branwell's \"The Life of Alexander Percy\", which tells the story of an all-consuming, death-defying, and ultimately self-destructive love and is generally considered an inspiration for \"Wuthering Heights\".\nAt seventeen, Emily began to attend the Roe Head Girls' School, where Charlotte was a teacher, but suffered from extreme homesickness and left after only a few months. Charlotte wrote later that \"Liberty was the breath of Emily's nostrils; without it, she perished. The change from her own home to a school and from her own very noiseless, very secluded but unrestricted and unartificial mode of life, to one of disciplined routine (though under the kindest auspices), was what she failed in enduring... I felt in my heart she would die if she did not go home, and with this conviction obtained her recall.\" Emily returned home and Anne took her place. At this time, the girls' objective was to obtain sufficient education to open a small school of their own.\nAdulthood.\nEmily became a teacher at Law Hill School in Halifax beginning in September 1838, when she was twenty. Her always fragile health soon broke under the stress of the 17-hour work day and she returned home in April 1839. Thereafter she remained at home, doing most of the cooking, ironing, and cleaning at Haworth. She taught herself German out of books and also practised the piano.\nIn 1842, Emily accompanied Charlotte to the H\u00e9ger Pensionnat in Brussels, Belgium, where they attended the girls' academy run by Constantin H\u00e9ger in the hope of perfecting their French and German before opening their school. Unlike Charlotte, Emily was uncomfortable in Brussels, and refused to adopt Belgian fashions, saying \"I wish to be as God made me\", which rendered her something of an outcast. Nine of Emily's French essays survive from this period. H\u00e9ger seems to have been impressed with the strength of Emily's character, writing that:\nShe should have been a man \u2013 a great navigator. Her powerful reason would have deduced new spheres of discovery from the knowledge of the old; and her strong imperious will would never have been daunted by opposition or difficulty, never have given way but with life. She had a head for logic, and a capability of argument unusual in a man and rarer indeed in a woman... impairing this gift was her stubborn tenacity of will which rendered her obtuse to all reasoning where her own wishes, or her own sense of right, was concerned.\nThe two sisters were committed to their studies and by the end of the term had become so competent in French that Madame H\u00e9ger proposed that they both stay another half-year, even, according to Charlotte, offering to dismiss the English master so that she could take his place. Emily had, by this time, become a competent pianist and teacher and it was suggested that she might stay on to teach music. However, the illness and death of their aunt drove them to return to their father and Haworth. In 1844, the sisters attempted to open a school in their house, but their plans were stymied by an inability to attract students to the remote area.\nIn 1844, Emily began going through all the poems she had written, recopying them neatly into two notebooks. One was labelled \"Gondal Poems\"; the other was unlabelled. Scholars such as Fannie Ratchford and Derek Roper have attempted to piece together a Gondal storyline and chronology from these poems.\nIn the autumn of 1845, Charlotte discovered the notebooks and insisted that the poems be published. Emily, furious at the invasion of her privacy, at first refused but relented when Anne brought out her own manuscripts and revealed to Charlotte that she had been writing poems in secret as well. As co-authors of Gondal stories, Anne and Emily were accustomed to read their Gondal stories and poems to each other, while Charlotte was excluded from their privacy. Around this time Emily had written one of her most famous poems \"No coward soul is mine\", probably as an answer to the violation of her privacy and her own transformation into a published writer. Despite Charlotte's later claim, it was not her last poem.\nIn 1846, the sisters' poems were published in one volume as \"Poems by Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell\". The Bront\u00eb sisters had adopted pseudonyms for publication, preserving their initials: Charlotte was \"Currer Bell\", Emily was \"Ellis Bell\" and Anne was \"Acton Bell\". Charlotte wrote in the 'Biographical Notice of Ellis and Acton Bell' that their \"ambiguous choice\" was \"dictated by a sort of conscientious scruple at assuming Christian names positively masculine, while we did not like to declare ourselves women, because... we had a vague impression that authoresses are liable to be looked on with prejudice\". Charlotte contributed 19 poems, and Emily and Anne each contributed 21. Although the sisters were told several months after publication that only two copies had sold, they were not discouraged (of their two readers, one was impressed enough to request their autographs). \"The Athenaeum\" reviewer praised Ellis Bell's work for its music and power, singling out his poems as the best: \"Ellis possesses a fine, quaint spirit and an evident power of wing that may reach heights not here attempted\", and \"The Critic\" reviewer recognised \"the presence of more genius than it was supposed this utilitarian age had devoted to the loftier exercises of the intellect.\"\nPersonality and character.\nEmily Bront\u00eb's solitary and reclusive nature has made her a mysterious figure and a challenge for biographers to assess. Except for Ellen Nussey and Louise de Bassompierre, Emily's fellow student in Brussels, she does not seem to have made any friends outside her family. Her closest friend was her sister Anne. Together they shared their own fantasy world, Gondal, and, according to Ellen Nussey, in childhood they were \"like twins\", \"inseparable companions\" and \"in the very closest sympathy which never had any interruption\". In 1845 Anne took Emily to visit some of the places she had come to know and love in the five years she spent as governess. A plan to visit Scarborough fell through and instead the sisters went to York where Anne showed Emily York Minster. During the trip the sisters acted out some of their Gondal characters.\nCharlotte Bront\u00eb remains the primary source of information about Emily, although as an elder sister, writing publicly about her only shortly after her death, she is considered by certain scholars not to be a neutral witness. Stevie Davies believes that there is what might be called Charlotte's smoke-screen and argues that Emily evidently shocked her, to the point where she may even have doubted her sister's sanity. After Emily's death, Charlotte rewrote her character, history and even poems on a more acceptable (to her and the bourgeois reading public) model. Biographer Claire O'Callaghan suggests that the trajectory of Bront\u00eb's legacy was altered significantly by Elizabeth Gaskell\u2019s biography of Charlotte, concerning not only because Gaskell did not visit Haworth until after Emily\u2019s death, but also because Gaskell admits to disliking what she did know of Emily in her biography of Charlotte. As O'Callaghan and others have noted, Charlotte was Gaskell's primary source of information on Emily's life and may have exaggerated or fabricated Emily\u2019s frailty and shyness to cast herself in the role of maternal saviour.\nCharlotte presented Emily as someone whose \"natural\" love of the beauties of nature had become somewhat exaggerated owing to her shy nature, portraying her as too fond of the Yorkshire moors, and homesick whenever she was away. According to Lucasta Miller, in her analysis of Bront\u00eb biographies, \"Charlotte took on the role of Emily's first mythographer.\" In the \"Preface\" to the Second Edition of \"Wuthering Heights\", in 1850, Charlotte wrote:\nMy sister's disposition was not naturally gregarious; circumstances favoured and fostered her tendency to seclusion; except to go to church or take a walk on the hills, she rarely crossed the threshold of home. Though her feeling for the people round was benevolent, intercourse with them she never sought; nor, with very few exceptions, ever experienced. And yet she knew them: knew their ways, their language, their family histories; she could hear of them with interest, and talk of them with detail, minute, graphic, and accurate; but WITH them, she rarely exchanged a word.\nEmily's unsociability and extremely shy nature have subsequently been reported many times. According to Norma Crandall, her \"warm, human aspect\" was \"usually revealed only in her love of nature and of animals\". In a similar description, \"Literary news\" (1883) states: \"[Emily] loved the solemn moors, she loved all wild, free creatures and things\", and critics attest that her love of the moors is manifest in \"Wuthering Heights\". Over the years, Emily's love of nature has been the subject of many anecdotes. A newspaper dated 31 December 1899, gives the folksy account that \"with bird and beast [Emily] had the most intimate relations, and from her walks she often came with fledgling or young rabbit in hand, talking softly to it, quite sure, too, that it understood\". Elizabeth Gaskell, in her biography of Charlotte, told the story of Emily's punishing her pet dog Keeper for lying \"on the delicate white counterpane\" that covered one of the beds in the Parsonage. According to Gaskell, she struck him with her fists until he was \"half-blind\" with his eyes \"swelled up\". This story is apocryphal, and contradicts the following account of Emily's and Keeper's relationship:\nPoor old Keeper, Emily's faithful friend and worshipper, seemed to understand her like a human being. One evening, when the four friends were sitting closely round the fire in the sitting-room, Keeper forced himself in between Charlotte and Emily and mounted himself on Emily\u2019s lap; finding the space too limited for his comfort he pressed himself forward on to the guest\u2019s knees, making himself quite comfortable. Emily\u2019s heart was won by the unresisting endurance of the visitor, little guessing that she herself, being in close contact, was the inspiring cause of submission to Keeper\u2019s preference. Sometimes Emily would delight in showing off Keeper\u2014make him frantic in action, and roar with the voice of a lion. It was a terrifying exhibition within the walls of an ordinary sitting-room. Keeper was a solemn mourner at Emily\u2019s funeral and never recovered his cheerfulness.\nIn \"Queens of Literature of the Victorian Era\" (1886), Eva Hope summarises Emily's character as \"a peculiar mixture of timidity and Spartan-like courage\", and goes on to say, \"She was painfully shy, but physically she was brave to a surprising degree. She loved few persons, but those few with a passion of self-sacrificing tenderness and devotion. To other people's failings she was understanding and forgiving, but over herself she kept a continual and most austere watch, never allowing herself to deviate for one instant from what she considered her duty.\"\nEmily Bront\u00eb has often been characterised as a devout if somewhat unorthodox Christian, a heretic and a visionary \"mystic of the moors\".\n\"Wuthering Heights\".\nEmily Bront\u00eb's \"Wuthering Heights\" was first published in London in 1847 by Thomas Cautley Newby, appearing as the first two volumes of a three-volume set that included Anne Bront\u00eb's \"Agnes Grey\". The authors were printed as being Ellis and Acton Bell; Emily's real name did not appear until 1850, when it was printed on the title page of an edited commercial edition. The novel's innovative structure somewhat puzzled critics.\n\"Wuthering Heights\"'s violence and passion led the Victorian public and many early reviewers to think that it had been written by a man. According to Juliet Gardiner, \"the vivid sexual passion and power of its language and imagery impressed, bewildered and appalled reviewers.\" Literary critic Thomas Joudrey further contextualizes this reaction: \"Expecting in the wake of Charlotte Bront\u00eb's \"Jane Eyre\" to be swept up in an earnest Bildungsroman, they were instead shocked and confounded by a tale of unchecked primal passions, replete with savage cruelty and outright barbarism.\" Even though the novel received mixed reviews when it first came out, and was often condemned for its portrayal of amoral passion, the book subsequently became an English literary classic. Emily Bront\u00eb never knew the extent of fame she achieved with her only novel, as she died a year after its publication, aged 30.\nAlthough a letter from her publisher indicates that Emily had begun to write a second novel, the manuscript has never been found. Perhaps Emily or a member of her family eventually destroyed the manuscript, if it existed, when she was prevented by illness from completing it. It has also been suggested that, though less likely, the letter could have been intended for Anne Bront\u00eb, who was already writing \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\", her second novel.\nDeath.\nEmily's health was probably weakened by the harsh local climate and by unsanitary conditions at home, where water was contaminated by run off from the church's graveyard. Branwell died suddenly, on Sunday, 24 September 1848. At his funeral service, a week later, Emily caught a severe cold that quickly developed into inflammation of the lungs and led to tuberculosis. Though her condition worsened steadily, she rejected medical help and all offered remedies, saying that she would have \"no poisoning doctor\" near her. On the morning of 19 December 1848, Charlotte, fearing for her sister, wrote:\nShe grows daily weaker. The physician's opinion was expressed too obscurely to be of use \u2013 he sent some medicine which she would not take. Moments so dark as these I have never known \u2013 I pray for God's support to us all.\nAt noon, Emily was worse; she could only whisper in gasps. With her last audible words she said to Charlotte, \"If you will send for a doctor, I will see him now\", but it was too late. She died that same day at about two in the afternoon. According to Mary Robinson, an early biographer of Emily, it happened while she was sitting on the sofa. However, Charlotte's letter to William Smith Williams where she mentions Emily's dog, Keeper, lying at the side of her dying-bed, makes this statement seem unlikely.\nIt was less than three months after Branwell's death, which led Martha Brown, a housemaid, to declare that \"Miss Emily died of a broken heart for love of her brother\". Emily had grown so thin that her coffin measured only 16 inches (40 centimeters) wide. The carpenter said he had never made a narrower one for an adult. Her mortal remains were interred in the family vault in St Michael and All Angels' Church, Haworth.\nLegacy.\nThe English folk group The Unthanks released \"Lines\", a trilogy of short albums, which includes settings of Bront\u00eb's poems to music and was recorded at the Bront\u00ebs' parsonage home, using their own Regency era piano, played by Adrian McNally.\nIn the 2019 film \"How to Build a Girl\", Emily and Charlotte Bront\u00eb are among the historical figures in Johanna's wall collage.\nIn May 2021, the contents of the Honresfield library, a collection of rare books and manuscripts first assembled by Rochdale mill owners Alfred and William Law, re-emerged after being out of public view for nearly a century. In the collection were handwritten poems by Emily Bront\u00eb, as well as the Bront\u00eb family edition of Bewick's 'History of British Birds.' The collection was to be auctioned off at Sotheby's and was estimated to sell for \u00a31\u00a0million.\nThe 1946 film \"Devotion\" was a highly fictionalized account of the lives of the Bront\u00eb sisters.\nIn the 2022 film \"Emily\", written and directed by Frances O'Connor, Emma Mackey plays Emily before the publication of \"Wuthering Heights\". The film mixes known biographical details with imagined situations and relationships.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9811", "revid": "42818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9811", "title": "Exchange particle", "text": ""}
{"id": "9813", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9813", "title": "Extinction event", "text": "Widespread and rapid decrease in the biodiversity on Earth\n &lt;imagemap&gt;\nImage:Extinction intensity.svg\nMarine extinction intensity during the Phanerozoic\nMillions of years ago\nK\u2013Pg\nTr\u2013J\nP\u2013Tr\nCap\nLate D\nO\u2013S\n&lt;imagemap&gt;\nImage:Extinction intensity.svg\n The blue graph shows the apparent \"percentage\" (not the absolute number) of marine animal genera becoming extinct during any given time interval. It does not represent all marine species, just those that are readily fossilized. The labels of the traditional \"Big Five\" extinction events and the more recently recognised Capitanian mass extinction event are clickable links. The two extinction events occurring in the Cambrian (far left) are very large in percentage magnitude, but small in absolute numbers of known taxa due to the relative scarcity of fossil-producing life at that time. \"()\"\nAn extinction event (also known as a mass extinction or biotic crisis) is a widespread and rapid decrease in the biodiversity on Earth. Such an event is identified by a sharp change in the diversity and abundance of multicellular organisms. It occurs when the rate of extinction increases with respect to the background extinction rate and the rate of speciation. Estimates of the number of major mass extinctions in the last 540 million years range from as few as five to more than twenty. These differences stem from disagreement as to what constitutes a \"major\" extinction event, and the data chosen to measure past diversity.\nThe \"Big Five\" mass extinctions.\nIn a landmark paper published in 1982, Jack Sepkoski and David M. Raup identified five particular geological intervals with excessive diversity loss. They were originally identified as outliers on a general trend of decreasing extinction rates during the Phanerozoic, but as more stringent statistical tests have been applied to the accumulating data, it has been established that multicellular animal life has experienced at least five major and many minor mass extinctions. The \"Big Five\" cannot be so clearly defined, but rather appear to represent the largest (or some of the largest) of a relatively smooth continuum of extinction events. An earlier (first) event at the end of the Ediacaran is speculated.\nDespite the popularization of these five events, there is no definite line separating them from other extinction events; using different methods of calculating an extinction's impact can lead to other events featuring in the top five.\nOlder fossil records are more difficult to interpret. This is because:\nIt has been suggested that the apparent variations in marine biodiversity may actually be an artifact, with abundance estimates directly related to quantity of rock available for sampling from different time periods. However, statistical analysis shows that this can only account for 50% of the observed pattern, and other evidence such as fungal spikes (geologically rapid increase in fungal abundance) provides reassurance that most widely accepted extinction events are real. A quantification of the rock exposure of Western Europe indicates that many of the minor events for which a biological explanation has been sought are most readily explained by sampling bias.\nSixth mass extinction.\nResearch completed after the seminal 1982 paper (Sepkoski and Raup) has concluded that a sixth mass extinction event is ongoing due to human activities:\nExtinctions by severity.\nExtinction events can be tracked by several methods, including geological change, ecological impact, extinction vs. origination (speciation) rates, and most commonly diversity loss among taxonomic units. Most early papers used families as the unit of taxonomy, based on compendiums of marine animal families by Sepkoski (1982, 1992). Later papers by Sepkoski and other authors switched to genera, which are more precise than families and less prone to taxonomic bias or incomplete sampling relative to species. These are several major papers estimating loss or ecological impact from fifteen commonly-discussed extinction events. Different methods used by these papers are described in the following section. The \"Big Five\" mass extinctions are bolded.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;a Graphed but not discussed by Sepkoski (1996), considered continuous with the Late Devonian mass extinction&lt;br&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;b At the time considered continuous with the end-Permian mass extinction&lt;br&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;c Includes late Norian time slices&lt;br&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;d Diversity loss of both pulses calculated together&lt;br&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;e Pulses extend over adjacent time slices, calculated separately&lt;br&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;f Considered ecologically significant, but not analyzed directly&lt;br&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;g Excluded due to a lack of consensus on Late Triassic chronology\nThe study of major extinction events.\nBreakthrough studies in the 1980s\u20131990s.\nFor much of the 20th century, the study of mass extinctions was hampered by insufficient data. Mass extinctions, though acknowledged, were considered mysterious exceptions to the prevailing gradualistic view of prehistory, where slow evolutionary trends define faunal changes. The first breakthrough was published in 1980 by a team led by Luis Alvarez, who discovered trace metal evidence for an asteroid impact at the end of the Cretaceous period. The Alvarez hypothesis for the end-Cretaceous extinction gave mass extinctions, and catastrophic explanations, newfound popular and scientific attention.\nAnother landmark study came in 1982, when a paper written by David M. Raup and Jack Sepkoski was published in the journal \"Science\". This paper, originating from a compendium of extinct marine animal families developed by Sepkoski, identified five peaks of marine family extinctions which stand out among a backdrop of decreasing extinction rates through time. Four of these peaks were statistically significant: the Ashgillian (end-Ordovician), Late Permian, Norian (end-Triassic), and Maastrichtian (end-Cretaceous). The remaining peak was a broad interval of high extinction smeared over the later half of the Devonian, with its apex in the Frasnian stage.\nThrough the 1980s, Raup and Sepkoski continued to elaborate and build upon their extinction and origination data, defining a high-resolution biodiversity curve (the \"Sepkoski curve\") and successive evolutionary faunas with their own patterns of diversification and extinction. Though these interpretations formed a strong basis for subsequent studies of mass extinctions, Raup and Sepkoski also proposed a more controversial idea in 1984: a 26-million-year periodic pattern to mass extinctions. Two teams of astronomers linked this to a hypothetical brown dwarf in the distant reaches of the solar system, inventing the \u201cNemesis hypothesis\u201d which has been strongly disputed by other astronomers.\nAround the same time, Sepkoski began to devise a compendium of marine animal genera, which would allow researchers to explore extinction at a finer taxonomic resolution. He began to publish preliminary results of this in-progress study as early as 1986, in a paper which identified 29 extinction intervals of note. By 1992, he also updated his 1982 family compendium, finding minimal changes to the diversity curve despite a decade of new data. In 1996, Sepkoski published another paper which tracked marine genera extinction (in terms of net diversity loss) by stage, similar to his previous work on family extinctions. The paper filtered its sample in three ways: all genera (the entire unfiltered sample size), multiple-interval genera (only those found in more than one stage), and \u201cwell-preserved\u201d genera (excluding those from groups with poor or understudied fossil records). Diversity trends in marine animal families were also revised based on his 1992 update.\nRevived interest in mass extinctions led many other authors to re-evaluate geological events in the context of their effects on life. A 1995 paper by Michael Benton tracked extinction and origination rates among both marine and continental (freshwater &amp; terrestrial) families, identifying 22 extinction intervals and no periodic pattern. Overview books by O.H. Wallister (1996) and A. Hallam and P.B. Wignall (1997) summarized the new extinction research of the previous two decades. One chapter in the former source lists over 60 geological events which could conceivably be considered global extinctions of varying sizes. These texts, and other widely circulated publications in the 1990s, helped to establish the popular image of mass extinctions as a \u201cbig five\u201d alongside many smaller extinctions through prehistory.\nNew data on genera: Sepkoski's compendium.\nThough Sepkoski passed away in 1999, his marine genera compendium was formally published in 2002. This prompted a new wave of studies into the dynamics of mass extinctions. These papers utilized the compendium to track origination rates (the rate that new species appear or speciate) parallel to extinction rates in the context of geological stages or substages. A review and re-analysis of Sepkoski\u2019s data by Bambach (2006) identified 18 distinct mass extinction intervals, including 4 large extinctions in the Cambrian. These fit Sepkoski\u2019s definition of extinction, as short substages with large diversity loss and overall high extinction rates relative to their surroundings.\nBambach et al. (2004) considered each of the \u201cBig Five\u201d extinction intervals to have a different pattern in the relationship between origination and extinction trends. Moreover, background extinction rates were broadly variable and could be separated into more severe and less severe time intervals. Background extinctions were least severe relative to the origination rate in the middle Ordovician-early Silurian, late Carboniferous-Permian, and Jurassic-recent. This argues that the Late Ordovician, end-Permian, and end-Cretaceous extinctions were statistically significant outliers in biodiversity trends, while the Late Devonian and end-Triassic extinctions occurred in time periods which were already stressed by relatively high extinction and low origination.\nComputer models run by Foote (2005) determined that abrupt pulses of extinction fit the pattern of prehistoric biodiversity much better than a gradual and continuous background extinction rate with smooth peaks and troughs. This strongly supports the utility of rapid, frequent mass extinctions as a major driver of diversity changes. Pulsed origination events are also supported, though to a lesser degree which is largely dependent on pulsed extinctions.\nSimilarly, Stanley (2007) used extinction and origination data to investigate turnover rates and extinction responses among different evolutionary faunas and taxonomic groups. In contrast to previous authors, his diversity simulations show support for an overall exponential rate of biodiversity growth through the entire Phanerozoic.\nTackling biases in the fossil record.\nAs data continued to accumulate, some authors began to re-evaluate Sepkoski\u2019s sample using methods meant to account for sampling biases. As early as 1982, a paper by Phillip W. Signor and Jere H. Lipps noted that the true sharpness of extinctions was diluted by the incompleteness of the fossil record. This phenomenon, later called the Signor-Lipps effect, notes that a species\u2019 true extinction must occur after its last fossil, and that origination must occur before its first fossil. Thus, species which appear to die out just prior to an abrupt extinction event may instead be a victim of the event, despite an apparent gradual decline looking at the fossil record alone. A model by Foote (2007) found that many geological stages had artificially inflated extinction rates due to Signor-Lipps \u201cbacksmearing\u201d from later stages with extinction events.\nOther biases include the difficulty in assessing taxa with high turnover rates or restricted occurrences, which cannot be directly assessed due to a lack of fine-scale temporal resolution. Many paleontologists opt to assess diversity trends by randomized sampling and rarefaction of fossil abundances rather than raw temporal range data, in order to account for all of these biases. But that solution is influenced by biases related to sample size. One major bias in particular is the \u201cPull of the recent\u201d, the fact that the fossil record (and thus known diversity) generally improves closer to the modern day. This means that biodiversity and abundance for older geological periods may be underestimated from raw data alone.\nAlroy (2010) attempted to circumvene sample size-related biases in diversity estimates using a method he called \u201cshareholder quorum subsampling\u201d (SQS). In this method, fossils are sampled from a \"collection\" (such as a time interval) to assess the relative diversity of that collection. Every time a new species (or other taxon) enters the sample, it brings over all other fossils belonging to that species in the collection (its \u201cshare\u201d of the collection). For example, a skewed collection with half its fossils from one species will immediately reach a sample share of 50% if that species is the first to be sampled. This continues, adding up the sample shares until a \u201ccoverage\u201d or \u201cquorum\u201d is reached, referring to a pre-set desired sum of share percentages. At that point, the number of species in the sample are counted. A collection with more species is expected to reach a sample quorum with more species, thus accurately comparing the relative diversity change between two collections without relying on the biases inherent to sample size.\nAlroy also elaborated on three-timer algorithms, which are meant to counteract biases in estimates of extinction and origination rates. A given taxon is a \u201cthree-timer\u201d if it can be found before, after, and within a given time interval, and a \u201ctwo-timer\u201d if it overlaps with a time interval on one side. Counting \u201cthree-timers\u201d and \u201ctwo-timers\u201d on either end of a time interval, and sampling time intervals in sequence, can together be combined into equations to predict extinction and origination with less bias. In subsequent papers, Alroy continued to refine his equations to improve lingering issues with precision and unusual samples.\nMcGhee et al. (2013), a paper which primarily focused on ecological effects of mass extinctions, also published new estimates of extinction severity based on Alroy\u2019s methods. Many extinctions were significantly more impactful under these new estimates, though some were less prominent.\nStanley (2016) was another paper which attempted to remove two common errors in previous estimates of extinction severity. The first error was the unjustified removal of \u201csingletons\u201d, genera unique to only a single time slice. Their removal would mask the influence of groups with high turnover rates or lineages cut short early in their diversification. The second error was the difficulty in distinguishing background extinctions from brief mass extinction events within the same short time interval. To circumvent this issue, background rates of diversity change (extinction/origination) were estimated for stages or substages without mass extinctions, and then assumed to apply to subsequent stages with mass extinctions. For example, the Santonian and Campanian stages were each used to estimate diversity changes in the Maastrichtian prior to the K-Pg mass extinction. Subtracting background extinctions from extinction tallies had the effect of reducing the estimated severity of the six sampled mass extinction events. This effect was stronger for mass extinctions which occurred in periods with high rates of background extinction, like the Devonian.\nUncertainty in the Proterozoic and earlier eons.\nBecause most diversity and biomass on Earth is microbial, and thus difficult to measure via fossils, extinction events placed on-record are those that affect the easily observed, biologically complex component of the biosphere rather than the total diversity and abundance of life. For this reason, well-documented extinction events are confined to the Phanerozoic eon, before which all living organisms were either microbial or at most soft-bodied; the sole exception is the Great Oxidation Event in the Proterozoic. Perhaps due to the absence of a robust microbial fossil record, mass extinctions \"seem\" mainly to be a Phanerozoic phenomenon, with apparent extinction rates being low before large complex organisms arose.\nExtinction occurs at an uneven rate. Based on the fossil record, the background rate of extinctions on Earth is about two to five taxonomic families of marine animals every million years. Marine fossils are mostly used to measure extinction rates because of their superior fossil record and stratigraphic range compared to land animals.\nThe Great Oxidation Event, which occurred around 2.45\u00a0billion years ago in the Paleoproterozoic, was probably the first major extinction event. Since the Cambrian explosion, five further major mass extinctions have significantly exceeded the background extinction rate. The most recent and best-known, the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, which occurred approximately \u00a0Ma (million years ago), was a large-scale mass extinction of animal and plant species in a geologically short period of time. In addition to the five major Phanerozoic mass extinctions, there are numerous minor ones as well, and the ongoing mass extinction caused by human activity is sometimes called the sixth extinction.\nEvolutionary importance.\nMass extinctions have sometimes accelerated the evolution of life on Earth. When dominance of particular ecological niches passes from one group of organisms to another, it is rarely because the newly dominant group is \"superior\" to the old but usually because an extinction event eliminates the old, dominant group and makes way for the new one, a process known as adaptive radiation.\nFor example, mammaliaformes (\"almost mammals\") and then mammals existed throughout the reign of the dinosaurs, but could not compete in the large terrestrial vertebrate niches that dinosaurs monopolized. The end-Cretaceous mass extinction removed the non-avian dinosaurs and made it possible for mammals to expand into the large terrestrial vertebrate niches. The dinosaurs themselves had been beneficiaries of a previous mass extinction, the end-Triassic, which eliminated most of their chief rivals, the crurotarsans.\nAnother point of view put forward in the Escalation hypothesis predicts that species in ecological niches with more organism-to-organism conflict will be less likely to survive extinctions. This is because the very traits that keep a species numerous and viable under fairly static conditions become a burden once population levels fall among competing organisms during the dynamics of an extinction event.\nFurthermore, many groups that survive mass extinctions do not recover in numbers or diversity, and many of these go into long-term decline, and these are often referred to as \"Dead Clades Walking\".\nHowever, clades that survive for a considerable period of time after a mass extinction, and which were reduced to only a few species, are likely to have experienced a rebound effect called the \"push of the past\".\nDarwin was firmly of the opinion that biotic interactions, such as competition for food and space \u2013 the \u2018struggle for existence\u2019 \u2013 were of considerably greater importance in promoting evolution and extinction than changes in the physical environment. He expressed this in \"The Origin of Species\":\n \"Species are produced and exterminated by slowly acting causes ... and the most import of all causes of organic change is one which is almost independent of altered ... physical conditions, namely the mutual relation of organism to organism \u2013 the improvement of one organism entailing the improvement or extermination of others\".\nPatterns in frequency.\nVarious authors have suggested that extinction events occurred periodically, every 26 to 30\u00a0million years, or that diversity fluctuates episodically about every 62 million years. Various ideas, mostly regarding astronomical influences, attempt to explain the supposed pattern, including the presence of a hypothetical companion star to the Sun, oscillations in the galactic plane, or passage through the Milky Way's spiral arms. However, other authors have concluded that the data on marine mass extinctions do not fit with the idea that mass extinctions are periodic, or that ecosystems gradually build up to a point at which a mass extinction is inevitable. Many of the proposed correlations have been argued to be spurious or lacking statistical significance. Others have argued that there is strong evidence supporting periodicity in a variety of records, and additional evidence in the form of coincident periodic variation in nonbiological geochemical variables such as Strontium isotopes, flood basalts, anoxic events, orogenies, and evaporite deposition. One explanation for this proposed cycle is carbon storage and release by oceanic crust, which exchanges carbon between the atmosphere and mantle.\nAll genera\n\"Well-defined\" genera\nTrend line\n\"Big Five\" mass extinctions\nOther mass extinctions\nMillion years ago\nThousands of genera\nPhanerozoic biodiversity as shown by the fossil record\nMass extinctions are thought to result when a long-term stress is compounded by a short-term shock. Over the course of the Phanerozoic, individual taxa appear to have become less likely to suffer extinction, which may reflect more robust food webs, as well as fewer extinction-prone species, and other factors such as continental distribution. However, even after accounting for sampling bias, there does appear to be a gradual decrease in extinction and origination rates during the Phanerozoic. This may represent the fact that groups with higher turnover rates are more likely to become extinct by chance; or it may be an artefact of taxonomy: families tend to become more speciose, therefore less prone to extinction, over time; and larger taxonomic groups (by definition) appear earlier in geological time.\nIt has also been suggested that the oceans have gradually become more hospitable to life over the last 500 million years, and thus less vulnerable to mass extinctions,\nbut susceptibility to extinction at a taxonomic level does not appear to make mass extinctions more or less probable.\nCauses.\nThere is still debate about the causes of all mass extinctions. In general, large extinctions may result when a biosphere under long-term stress undergoes a short-term shock. An underlying mechanism appears to be present in the correlation of extinction and origination rates to diversity. High diversity leads to a persistent increase in extinction rate; low diversity to a persistent increase in origination rate. These presumably ecologically controlled relationships likely amplify smaller perturbations (asteroid impacts, etc.) to produce the global effects observed.\nIdentifying causes of specific mass extinctions.\nA good theory for a particular mass extinction should: \nIt may be necessary to consider combinations of causes. For example, the marine aspect of the end-Cretaceous extinction appears to have been caused by several processes that partially overlapped in time and may have had different levels of significance in different parts of the world.\nArens and West (2006) proposed a \"press / pulse\" model in which mass extinctions generally require two types of cause: long-term pressure on the eco-system (\"press\") and a sudden catastrophe (\"pulse\") towards the end of the period of pressure.\nTheir statistical analysis of marine extinction rates throughout the Phanerozoic suggested that neither long-term pressure alone nor a catastrophe alone was sufficient to cause a significant increase in the extinction rate.\nMost widely supported explanations.\nMacLeod (2001) summarized the relationship between mass extinctions and events that are most often cited as causes of mass extinctions, using data from Courtillot, Jaeger &amp; Yang \"et al.\" (1996), Hallam (1992) and Grieve &amp; Pesonen (1992):\nThe most commonly suggested causes of mass extinctions are listed below.\nFlood basalt events.\nThe formation of large igneous provinces by flood basalt events could have:\nFlood basalt events occur as pulses of activity punctuated by dormant periods. As a result, they are likely to cause the climate to oscillate between cooling and warming, but with an overall trend towards warming as the carbon dioxide they emit can stay in the atmosphere for hundreds of years.\nFlood basalt events have been implicated as the cause of many major extinction events. It is speculated that massive volcanism caused or contributed to the Kellwasser Event, the End-Guadalupian Extinction Event, the End-Permian Extinction Event, the Smithian-Spathian Extinction, the Triassic-Jurassic Extinction Event, the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event, the Cenomanian-Turonian Oceanic Anoxic Event, the Cretaceous-Palaeogene Extinction Event, and the Palaeocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum. The correlation between gigantic volcanic events expressed in the large igneous provinces and mass extinctions was shown for the last 260 million years. Recently such possible correlation was extended across the whole Phanerozoic Eon.\nSea-level fall.\nThese are often clearly marked by worldwide sequences of contemporaneous sediments that show all or part of a transition from sea-bed to tidal zone to beach to dry land \u2013 and where there is no evidence that the rocks in the relevant areas were raised by geological processes such as orogeny. Sea-level falls could reduce the continental shelf area (the most productive part of the oceans) sufficiently to cause a marine mass extinction, and could disrupt weather patterns enough to cause extinctions on land. But sea-level falls are very probably the result of other events, such as sustained global cooling or the sinking of the mid-ocean ridges.\nSea-level falls are associated with most of the mass extinctions, including all of the \"Big Five\"\u2014End-Ordovician, Late Devonian, End-Permian, End-Triassic, and End-Cretaceous, along with the more recently recognised Capitanian mass extinction of comparable severity to the Big Five.\nA 2008 study, published in the journal \"Nature\", established a relationship between the speed of mass extinction events and changes in sea level and sediment. The study suggests changes in ocean environments related to sea level exert a driving influence on rates of extinction, and generally determine the composition of life in the oceans.\nExtraterrestrial threats.\nImpact events.\nThe impact of a sufficiently large asteroid or comet could have caused food chains to collapse both on land and at sea by producing dust and particulate aerosols and thus inhibiting photosynthesis. Impacts on sulfur-rich rocks could have emitted sulfur oxides precipitating as poisonous acid rain, contributing further to the collapse of food chains. Such impacts could also have caused megatsunamis and/or global forest fires.\nMost paleontologists now agree that an asteroid did hit the Earth about 66\u00a0Ma, but there is lingering dispute whether the impact was the sole cause of the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. Nonetheless, in October 2019, researchers reported that the Cretaceous Chicxulub asteroid impact that resulted in the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs 66\u00a0Ma, also rapidly acidified the oceans, producing ecological collapse and long-lasting effects on the climate, and was a key reason for end-Cretaceous mass extinction.\nThe Permian-Triassic extinction event has also been hypothesised to have been caused by an asteroid impact that formed the Araguainha crater due to the estimated date of the crater's formation overlapping with the end-Permian extinction event. However, this hypothesis has been widely challenged, with the impact hypothesis being rejected by most researchers.\nAccording to the Shiva Hypothesis, the Earth is subject to increased asteroid impacts about once every 27\u00a0million years because of the Sun's passage through the plane of the Milky Way galaxy, thus causing extinction events at 27\u00a0million year intervals. Some evidence for this hypothesis has emerged in both marine and non-marine contexts. Alternatively, the Sun's passage through the higher density spiral arms of the galaxy could coincide with mass extinction on Earth, perhaps due to increased impact events. However, a reanalysis of the effects of the Sun's transit through the spiral structure based on maps of the spiral structure of the Milky Way in CO molecular line emission has failed to find a correlation.\nA nearby nova, supernova or gamma ray burst.\nA nearby gamma-ray burst (less than 6000 light-years away) would be powerful enough to destroy the Earth's ozone layer, leaving organisms vulnerable to ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. Gamma ray bursts are fairly rare, occurring only a few times in a given galaxy per million years.\nIt has been suggested that a gamma ray burst caused the End-Ordovician extinction, while a supernova has been proposed as the cause of the Hangenberg event.\nGlobal cooling.\nSustained and significant global cooling could kill many polar and temperate species and force others to migrate towards the equator; reduce the area available for tropical species; often make the Earth's climate more arid on average, mainly by locking up more of the planet's water in ice and snow. The glaciation cycles of the current ice age are believed to have had only a very mild impact on biodiversity, so the mere existence of a significant cooling is not sufficient on its own to explain a mass extinction.\nIt has been suggested that global cooling caused or contributed to the End-Ordovician, Permian\u2013Triassic, Late Devonian extinctions, and possibly others. Sustained global cooling is distinguished from the temporary climatic effects of flood basalt events or impacts.\nGlobal warming.\nThis would have the opposite effects: expand the area available for tropical species; kill temperate species or force them to migrate towards the poles; possibly cause severe extinctions of polar species; often make the Earth's climate wetter on average, mainly by melting ice and snow and thus increasing the volume of the water cycle. It might also cause anoxic events in the oceans (see below).\nGlobal warming as a cause of mass extinction is supported by several recent studies.\nThe most dramatic example of sustained warming is the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum, which was associated with one of the smaller mass extinctions. It has also been suggested to have caused the Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinction event, during which 20% of all marine families became extinct. Furthermore, the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event has been suggested to have been caused by warming.\nClathrate gun hypothesis.\nClathrates are composites in which a lattice of one substance forms a cage around another. Methane clathrates (in which water molecules are the cage) form on continental shelves. These clathrates are likely to break up rapidly and release the methane if the temperature rises quickly or the pressure on them drops quickly\u2014for example in response to sudden global warming or a sudden drop in sea level or even earthquakes. Methane is a much more powerful greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide, so a methane eruption (\"clathrate gun\") could cause rapid global warming or make it much more severe if the eruption was itself caused by global warming.\nThe most likely signature of such a methane eruption would be a sudden decrease in the ratio of carbon-13 to carbon-12 in sediments, since methane clathrates are low in carbon-13; but the change would have to be very large, as other events can also reduce the percentage of carbon-13.\nIt has been suggested that \"clathrate gun\" methane eruptions were involved in the end-Permian extinction (\"the Great Dying\") and in the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum, which was associated with one of the smaller mass extinctions.\nAnoxic events.\nAnoxic events are situations in which the middle and even the upper layers of the ocean become deficient or totally lacking in oxygen. Their causes are complex and controversial, but all known instances are associated with severe and sustained global warming, mostly caused by sustained massive volcanism.\nIt has been suggested that anoxic events caused or contributed to the Ordovician\u2013Silurian, late Devonian, Capitanian, Permian\u2013Triassic, and Triassic\u2013Jurassic extinctions, as well as a number of lesser extinctions (such as the Ireviken, Lundgreni, Mulde, Lau, Smithian-Spathian, Toarcian, and Cenomanian\u2013Turonian events). On the other hand, there are widespread black shale beds from the mid-Cretaceous that indicate anoxic events but are not associated with mass extinctions.\nThe bio-availability of essential trace elements (in particular selenium) to potentially lethal lows has been shown to coincide with, and likely have contributed to, at least three mass extinction events in the oceans, that is, at the end of the Ordovician, during the Middle and Late Devonian, and at the end of the Triassic. During periods of low oxygen concentrations very soluble selenate (Se6+) is converted into much less soluble selenide (Se2-), elemental Se and organo-selenium complexes. Bio-availability of selenium during these extinction events dropped to about 1% of the current oceanic concentration, a level that has been proven lethal to many extant organisms.\nBritish oceanologist and atmospheric scientist, Andrew Watson, explained that, while the Holocene epoch exhibits many processes reminiscent of those that have contributed to past anoxic events, full-scale ocean anoxia would take \"thousands of years to develop\".\nHydrogen sulfide emissions from the seas.\nKump, Pavlov and Arthur (2005) have proposed that during the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event the warming also upset the oceanic balance between photosynthesising plankton and deep-water sulfate-reducing bacteria, causing massive emissions of hydrogen sulfide, which poisoned life on both land and sea and severely weakened the ozone layer, exposing much of the life that still remained to fatal levels of UV radiation.\nOceanic overturn.\nOceanic overturn is a disruption of thermo-haline circulation that lets surface water (which is more saline than deep water because of evaporation) sink straight down, bringing anoxic deep water to the surface and therefore killing most of the oxygen-breathing organisms that inhabit the surface and middle depths. It may occur either at the beginning or the end of a glaciation, although an overturn at the start of a glaciation is more dangerous because the preceding warm period will have created a larger volume of anoxic water.\nUnlike other oceanic catastrophes such as regressions (sea-level falls) and anoxic events, overturns do not leave easily identified \"signatures\" in rocks and are theoretical consequences of researchers' conclusions about other climatic and marine events.\nIt has been suggested that oceanic overturn caused or contributed to the late Devonian and Permian\u2013Triassic extinctions.\nGeomagnetic reversal.\nOne theory is that periods of increased geomagnetic reversals will weaken Earth's magnetic field long enough to expose the atmosphere to the solar winds, causing oxygen ions to escape the atmosphere in a rate increased by 3\u20134 orders, resulting in a disastrous decrease in oxygen.\nPlate tectonics.\nMovement of the continents into some configurations can cause or contribute to extinctions in several ways: by initiating or ending ice ages; by changing ocean and wind currents and thus altering climate; by opening seaways or land bridges that expose previously isolated species to competition for which they are poorly adapted (for example, the extinction of most of South America's native ungulates and all of its large metatherians after the creation of a land bridge between North and South America). Occasionally continental drift creates a super-continent that includes the vast majority of Earth's land area, which in addition to the effects listed above is likely to reduce the total area of continental shelf (the most species-rich part of the ocean) and produce a vast, arid continental interior that may have extreme seasonal variations.\nAnother theory is that the creation of the super-continent Pangaea contributed to the End-Permian mass extinction. Pangaea was almost fully formed at the transition from mid-Permian to late-Permian, and the \"Marine genus diversity\" diagram at the top of this article shows a level of extinction starting at that time, which might have qualified for inclusion in the \"Big Five\" if it were not overshadowed by the \"Great Dying\" at the end of the Permian.\nOther hypotheses.\nMany other hypotheses have been proposed, such as the spread of a new disease, or simple out-competition following an especially successful biological innovation. But all have been rejected, usually for one of the following reasons: they require events or processes for which there is no evidence; they assume mechanisms that are contrary to the available evidence; they are based on other theories that have been rejected or superseded.\nScientists have been concerned that human activities could cause more plants and animals to become extinct than any point in the past. Along with human-made changes in climate (see above), some of these extinctions could be caused by overhunting, overfishing, invasive species, or habitat loss. A study published in May 2017 in \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\" argued that a \u201cbiological annihilation\u201d akin to a sixth mass extinction event is underway as a result of anthropogenic causes, such as over-population and over-consumption. The study suggested that as much as 50% of the number of animal individuals that once lived on Earth were already extinct, threatening the basis for human existence too.\nFuture biosphere extinction/sterilization.\nThe eventual warming and expanding of the Sun, combined with the eventual decline of atmospheric carbon dioxide, could actually cause an even greater mass extinction, having the potential to wipe out even microbes (in other words, the Earth would be completely sterilized): rising global temperatures caused by the expanding Sun would gradually increase the rate of weathering, which would in turn remove more and more CO2 from the atmosphere. When CO2 levels get too low (perhaps at 50 ppm), most plant life will die out, although simpler plants like grasses and mosses can survive much longer, until CO2 levels drop to 10 ppm.\nWith all photosynthetic organisms gone, atmospheric oxygen can no longer be replenished, and it is eventually removed by chemical reactions in the atmosphere, perhaps from volcanic eruptions. Eventually the loss of oxygen will cause all remaining aerobic life to die out via asphyxiation, leaving behind only simple anaerobic prokaryotes. When the Sun becomes 10% brighter in about a billion years, Earth will suffer a moist greenhouse effect resulting in its oceans boiling away, while the Earth's liquid outer core cools due to the inner core's expansion and causes the Earth's magnetic field to shut down. In the absence of a magnetic field, charged particles from the Sun will deplete the atmosphere and further increase the Earth's temperature to an average of around 420 K (147\u00a0\u00b0C, 296\u00a0\u00b0F) in 2.8 billion years, causing the last remaining life on Earth to die out. This is the most extreme instance of a climate-caused extinction event. Since this will only happen late in the Sun's life, it would represent the final mass extinction in Earth's history (albeit a very long extinction event).\nEffects and recovery.\nThe effects of mass extinction events varied widely. After a major extinction event, usually only weedy species survive due to their ability to live in diverse habitats. Later, species diversify and occupy empty niches. Generally, it takes millions of years for biodiversity to recover after extinction events. In the most severe mass extinctions it may take 15 to 30 million years.\nThe worst Phanerozoic event, the Permian\u2013Triassic extinction, devastated life on Earth, killing over 90% of species. Life seemed to recover quickly after the P-T extinction, but this was mostly in the form of disaster taxa, such as the hardy \"Lystrosaurus\". The most recent research indicates that the specialized animals that formed complex ecosystems, with high biodiversity, complex food webs and a variety of niches, took much longer to recover. It is thought that this long recovery was due to successive waves of extinction that inhibited recovery, as well as prolonged environmental stress that continued into the Early Triassic. Recent research indicates that recovery did not begin until the start of the mid-Triassic, four to six million years after the extinction;\nand some writers estimate that the recovery was not complete until 30 million years after the P-T extinction, that is, in the late Triassic. Subsequent to the P-T extinction, there was an increase in provincialization, with species occupying smaller ranges \u2013 perhaps removing incumbents from niches and setting the stage for an eventual rediversification.\nThe effects of mass extinctions on plants are somewhat harder to quantify, given the biases inherent in the plant fossil record. Some mass extinctions (such as the end-Permian) were equally catastrophic for plants, whereas others, such as the end-Devonian, did not affect the flora.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9814", "revid": "23012287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9814", "title": "E. E. Smith", "text": "Food engineer and science-fiction author (1890\u20131965)\nEdward Elmer Smith (May 2, 1890 \u2013 August 31, 1965) was an American food engineer (specializing in doughnut and pastry mixes) and science-fiction author, best known for the \"Lensman\" and \"Skylark\" series. He is sometimes called the father of space opera.\nBiography.\nFamily and education.\nEdward Elmer Smith was born in Sheboygan, Wisconsin, on May 2, 1890, to Fred Jay Smith and Caroline Mills Smith, both staunch Presbyterians of British ancestry. His mother was a teacher born in Michigan in February 1855; his father was a sailor, born in Maine in January 1855 to an English father. They moved to Spokane, Washington, the winter after Edward Elmer was born, where Mr. Smith was working as a contractor in 1900. In 1902, the family moved to Seneaquoteen, near the Pend Oreille River, in Kootenai County, Idaho. He had four siblings, Rachel M. born September 1882, Daniel M. born January 1884, Mary Elizabeth born February 1886 (all of whom were born in Michigan), and Walter E. born July 1891 in Washington. In 1910, Fred and Caroline Smith and their son Walter were living in the Markham Precinct of Bonner County, Idaho; Fred is listed in census records as a farmer.\nSmith worked mainly as a manual laborer until he injured his wrist while fleeing from a fire at the age of 19. He attended the University of Idaho. (Many years later he would be installed in the 1984 Class of the University of Idaho Alumni Hall of Fame.) He entered its prep school in 1907, and graduated with two degrees in chemical engineering in 1914. He was president of the Chemistry Club, the Chess Club, and the Mandolin and Guitar Club, and captain of the Drill and Rifle Team; he also sang the bass lead in Gilbert and Sullivan operettas. His undergraduate thesis was \"Some Clays of Idaho\", co-written with classmate Chester Fowler Smith, who died in California of tuberculosis the following year, after taking a teaching fellowship at Berkeley. Whether the two were related is not known.\nOn October 5, 1915, in Boise, Idaho he married Jeanne Craig MacDougall, the sister of his college roommate, Allen Scott (Scotty) MacDougall. (Her sister was named Clarissa MacLean MacDougall; the heroine of the \"Lensman\" novels would later be named Clarissa MacDougall.) Jeanne MacDougall was born in Glasgow, Scotland; her parents were Donald Scott MacDougall, a violinist, and Jessica Craig MacLean. Her father had moved to Boise when the children were young, and later sent for his family; he died while they were en route in 1905. Jeanne's mother, who remarried businessman and retired politician John F. Kessler in 1914 worked at, and later owned, a boarding house on Ridenbaugh Street.\nThe Smiths had three children:\nEarly chemical career and the beginning of \"Skylark\".\nAfter college, Smith was a junior chemist for the National Bureau of Standards in Washington, D.C., developing standards for butter and for oysters, while studying food chemistry at George Washington University. During World War I, he \"wanted to fly a Jenny, but chemists were too scarce. (Or were Jennies too valuable?)\" He ended up being sent to the Commission for Relief in Belgium headed by Herbert Hoover. His draft card, partly illegible, seems to show that Smith requested exemption from military service, based on his wife's dependence and on his contribution to the war effort as a civilian chemist.\nOne evening in 1915, the Smiths were visiting a former classmate from the University of Idaho, Dr. Carl Garby (1890-1928) who had also moved to Washington, D.C. He lived nearby in the Seaton Place Apartments with his wife, Lee Hawkins Garby. A long discussion about journeys into outer space ensued, and it was suggested that Smith should write down his ideas and speculations as a story about interstellar travel. Although he was interested, Smith believed after some thought that some romantic elements would be required and he was uncomfortable with that.\nMrs. Garby offered to take care of the love interest and the romantic dialogue, and Smith decided to give it a try. The sources of inspirations for the main characters in the novel were themselves; the \"Seatons\" and \"Cranes\" were based on the Smiths and Garbys, respectively. About one third of \"The Skylark of Space\" was completed by the end of 1916, when Smith and Garby gradually abandoned work on it.\nSmith earned his master's degree in chemistry from the George Washington University in 1917, studying under Dr. Charles E. Munroe., who Smith called \"probably the greatest high-explosives man yet to live.\" Smith completed his PhD in chemical engineering in 1918, with a food engineering focus; his dissertation, \"The effect of bleaching with oxides of nitrogen upon the baking quality and commercial value of wheat flour\", was published in 1919. (Warner and Fleischer give the title \"The Effect of the Oxides of Nitrogen upon the Carotin Molecule \u2013 C40H56\", which is difficult to explain. Sam Moskowitz gives the degree date 1919, perhaps reflecting different dates for thesis submission, thesis defense, and degree certification.)\nWriting \"Skylark\".\nIn 1919, Smith was hired as chief chemist for F. W. Stock &amp; Sons of Hillsdale, Michigan, at one time the largest family-owned mill east of the Mississippi, working on doughnut mixes.\nOne evening late in 1919, after moving to Michigan, Smith was baby-sitting (presumably for Roderick) while his wife attended a movie; he resumed work on \"The Skylark of Space\", finishing it in the spring of 1920. He submitted it to many book publishers and magazines, spending more in postage than he would eventually receive for its publication. Bob Davis, editor of \"Argosy\", sent an encouraging rejection letter in 1922, saying that he liked the novel personally, but that it was too far out for his readers. (According to Warner, but no other source, Smith began work on the sequel, \"Skylark Three\", before the first book was accepted.) Finally, upon seeing the April 1927 issue of \"Amazing Stories\", he submitted it to that magazine; it was accepted, initially for $75, later raised to $125. It was published as a three-part serial in the August to October 1928 issues and it was such a success that associate editor Sloane requested a sequel before the second installment had been published.\nMrs. Garby, whose husband died in 1928, was not interested in further collaboration, so Smith began work on \"Skylark Three\" alone. It was published as another three-part serial, in the August to October 1930 issues of \"Amazing\", introduced as the cover story for August. (In 1930, the Smiths were living in Michigan, at 33 Rippon Avenue in Hillsdale.) This was as far as he had planned to take the \"Skylark\" series; it was praised in \"Amazing\"'s letter column, and he was paid \u00be\u00a2 per word, surpassing \"Amazing\"'s previous record of half a cent.\nThe early 1930s: between \"Skylark\" and \"Lensman\".\nSmith then began work on what he intended as a new series, starting with \"Spacehounds of IPC,\" which he finished in the autumn of 1930. In this novel, he took pains to avoid the scientific impossibilities which had bothered some readers of the \"Skylark\" novels. Even in 1938, after he had written \"Galactic Patrol\", Smith considered it his finest work; he later said of it, \"This was really scientific fiction; not, like the Skylarks, pseudo-science\"; and even at the end of his career, he considered it his only work of true science fiction. It was published in the July through September 1931 issues of \"Amazing,\" with Sloane making unauthorized changes. Fan letters in the magazine complained about the novel's containment within the solar system, and Sloane sided with the readers. So when Harry Bates, editor of \"Astounding Stories\", offered Smith 2\u00a2/word\u2014payable on publication\u2014for his next story, he agreed; this meant that it could not be a sequel to \"Spacehounds.\"\nThis book would be \"Triplanetary\", \"in which scientific detail would not be bothered about, and in which his imagination would run riot.\" Indeed, characters within the story point out its psychological and scientific implausibilities, and sometimes even seem to suggest self-parody. At other times, they are conspicuously silent about obvious implausibilities. The January 1933 issue of \"Astounding\" announced that \"Triplanetary\" would appear in the March issue, and that issue's cover illustrated a scene from the story, but \"Astounding\"'s financial difficulties prevented the story from appearing. Smith then submitted the manuscript to \"Wonder Stories\", whose new editor, 17-year-old Charles D. Hornig, rejected it, later boasting about the rejection in a fanzine. He finally submitted it to \"Amazing\", which published it beginning in January 1934, but for only half a cent a word. Shortly after it was accepted, F. Orlin Tremaine, the new editor of the revived \"Astounding\", offered one cent a word for \"Triplanetary\"; when he learned that he was too late, he suggested a third \"Skylark\" novel instead.\nIn the winter of 1933\u201334, Smith worked on \"The Skylark of Valeron\", but he felt that the story was getting out of control; he sent his first draft to Tremaine, with a distraught note asking for suggestions. Tremaine accepted the rough draft for $850, and announced it in the June 1934 issue, with a full-page editorial and a three-quarter-page advertisement. The novel was published in the August 1934 through February 1935 issues. \"Astounding\"'s circulation rose by 10,000 for the first issue, and its two main competitors, \"Amazing\" and \"Wonder Stories\", fell into financial difficulties, both skipping issues within a year.\nThe \"Lensman\" series.\nIn January 1936, a time period where he was already an established science-fiction writer, he took a job for salary plus profit-sharing, as production manager at Dawn Donut Co. of Jackson, Michigan. This initially entailed almost a year's worth of 18-hour days and seven-day workweeks. Individuals who knew Smith confirmed that he had a role in developing mixes for doughnuts and other pastries, but the contention that he developed the first process for making powdered sugar adhere to doughnuts cannot be substantiated. Smith was reportedly dislocated from his job at Dawn Donuts by prewar rationing in early 1940.\nSmith had been contemplating writing a \"space-police novel\" since early 1927; once he had \"the Lensmen's universe fairly well set up\", he reviewed his science-fiction collection for \"cops-and-robbers\" stories. He cites Clinton Constantinescue's \"War of the Universe\" as a negative example, and Starzl and Williamson as positive ones. Tremaine responded extremely positively to a brief description of the idea.\nOnce Dawn Donuts became profitable in late 1936, Smith wrote an 85-page outline for what became the four core \"Lensman\" novels; in early 1937, Tremaine committed to buying them. Segmenting the story into four novels required considerable effort to avoid dangling loose ends; Smith cites Edgar Rice Burroughs as a negative example. After the outline was complete, he wrote a more detailed outline of \"Galactic Patrol\", plus a detailed graph of its structure, with \"peaks of emotional intensity and the valleys of characterization and background material.\" He notes, however, that he was never able to follow any of his outlines at all closely, as the \"characters get away from me and do exactly as they damn please.\" After completing the rough draft of \"Galactic Patrol\", he wrote the concluding chapter of the last book in the series, \"Children of the Lens.\" \"Galactic Patrol\" was published in the September 1937 through February 1938 issues of \"Astounding\"; unlike the revised book edition, it was not set in the same universe as \"Triplanetary\".\n\"Gray Lensman\", the fourth book in the series, appeared in \"Astounding\"'s October 1939 through January 1940 issues. (Note that the frequent British spelling \"grey\" is simply a recurrent mistake, starting with the cover of the first installment; Moskowitz's usage, \"\"The Grey Lensman\",\" is even harder to justify.) \"Gray Lensman\" (and its cover illustration) was extremely well received. Campbell's editorial in the December issue suggested that the October issue was the best issue of \"Astounding\" ever, and \"Gray Lensman\" was first place in the Analytical Laboratory statistics \"by a lightyear\", with three runners-up in a distant tie for second place. The cover was also praised by readers in \"Brass Tacks\", and Campbell noted, \"We got a letter from E. E. Smith saying he and [cover artist] Hubert Rogers agreed on how Kinnison looked.\"\nSmith was the guest of honor at Chicon I, the second World Science Fiction Convention, held in Chicago over Labor Day weekend 1940, giving a speech on the importance of science fiction fandom entitled \"What Does This Convention Mean?\" He attended the convention's masquerade as C. L. Moore's Northwest Smith, and met fans living near him in Michigan, who would later form the Galactic Roamers, which previewed and advised him on his future work.\nAfter Pearl Harbor, Smith discovered he \"was one year over age for reinstatement\" into the US Army. Instead he worked on high explosives at the Kingsbury Ordnance Plant in La Port, Indiana, at first as a chemical engineer, but gradually worked his way up to chief. In late 1943 he became head of the Inspection Division, and was fired in early 1944. An extended segment in the novel version of \"Triplanetary\", set during World War II, suggests intimate familiarity with explosives and munitions manufacturing. Some biographers cite as fact that, just as Smith's protagonist in this segment lost his job over failure to approve substandard munitions, Smith did as well.\nSmith spent the next few years working on \"light farm machinery and heavy tanks for Allis-Chalmers,\" after which he was hired as manager of the Cereal Mix Division of J. W. Allen &amp; Co., where he worked until his professional retirement in 1957.\nRetirement and late writing.\nAfter Smith retired, he and his wife lived in Clearwater, Florida, in the fall and winter, driving the smaller of their two trailers to Seaside, Oregon, each April, often stopping at science fiction conventions on the way. (Smith did not like to fly.) In 1963, he was presented the inaugural First Fandom Hall of Fame award at the 21st World Science Fiction Convention in Washington, D.C. Some of his biography is captured in an essay by Robert A. Heinlein, which was reprinted in the collection \"Expanded Universe\" in 1980. A more detailed, although allegedly error-ridden biography is in Sam Moskowitz's \"Seekers of Tomorrow.\"\nRobert Heinlein and Smith were friends. (Heinlein dedicated his 1958 novel \"Methuselah's Children\" \"To Edward E. Smith, PhD\".) Heinlein reported that E. E. Smith perhaps took his \"unrealistic\" heroes from life, citing as an example the extreme competence of the hero of \"Spacehounds of IPC\". He reported that E. E. Smith was a large, blond, athletic, very intelligent, very gallant man, married to a remarkably beautiful, intelligent, red-haired woman named MacDougal (thus perhaps the prototypes of 'Kimball Kinnison' and 'Clarissa MacDougal'). In Heinlein's essay, he reports that he began to suspect Smith might be a sort of \"superman\" when he asked Smith for help in purchasing a car. Smith tested the car by driving it on a back road at illegally high speeds with their heads pressed tightly against the roof columns to listen for chassis squeaks by bone conduction\u2014a process apparently improvised on the spot.\nIn his nonseries novels written after his professional retirement, \"Galaxy Primes\", \"Subspace Explorers\", and \"Subspace Encounter\", E. E. Smith explores themes of telepathy and other mental abilities collectively called \"psionics\", and of the conflict between libertarian and socialistic/communistic influences in the colonization of other planets. \"Galaxy Primes\" was written after critics such as Groff Conklin and P. Schuyler Miller in the early '50s accused his fiction of being pass\u00e9, and he made an attempt to do something more in line with the concepts about which \"Astounding\" editor John W. Campbell encouraged his writers to make stories. Despite this, it was rejected by Campbell, and it was eventually published by \"Amazing Stories\" in 1959. His late story \"The Imperial Stars\" (1964), featuring a troupe of circus performers involved in sabotage in a galactic empire, recaptured some of the atmosphere from his earlier works and was intended as the first in a new series, with outlines of later parts rumored to still exist. In fact, the Imperial Stars characters and concepts were continued by author Stephen Goldin as the \"Family D'Alembert series\". While the book covers indicate the series was written by Smith and Goldin together, Goldin only ever had Smith's original novella to expand upon.\nThe fourth \"Skylark\" novel, \"Skylark DuQuesne\", ran in the June to October 1965 issues of \"If\", beginning once again as the cover story. Editor Frederik Pohl introduced it with a one-page summary of the previous stories, which were all at least 30 years old.\nLord Tedric.\nSmith published two novelettes entitled \"Tedric\" in \"Other Worlds Science Fiction Stories\" (1953) and \"Lord Tedric\" in \"Universe Science Fiction\" (1954). These were almost completely forgotten until after Smith's death. In 1975, a compendium of Smith's works was published, entitled \"The Best of E. E. \"Doc\" Smith\", containing these two short stories, excerpts from several of his major works, and another short story first published in \"Worlds of If\" in 1964 entitled \"The Imperial Stars\".\nIn Smith's original short stories, Tedric was a smith (both blacksmith and whitesmith) residing in a small town near a castle in a situation roughly equivalent to England of the 1200s. He received instruction in advanced metallurgy from a time-traveler who wanted to change the situation in his own time by modifying certain events of the past. From this instruction, he was able to build better suits of armor and help defeat the villains of the piece. Unlike Eklund's later novels based on these short stories, the original Tedric never left his own time or planet, and fought purely local enemies of his own time period.\nA few years later and 13 years after Smith's death, Verna Smith arranged with Gordon Eklund to publish another novel of the same name about the same fictional character, introducing it as \"a new series conceived by E. E. 'Doc' Smith\". Eklund later went on to publish the other novels in the series, one or two under the pseudonym \"E. E. 'Doc' Smith\" or \"E. E. Smith\". The protagonist possesses heroic qualities similar to those of the heroes in Smith's original novels and can communicate with an extra-dimensional race of beings known as the Scientists, whose archenemy is Fra Villion, a mysterious character described as a dark knight, skilled in whip-sword combat, and evil genius behind the creation of a planetoid-sized \"iron sphere\" armed with a weapon capable of destroying planets. As a result, Smith is believed by many to be the unacknowledged progenitor of themes that would appear in \"Star Wars\". In fact, however, these appear in the sequels written by others after Smith's death.\nCritical opinion.\nSmith's novels are generally considered to be classic space operas, and he is sometimes called the first of the three \"novas\" of 20th-century science fiction (with Stanley G. Weinbaum and Robert A. Heinlein as the second and third novas).\nHeinlein credited him for being his main influence:\nI have learned from many writers\u2014from Verne and Wells and Campbell and Sinclair Lewis, et al.\u2014but I have learned more from you than from any of the others and perhaps more than for all the others put together...\nSmith expressed a preference for inventing fictional technologies that were not strictly impossible (so far as the science of the day was aware) but highly unlikely: \"the more highly improbable a concept is\u2014short of being contrary to mathematics whose fundamental operations involve no neglect of infinitesimals\u2014the better I like it\" was his phrase.\n\"Lensman\" was one of five finalists when the 1966 World Science Fiction Convention judged Isaac Asimov's \"Foundation\" the Best All-Time Series.\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Smith in 2004.\nExtending the \"Lensman\" universe.\n\"Vortex Blasters\" (also known as \"Masters of the Vortex\") is set in the same universe as the \"Lensman\" novels. It is an extension to the main storyline which takes place between \"Galactic Patrol\" and \"Children of the Lens\", and introduces a different type of psionics from that used by the Lensmen. \"Spacehounds of IPC\" is not a part of the series, despite occasional erroneous statements to the contrary. (It is listed as a novel in the series in some paperback editions of the 1970s.)\nInfluence on science and the military.\nSmith was widely read by scientists and engineers from the 1930s into the 1970s. Literary precursors of ideas which arguably entered the military-scientific complex include SDI (\"Triplanetary\"), stealth (\"Gray Lensman\"), the OODA loop, C3-based warfare, and the AWACS (\"Gray Lensman\").\nAn inarguable influence was described in a June 11, 1947, letter to Smith from John W. Campbell (the editor of \"Astounding\", where much of the \"Lensman\" series was originally published). In it, Campbell relayed Captain Cal Laning's acknowledgment that he had used Smith's ideas for displaying the battlespace situation (called the \"tank\" in the stories) in the design of the United States Navy's ships' Combat Information Centers. \"The entire set-up was taken specifically, directly, and consciously from the \"Directrix\". In your story, you reached the situation the Navy was in\u2014more communication channels than integration techniques to handle it. You proposed such an integrating technique and proved how advantageous it could be. You, sir, were 100% right. As the Japanese Navy\u2014not the hypothetical Boskonian fleet\u2014learned at an appalling cost.\"\nOne underlying theme of the later \"Lensman\" novels was the difficulty in maintaining military secrecy\u2014as advanced capabilities are revealed, the opposing side can often duplicate them. This point was also discussed extensively by John Campbell in his letter to Smith. Also in the later \"Lensman\" novels, and particular after the \"Battle of Klovia\" broke the Boskonian's power base at the end of \"Second Stage Lensmen\", the Boskonian forces and particularly Kandron of Onlo reverted to terroristic tactics to attempt to demoralize Civilization, thus providing an early literary glimpse into this modern problem of both law enforcement and military response. The use of \"Vee-two\" gas by the pirates attacking the \"Hyperion\" in \"Triplanetary\" (in both magazine and book appearances) also suggests anticipation of the terrorist uses of poison gases. (But note that Smith lived through WW I, when the use of poison gas on troops was well known to the populace; extending the assumption that pirates might use it if they could obtain it was no great extension of the present-day knowledge.)\nThe beginning of the story \"Skylark of Space\" describes in relative detail the protagonist's research into separation of platinum group residues, subsequent experiments involving electrolysis, and the discovery of a process evocative of cold fusion (over 50 years before Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann). He describes a nuclear process yielding large amounts of energy and producing only negligible radioactive waste\u2014which then goes on to form the basis of the adventures in the Skylark books. Smith's general description of the process of discovery is highly evocative of R\u00f6ntgen's descriptions of his discovery of the X-ray.\nAnother theme of the \"Skylark\" novels involves precursors of modern information technology. The humanoid aliens encountered in the first novel have developed a primitive technology called the \"mechanical educator\", which allows direct conversion of brain waves into intelligible thought for transmission to others or for electrical storage. By the third novel in the series, \"Skylark of Valeron\", this technology has grown into an \"Electronic Brain\" which is capable of computation on all \"bands\" of energy\u2014electromagnetism, gravity, and \"tachyonic\" energy and radiation bands included. This is itself derived from a discussion of reductionist atomic theory in the second novel, \"Skylark Three\", which brings to mind modern quark and sub-quark theories of elementary particle physics.\nLiterary influences.\nIn his 1947 essay \"The Epic of Space\", Smith listed (by last name only) authors he enjoyed reading: John W. Campbell, L. Sprague de Camp, Robert A. Heinlein, Murray Leinster, H. P. Lovecraft, and A. Merritt (specifically \"The Ship of Ishtar\", \"The Moon Pool\", \"The Snake Mother\", and \"Dwellers in the Mirage\", as well as the character John Kenton), C. L. Moore (specifically \"Jirel of Joiry\"), Roman Frederick Starzl, John Taine, A. E. van Vogt, Stanley G. Weinbaum (specifically \"Tweerl\"), and Jack Williamson. In a passage on his preparation for writing the \"Lensman\" novels, he notes that Clinton Constantinescu's \"War of the Universe\" was not a masterpiece, but says that Starzl and Williamson were masters; this suggests that Starzl's Interplanetary Flying Patrol may have been an influence on Smith's Triplanetary Patrol, later the \"Galactic Patrol\". The feeding of the Overlords of Delgon upon the life-force of their victims at the end of chapter five of \"Galactic Patrol\" seems a clear allusion to chapter 29 of \"The Moon Pool\", Merritt's account of the Taithu and the power of love in chapters 29 and 34 also bear some resemblance to the end of \"Children of the Lens.\" Smith also mentions Edgar Rice Burroughs, complaining about loose ends at the end of one of his novels.\nSmith acknowledges the help of the Galactic Roamers writers' workshop, plus E. Everett Evans, Ed Counts, an unnamed aeronautical engineer, Dr. James Enright, and Dr. Richard W. Dodson. Smith's daughter, Verna, lists the following authors as visitors to the Smith household in her youth: Lloyd Arthur Eshbach, Heinlein, Dave Kyle, Bob Tucker, Williamson, Pohl, Merritt, and the Galactic Roamers. Smith cites Bigelow's \"Theoretical Chemistry\u2013Fundamentals\" as a justification for the possibility of the inertialess drive. Also, an extended reference is made to Rudyard Kipling's \"Ballad of Boh Da Thone \" in \"Gray Lensman\" (chapter 22, \"Regeneration\", in a conversation between Kinnison and MacDougall). Again in \"Gray Lensman\", Smith quotes from Merritt's \"Dwellers in the Mirage\", even name-checking the author:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He could not even pray, with immortal Merritt's Dwayanu, \"Luka - turn your wheel so that I need not slay this woman!\"\nSam Moskowitz's biographical essay on Smith in \"Seekers of Tomorrow\" states that he regularly read \"Argosy\" magazine, and everything by H. G. Wells, Jules Verne, H. Rider Haggard, Edgar Allan Poe, and Edgar Rice Burroughs. Moskowitz also notes that Smith's \"reading enthusiasms included poetry, philosophy, ancient and medieval history, and all of English literature\". (Smith's grandson notes that he spoke, and sang, German.) The influence of these is not readily apparent, except in the Roman section of \"Triplanetary\", and in the impeccable but convoluted grammar of Smith's narration. Some influence of 19th-century philosophy of language may be detectable in the account in \"Galactic Patrol\" of the Lens of Arisia as a universal translator, which is reminiscent of Frege's strong realism about \"Sinn\", that is, thought or sense.\nBoth Moskowitz and Smith's daughter Verna Smith Trestrail report that Smith had a troubled relationship with John Campbell, the editor of \"Astounding\". Smith's most successful works were published under Campbell, but the degree of influence is uncertain. The original outline for the \"Lensman\" series had been accepted by F. Orlin Tremaine, and Smith angered Campbell by showing loyalty to Tremaine at his new magazine, \"Comet\", when he sold him \"The Vortex Blaster\" in 1941. Campbell's announcement of \"Children of the Lens\", in 1947, was less than enthusiastic. Campbell later said that he published it only reluctantly, though he praised it privately, and bought little from Smith thereafter.\nFictional appearances.\nSmith himself appears as a character in the 2006 novel \"The Chinatown Death Cloud Peril\" by Paul Malmont. The novel describes friendship and rivalry among pulp writers of the 1930s. He also appears as \"Lensman Ted Smith\" in the 1980 novel \"The Number of the Beast\" and as \"Commander Ted Smith\" in the 1985 novel \"The Cat Who Walks Through Walls\", both by Robert A. Heinlein. It is also suggested that he was one of the inspirations for Heinlein's character Lazarus Long. Christopher Nuttall incorporates a fictional quote from \u201cEdward E. Smith, Professor of Sociology\u201d in his military science fiction book, \u201cNo Worse Enemy\u201d.\nBibliography.\nBecause he died in 1965, the works of E. E. Smith are now public domain in countries where the term of copyright lasts 50 years after the death of the author, or less; generally this does not include works first published posthumously. Works first published before 1927 are also public domain in the United States. Additionally, a number of the author's works have become public domain in the United States owing to non-renewal of copyright.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9815", "revid": "42069556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9815", "title": "\u00c9variste Galois", "text": "French mathematician (1811\u20131832)\n\u00c9variste Galois (; ]; 25 October 1811\u00a0\u2013 31 May 1832) was a French mathematician and political activist. While still in his teens, he was able to determine a necessary and sufficient condition for a polynomial to be solvable by radicals, thereby solving a problem that had been open for 350 years. His work laid the foundations for Galois theory and group theory, two major branches of abstract algebra. He was a staunch republican and was heavily involved in the political turmoil that surrounded the French Revolution of 1830. As a result of his political activism, he was arrested repeatedly, serving one jail sentence of several months. For reasons that remain obscure, shortly after his release from prison he fought in a duel and died of the wounds he suffered.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nGalois was born on 25 October 1811 to Nicolas-Gabriel Galois and Ad\u00e9la\u00efde-Marie (n\u00e9e Demante). His father was a Republican and was head of Bourg-la-Reine's liberal party. His father became mayor of the village after Louis XVIII returned to the throne in 1814. His mother, the daughter of a jurist, was a fluent reader of Latin and classical literature and was responsible for her son's education for his first twelve years.\nIn October 1823, he entered the Lyc\u00e9e Louis-le-Grand where his teacher Louis Paul \u00c9mile Richard recognized his brilliance. At the age of 14, he began to take a serious interest in mathematics.\nHe found a copy of Adrien-Marie Legendre's \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments de G\u00e9om\u00e9trie\", which, it is said, he read \"like a novel\" and mastered at the first reading. At 15, he was reading the original papers of Joseph-Louis Lagrange, such as the \"R\u00e9flexions sur la r\u00e9solution alg\u00e9brique des \u00e9quations\" which likely motivated his later work on equation theory, and \"Le\u00e7ons sur le calcul des fonctions\", work intended for professional mathematicians, yet his classwork remained uninspired and his teachers accused him of \"affecting\" ambition and originality in a negative way.\nBudding mathematician.\nIn 1828, he attempted the entrance examination for the \u00c9cole Polytechnique, the most prestigious institution for mathematics in France at the time, without the usual preparation in mathematics, and failed for lack of explanations on the oral examination. In that same year, he entered the \u00c9cole Normale (then known as l'\u00c9cole pr\u00e9paratoire), a far inferior institution for mathematical studies at that time, where he found some professors sympathetic to him.\nIn the following year Galois's first paper, on continued fractions, \nwas published. It was at around the same time that he began making fundamental discoveries in the theory of polynomial equations. He submitted two papers on this topic to the Academy of Sciences. Augustin-Louis Cauchy refereed these papers, but refused to accept them for publication for reasons that still remain unclear. However, in spite of many claims to the contrary, it is widely held that Cauchy recognized the importance of Galois's work, and that he merely suggested combining the two papers into one in order to enter it in the competition for the Academy's Grand Prize in Mathematics. Cauchy, an eminent mathematician of the time though with political views that were diametrically opposed to those of Galois, considered Galois's work to be a likely winner.\nOn 28 July 1829, Galois's father died by suicide after a bitter political dispute with the village priest. A couple of days later, Galois made his second and last attempt to enter the Polytechnique and failed yet again. It is undisputed that Galois was more than qualified; however, accounts differ on why he failed. More plausible accounts state that Galois made too many logical leaps and baffled the incompetent examiner, which enraged Galois. The recent death of his father may have also influenced his behavior.\nHaving been denied admission to the \u00c9cole polytechnique, Galois took the Baccalaureate examinations in order to enter the \u00c9cole normale. He passed, receiving his degree on 29 December 1829. His examiner in mathematics reported, \"This pupil is sometimes obscure in expressing his ideas, but he is intelligent and shows a remarkable spirit of research.\"\nHe submitted his memoir on equation theory several times, but it was never published in his lifetime due to various events. Though his first attempt was refused by Cauchy, in February 1830 following Cauchy's suggestion he submitted it to the Academy's secretary Joseph Fourier, to be considered for the Grand Prix of the Academy. Unfortunately, Fourier died soon after, and the memoir was lost. The prize would be awarded that year to Niels Henrik Abel posthumously and also to Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi. Despite the lost memoir, Galois published three papers that year. One laid the foundations for Galois theory. The second was about the numerical resolution of equations (root finding in modern terminology). The third was an important one in number theory, in which the concept of a finite field was first articulated.\nPolitical firebrand.\nGalois lived during a time of political turmoil in France. Charles X had succeeded Louis XVIII in 1824, but in 1827 his party suffered a major electoral setback and by 1830 the opposition liberal party became the majority. Charles, faced with political opposition from the chambers, staged a coup d'\u00e9tat, and issued his notorious July Ordinances, touching off the July Revolution which ended with Louis Philippe becoming king. While their counterparts at the Polytechnique were making history in the streets, Galois, at the \u00c9cole Normale, was locked in by the school's director. Galois was incensed and wrote a blistering letter criticizing the director, which he submitted to the \"Gazette des \u00c9coles\", signing the letter with his full name. Although the \"Gazette\"'s editor omitted the signature for publication, Galois was expelled.\nAlthough his expulsion would have formally taken effect on 4 January 1831, Galois quit school immediately and joined the staunchly Republican artillery unit of the National Guard. He divided his time between his mathematical work and his political affiliations. Due to controversy surrounding the unit, soon after Galois became a member, on 31 December 1830, the artillery of the National Guard was disbanded out of fear that they might destabilize the government. At around the same time, nineteen officers of Galois's former unit were arrested and charged with conspiracy to overthrow the government.\nIn April 1831, the officers were acquitted of all charges, and on 9 May 1831, a banquet was held in their honor, with many illustrious people present, such as Alexandre Dumas. The proceedings grew riotous. At some point, Galois stood and proposed a toast in which he said, \"To Louis Philippe,\" with a dagger above his cup. The republicans at the banquet interpreted Galois's toast as a threat against the king's life and cheered. He was arrested the following day at his mother's house and held in detention at Sainte-P\u00e9lagie prison until 15 June 1831, when he had his trial. Galois's defense lawyer cleverly claimed that Galois actually said, \"To Louis-Philippe, \"if he betrays\",\" but that the qualifier was drowned out in the cheers. The prosecutor asked a few more questions, and perhaps influenced by Galois's youth, the jury acquitted him that same day.\nOn the following Bastille Day (14 July 1831), Galois was at the head of a protest, wearing the uniform of the disbanded artillery, and came heavily armed with several pistols, a loaded rifle, and a dagger. He was again arrested. During his stay in prison, Galois at one point drank alcohol for the first time at the goading of his fellow inmates. One of these inmates, Fran\u00e7ois-Vincent Raspail, recorded what Galois said while drunk in a letter from 25 July. Excerpted from the letter: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And I tell you, I will die in a duel on the occasion of some coquette de bas \u00e9tage. Why? Because she will invite me to avenge her honor which another has compromised.&lt;br&gt;\nDo you know what I lack, my friend? I can confide it only to you: it is someone whom I can love and love only in spirit. I've lost my father and no one has ever replaced him, do you hear me...?\nThe first line is a haunting prophecy of how Galois would in fact die; the second shows how Galois was profoundly affected by the loss of his father. Raspail continues that Galois, still in a delirium, attempted suicide, and that he would have succeeded if his fellow inmates hadn't forcibly stopped him. Months later, when Galois's trial occurred on 23 October, he was sentenced to six months in prison for illegally wearing a uniform. While in prison, he continued to develop his mathematical ideas. He was released on 29 April 1832.\nFinal days.\nGalois returned to mathematics after his expulsion from the \u00c9cole Normale, although he continued to spend time in political activities. After his expulsion became official in January 1831, he attempted to start a private class in advanced algebra which attracted some interest, but this waned, as it seemed that his political activism had priority. Sim\u00e9on Denis Poisson asked him to submit his work on the theory of equations, which he did on 17 January 1831. Around 4 July 1831, Poisson declared Galois's work \"incomprehensible\", declaring that \"[Galois's] argument is neither sufficiently clear nor sufficiently developed to allow us to judge its rigor\"; however, the rejection report ends on an encouraging note: \"We would then suggest that the author should publish the whole of his work in order to form a definitive opinion.\" \nWhile Poisson's report was made before Galois's 14 July arrest, it took until October to reach Galois in prison. It is unsurprising, in the light of his character and situation at the time, that Galois reacted violently to the rejection letter, and decided to abandon publishing his papers through the Academy and instead publish them privately through his friend Auguste Chevalier. Apparently, however, Galois did not ignore Poisson's advice, as he began collecting all his mathematical manuscripts while still in prison, and continued polishing his ideas until his release on 29\u00a0April 1832, after which he was somehow talked into a duel.\nGalois's fatal duel took place on 30 May. The true motives behind the duel are obscure. There has been much speculation about them. What is known is that, five days before his death, he wrote a letter to Chevalier which clearly alludes to a broken love affair.\nSome archival investigation on the original letters suggests that the woman of romantic interest was St\u00e9phanie-F\u00e9licie Poterin du Motel, the daughter of the physician at the hostel where Galois stayed during the last months of his life. Fragments of letters from her, copied by Galois himself (with many portions, such as her name, either obliterated or deliberately omitted), are available. The letters hint that du Motel had confided some of her troubles to Galois, and this might have prompted him to provoke the duel himself on her behalf. This conjecture is also supported by other letters Galois later wrote to his friends the night before he died. Galois's cousin, Gabriel Demante, when asked if he knew the cause of the duel, mentioned that Galois \"found himself in the presence of a supposed uncle and a supposed fianc\u00e9, each of whom provoked the duel.\" Galois himself exclaimed: \"I am the victim of an infamous coquette and her two dupes.\"\nMuch more detailed speculation based on these scant historical details has been interpolated by many of Galois's biographers, such as the frequently repeated speculation that the entire incident was stage-managed by the police and royalist factions to eliminate a political enemy.\nAs to his opponent in the duel, Alexandre Dumas names Pescheux d'Herbinville, who was actually one of the nineteen artillery officers whose acquittal was celebrated at the banquet that occasioned Galois's first arrest. However, Dumas is alone in this assertion, and if he were correct it is unclear why d'Herbinville would have been involved. It has been speculated that he was du Motel's \"supposed fianc\u00e9\" at the time (she ultimately married someone else), but no clear evidence has been found supporting this conjecture. On the other hand, extant newspaper clippings from only a few days after the duel give a description of his opponent (identified by the initials \"L.D.\") that appear to more accurately apply to one of Galois's Republican friends, most probably Ernest Duchatelet, who was imprisoned with Galois on the same charges. Given the conflicting information available, the true identity of his killer may well be lost to history.\nWhatever the reasons behind the duel, Galois was so convinced of his impending death that he stayed up all night writing letters to his Republican friends and composing what would become his mathematical testament, the famous letter to Auguste Chevalier outlining his ideas, and three attached manuscripts. Mathematician Hermann Weyl said of this testament, \"This letter, if judged by the novelty and profundity of ideas it contains, is perhaps the most substantial piece of writing in the whole literature of mankind.\" However, the legend of Galois pouring his mathematical thoughts onto paper the night before he died seems to have been exaggerated. In these final papers, he outlined the rough edges of some work he had been doing in analysis and annotated a copy of the manuscript submitted to the Academy and other papers.\nEarly in the morning of 30 May 1832, he was shot in the abdomen, was abandoned by his opponents and his own seconds, and was found by a passing farmer. He died the following morning at ten o'clock in the H\u00f4pital Cochin (probably of peritonitis), after refusing the offices of a priest. His funeral ended in riots. There were plans to initiate an uprising during his funeral, but during the same time the leaders heard of General Jean Maximilien Lamarque's death and the rising was postponed without any uprising occurring until 5 June. Only Galois's younger brother was notified of the events prior to Galois's death. Galois was 20 years old. His last words to his younger brother Alfred were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Ne pleure pas, Alfred\u00a0! J'ai besoin de tout mon courage pour mourir \u00e0 vingt ans\u00a0!\"(Don't weep, Alfred! I need all my courage to die at twenty!)\nOn 2 June, \u00c9variste Galois was buried in a common grave of the Montparnasse Cemetery whose exact location is unknown. In the cemetery of his native town \u2013 Bourg-la-Reine \u2013 a cenotaph in his honour was erected beside the graves of his relatives.\nIn 1843 Joseph Liouville reviewed his manuscript and declared it sound. It was finally published in the October\u2013November 1846 issue of the \"Journal de Math\u00e9matiques Pures et Appliqu\u00e9es\". The most famous contribution of this manuscript was a novel proof that there is no quintic formula \u2013 that is, that fifth and higher degree equations are not generally solvable by radicals. Although Niels Henrik Abel had already proved the impossibility of a \"quintic formula\" by radicals in 1824 and Paolo Ruffini had published a solution in 1799 that turned out to be flawed, Galois's methods led to deeper research in what is now called Galois theory. For example, one can use it to determine, for \"any\" polynomial equation, whether it has a solution by radicals.\nContributions to mathematics.\nFrom the closing lines of a letter from Galois to his friend Auguste Chevalier, dated 29 May 1832, two days before Galois's death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Tu prieras publiquement Jacobi ou Gauss de donner leur avis, non sur la v\u00e9rit\u00e9, mais sur l'importance des th\u00e9or\u00e8mes.\"\n\"Apr\u00e8s cela, il y aura, j'esp\u00e8re, des gens qui trouveront leur profit \u00e0 d\u00e9chiffrer tout ce g\u00e2chis.\"\nWithin the 60 or so pages of Galois's collected works are many important ideas that have had far-reaching consequences for nearly all branches of mathematics. \nHis work has been compared to that of Niels Henrik Abel (1802 \u2013 1829), a contemporary mathematician who died at a very young age, and much of their work had significant overlap.\nAlgebra.\nWhile many mathematicians before Galois gave consideration to what are now known as groups, it was Galois who was the first to use the word \"group\" (in French \"groupe\") in a sense close to the technical sense that is understood today, making him among the founders of the branch of algebra known as group theory. He called the decomposition of a group into its left and right cosets a \"proper decomposition\" if the left and right cosets coincide, which is what today is known as a normal subgroup. He also introduced the concept of a finite field (also known as a Galois field in his honor) in essentially the same form as it is understood today.\nIn his last letter to Chevalier and attached manuscripts, the second of three, he made basic studies of linear groups over finite fields:\nGalois theory.\nGalois's most significant contribution to mathematics is his development of Galois theory. He realized that the algebraic solution to a polynomial equation is related to the structure of a group of permutations associated with the roots of the polynomial, the Galois group of the polynomial. He found that an equation could be solved in radicals if one can find a series of subgroups of its Galois group, each one normal in its successor with abelian quotient, that is, its Galois group is solvable. This proved to be a fertile approach, which later mathematicians adapted to many other fields of mathematics besides the theory of equations to which Galois originally applied it.\nAnalysis.\nGalois also made some contributions to the theory of Abelian integrals and continued fractions.\nAs written in his last letter, Galois passed from the study of elliptic functions to consideration of the integrals of the most general algebraic differentials, today called Abelian integrals. He classified these integrals into three categories.\nContinued fractions.\nIn his first paper in 1828, Galois proved that the regular continued fraction which represents a quadratic surd \"\u03b6\" is purely periodic if and only if \"\u03b6\" is a reduced surd, that is, formula_1 and its conjugate formula_2\nsatisfies formula_3.\nIn fact, Galois showed more than this. He also proved that if \"\u03b6\" is a reduced quadratic surd and \"\u03b7\" is its conjugate, then the continued fractions for \"\u03b6\" and for (\u22121/\"\u03b7\") are both purely periodic, and the repeating block in one of those continued fractions is the mirror image of the repeating block in the other. In symbols we have\nformula_4\nwhere \"\u03b6\" is any reduced quadratic surd, and \"\u03b7\" is its conjugate.\nFrom these two theorems of Galois a result already known to Lagrange can be deduced. If \"r\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a01 is a rational number that is not a perfect square, then\nformula_5\nIn particular, if \"n\" is any non-square positive integer, the regular continued fraction expansion of \u221a\"n\" contains a repeating block of length \"m\", in which the first \"m\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 partial denominators form a palindromic string.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9817", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9817", "title": "Electronic music/Art music", "text": ""}
{"id": "9820", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9820", "title": "Ennius", "text": "Roman writer\nQuintus Ennius (]; c. 239 \u2013 c. 169 BC) was a writer and poet who lived during the Roman Republic. He is often considered the father of Roman poetry. He was born in the small town of Rudiae, located near modern Lecce, Apulia, (Ancient Calabria, today Salento), a town founded by the Messapians, and could speak Greek as well as Latin and Oscan (his native language). Although only fragments of his works survive, his influence in Latin literature was significant, particularly in his use of Greek literary models.\nBiography.\nVery little is reliably known about the life of Ennius. His contemporaries hardly mentioned him and much that is related about him could have been embroidered from references to himself in his now fragmentary writings. Some lines of the \"Annales\", as well as ancient testimonies, for example, suggest that Ennius opened his epic with a recollection of a dream in which the ancient epic-writer Homer informed him that his spirit had been reborn into Ennius. It is true that the doctrine of the transmigration of souls once flourished in the areas of Italy settled by Greeks, but the statement might have been no more than a literary flourish. Ennius seems to have been given to making large claims, as in the report by Maurus Servius Honoratus that he claimed descent from Messapus, the legendary king of his native district. The partially Hellenised city of Rudiae, his place of birth, was certainly in the area settled by the Messapians. And this, he used to say, according to Aulus Gellius, had endowed him with a triple linguistic and cultural heritage, fancifully described as \"three hearts\u2026 Greek, Oscan and Latin\".\nThe public career of Ennius first really emerges in middle life, when he was serving in the army with the rank of centurion during the Second Punic War. While in Sardinia in the year 204 BC, he is said to have attracted the attention of Cato the Elder and was taken by him to Rome. There he taught Greek and adapted Greek plays for a livelihood, and by his poetical compositions gained the friendship of some of the greatest men in Rome whose achievements he praised. Amongst these were Scipio Africanus and Fulvius Nobilior, whom he accompanied on his Aetolian campaign (189). Afterwards he made the capture of Ambracia, at which he was present, the subject of a play and of an episode in the \"Annales\". It was through the influence of Nobilior's son Quintus that Ennius subsequently obtained Roman citizenship. But he himself lived plainly and simply in the literary quarter on the Aventine Hill with the poet Caecilius Statius, a fellow adapter of Greek plays.\nAt about the age of 70 Ennius died, immediately after producing his tragedy \"Thyestes\". In the last book of his epic poem, in which he seems to have given various details of his personal history, he mentioned that he was in his 67th year at the date of its composition. He compared himself, in contemplation of the close of the great work of his life, to a gallant horse which, after having often won the prize at the Olympic Games, obtained his rest when weary with age. A similar feeling of pride at the completion of a great career is expressed in the memorial lines which he composed to be placed under his bust after death: \"Let no one weep for me, or celebrate my funeral with mourning; for I still live, as I pass to and fro through the mouths of men.\"\nLiterature.\nEnnius continued the nascent literary tradition by writing plays in Greek and Roman style (praetextae and palliatae), as well as his most famous work, a historical epic in hexameters called the \"Annales\". Other minor works include the \"Epicharmus\", \"Epigrammata\", the \"Euhemerus\", the \"Hedyphagetica\", \"Praecepta\"/\"Protrepticus\", \"Saturae\" (or \"Satires\"), \"Scipio\", and \"Sota\".\nThe \"Annales\".\nThe \"Annales\" was an epic poem in fifteen books, later expanded to eighteen, covering Roman history from the fall of Troy in 1184 BC down to the censorship of Cato the Elder in 184 BC. It was the first Latin poem to adopt the dactylic hexameter metre used in Greek epic and didactic poetry, leading it to become the standard metre for these genres in Latin poetry. The \"Annals\" became a school text for Roman schoolchildren, eventually supplanted by Virgil's \"Aeneid\". About 600 lines survive.\nMinor works.\nThe \"Epicharmus\" was inspired by the philosophical hypotheses developed by the Sicilian poet and philosopher Epicharmus of Kos, after which Ennius's work took its name. In the \"Epicharmus\", the poet describes a dream he had in which he died and was transported to some place of heavenly enlightenment. Here, he met Epicharmus, who explained the nature of the gods and taught Ennius the physics of the universe.\nThe \"Euhemerus\" presented a theological doctrine based on the ideas Greek of Euhemerus of Messene, who argued that the gods of Olympus were not supernatural powers that interference in the lives of humans, but rather heroes of old who after death were eventually regarded as deities due to their valor, bravery, or cultural impact (this belief is now known as euhemerism). Both Cicero and Lactantius write that the \"Euhemerus\" was a \"translat[ion] and a recount[ing]\" of Euhemerus's original work the \"Sacred History\", but it is unclear if this means Ennius simply translated the original from Greek into Latin, or added in his own elements. Most of what is preserved of this work comes to us from Lactantius, and these snippets suggest that the \"Euhemerus\" was a prose text.\nThe \"Hedyphagetica\" took much of its substance from the gastronomical epic of Archestratus of Gela. The extant portions of Ennius's poem discuss where a reader might find the best type of fish. Most of the fragments, replete with unique terms for fish and numerous place names, are corrupt or damaged. The \"Hedyphagetica\" is written in hexameters, but differs from the \"Annales\" in regards to \"metrical practices\"; this difference is largely due to each works' distinct subject matter.\nThe titles \"Praecepta\" and \"Protrepticus\" were likely used to refer to the same (possibly exhortatory) work. However, given this work's almost non-existent nature (only the word \"pannibus\"\u2014an \"unusual\" form of the word \"pannis\", meaning \"rags\"\u2014is preserved in the work of the Latin grammarian Charisius), this position is extremely difficult to verify.\nThe \"Saturae\" is a collection of about thirty lines from satirical poems\u2014making it the first extant instance of Roman satire. These lines are written in a variety of poetic metres. The poems in this collection \"were mostly concerned with practical wisdom, often driving home a lesson with the help of a fable.\"\nEnnius's \"Scipio\" was a work (possibly a panegyric poem) that apparently celebrated the life and deeds of Scipio Africanus. Hardly anything remains of this work, and what is preserved is embedded in the works of others. Unfortunately, \"no quotation of [\"Scipio\"] supplies a context\". Some have proposed that the work was written before the \"Annales\", and others have said that the work was written after Scipio's 201 BC triumph that followed the Battle of Zama (202 BC).\nThe \"Sota\" was a poem, potentially of some length, named after the Greek poet Sotades. The work, which followed a metre established by Sotades known as the \"Sotadeus\", concerned itself with a number of disparate topics and ideas.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9822", "revid": "44277652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9822", "title": "Electronic", "text": "Electronic may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9823", "revid": "25112844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9823", "title": "Eris (mythology)", "text": "Greek goddess of strife and discord\nEris (; Greek: ', \"Strife\") is the Greek goddess of strife and discord. Her Roman equivalent is Discordia, which means the same. Eris's Greek opposite is Harmonia, whose Roman counterpart is Concordia. Homer equated her with the war-goddess Enyo, whose Roman counterpart is Bellona. The dwarf planet Eris is named after the goddess.\nShe had no temples in ancient Greece and functions essentially as a personification, as which she appears in Homer and many later works.\nEtymology.\n\"Eris\" is of uncertain etymology; connections with the verb , 'to raise, stir, excite', and the proper name have been suggested. R. S. P. Beekes rejects these derivations and suggested a Pre-Greek origin.\nCharacteristics in Greek mythology.\nIn Hesiod's \"Works and Days\" 11\u201324, two different goddesses named Eris are distinguished:\n&lt;poem&gt;So, after all, there was not one kind of Strife alone, but all over the earth there are two. As for the one, a man would praise her when he came to understand her; but the other is blameworthy: and they are wholly different in nature. For one fosters evil war and battle, being cruel: her no man loves; but perforce, through the will of the deathless gods, men pay harsh Strife her honour due.\n(Nyx), and the son of Cronus [i.e. Zeus] who sits above and dwells in the aether, set her in the roots of the earth: and she is far kinder to men. She stirs up even the shiftless to toil; for a man grows eager to work when he considers his neighbour, a rich man who hastens to plough and plant and put his house in good order; and neighbour vies with his neighbour as he hurries after wealth. This Strife is wholesome for men. And potter is angry with potter, and craftsman with craftsman and beggar is jealous of beggar, and minstrel of minstrel.&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn Hesiod's \"Theogony\" (226\u2013232), Eris, the daughter of Night, is less kindly spoken of as she brings forth other personifications as her children:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe other Eris is presumably she who appears in Homer's \"Iliad\" Book\u00a0IV; equated with Enyo as sister of Ares and so presumably daughter of Zeus and Hera:\n... and Discord [\"\u1f1c\u03c1\u03b9\u03c2\"] that rageth incessantly, sister and comrade of man-slaying Ares; she at the first rears her crest but little, yet thereafter planteth her head in heaven, while her feet tread on earth. She it was that now cast evil strife into their midst as she fared through the throng, making the groanings of men to wax.\nShe also has a son whom she named Strife.\nEnyo is mentioned in Book 5, and Zeus sends Strife to rouse the Achaeans in Book 11, of the same work.\nThe most famous tale of Eris recounts her initiating the Trojan War by causing the Judgement of Paris. The goddesses Hera, Athena and Aphrodite had been invited along with the rest of Olympus to the forced wedding of Peleus and Thetis, who would become the parents of Achilles, but Eris had been snubbed because of her troublemaking inclinations.\nShe therefore (as mentioned at the \"Kypria\" according to Proclus as part of a plan hatched by Zeus and Themis) tossed into the party the Apple of Discord, a golden apple inscribed \u00a0\u2013 \"For the most beautiful one\", or \"To the Fairest One\"\u00a0\u2013 provoking the goddesses to begin quarreling about the appropriate recipient. The hapless Paris, Prince of Troy, was appointed to select the fairest by Zeus. The goddesses stripped naked to try to win Paris's decision, and also attempted to bribe him. Hera offered political power; Athena promised infinite wisdom; and Aphrodite tempted him with the most beautiful woman in the world: Helen, wife of Menelaus of Sparta. While Greek culture placed a greater emphasis on prowess and power, Paris chose to award the apple to Aphrodite, thereby dooming his city, which was destroyed in the war that ensued.\nEris is also mentioned in Nonnus's \"Dionysiaca\", when Typhon prepares to battle with Zeus:\nEris (\"Strife\") was Typhon's escort in the mellay, Nike (\"Victory\") led Zeus into battle.\nAnother story of Eris includes Hera, and the love of Polytechnus and Aedon. They claimed to love each other more than Hera and Zeus were in love. This angered Hera, so she sent Eris to wreak discord upon them. Polytekhnos was finishing off a chariot board, and Aedon a web she had been weaving. Eris said to them, \"Whosoever finishes thine task last shall have to present the other with a female servant!\" Aedon won. But Polytekhnos was not happy by his defeat, so he came to Khelidon, Aedon's sister, and raped her. He then disguised her as a slave, presenting her to Aedon. When Aedon discovered this was indeed her sister, she chopped up Polytekhnos's son and fed him to Polytekhnos. The gods were not pleased, so they were transformed into birds.\nCultural influences.\nDiscordianism.\nEris has been adopted as the patron deity of the modern Discordian religion, which was begun in the late 1950s by Gregory Hill and Kerry Wendell Thornley under the pen names of \"Malaclypse the Younger\" and \"Omar Khayyam Ravenhurst\". The Discordian version of Eris is considerably lighter in comparison to the rather malevolent Graeco-Roman original, wherein she is depicted as a positive (albeit mischievous) force of chaotic creation. \"Principia Discordia\", the first holy book of Discordianism, states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One day Mal-2 consulted his Pineal Gland and asked Eris if She really created all of those terrible things. She told him that She had always liked the Old Greeks, but that they cannot be trusted with historic matters. \"They were,\" She added, \"victims of indigestion, you know.\"\nSuffice it to say that Eris is not hateful or malicious. But she is mischievous, and does get a little bitchy at times.\nThe story of Eris being snubbed and indirectly starting the Trojan War is recorded in the \"Principia\", and is referred to as the Original Snub. The \"Principia Discordia\" states that her parents may be as described in Greek legend, or that she may be the daughter of Void. She is the Goddess of Disorder and Being, whereas her sister Aneris (called the equivalent of Harmonia by the Mythics of Harmonia) is the goddess of Order and Non-Being. Their brother is Spirituality.\nDiscordian Eris is looked upon as a foil to the preoccupation of western philosophy in attempting find order in the chaos of reality, in prescribing order to be synonymous with truth. Discordian Eris teaches us that the only truth is chaos, and that order and disorder are simply temporary filters applied to the lenses we view the chaos through. This is known as the Aneristic Illusion.\nIn this telling, Eris becomes something of a patron saint of chaotic creation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am chaos. I am the substance from which your artists and scientists build rhythms. I am the spirit with which your children and clowns laugh in happy anarchy. I am chaos. I am alive, and I tell you that you are free.\nThe concept of Eris as developed by the \"Principia Discordia\" is used and expanded upon in the science fiction work \"The Illuminatus! Trilogy\" by Robert Shea and Robert Anton Wilson (in which characters from \"Principia Discordia\" appear). In this work, Eris is a major character.\nOther.\nThe classic fairy tale \"Sleeping Beauty\" is partly inspired by Eris's role in the wedding of Peleus and Thetis. Like Eris, a malevolent fairy curses a princess after not being invited to the princess's christening.\nThe New Zealand moth species \"Ichneutica eris\" was named in honour of Eris.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9824", "revid": "33476830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9824", "title": "Edna St. Vincent Millay", "text": "American poet (1892\u20131950)\nEdna St. Vincent Millay (February 22, 1892 \u2013 October 19, 1950) was an American lyrical poet and playwright. Millay was a renowned social figure and noted feminist in New York City during the Roaring Twenties and beyond. She wrote much of her prose and hackwork verse under the pseudonym Nancy Boyd.\nMillay won the 1923 Pulitzer Prize for Poetry for her poem \"\"; she was the first woman and second person to win the award. In 1943, Millay was the sixth person and the second woman to be awarded the Frost Medal for her lifetime contribution to American poetry.\nMillay was highly regarded during much of her lifetime, with the prominent literary critic Edmund Wilson calling her \"one of the only poets writing in English in our time who have attained to anything like the stature of great literary figures.\" By the 1930s, her critical reputation began to decline, as modernist critics dismissed her work for its use of traditional poetic forms and subject matter, in contrast to modernism's exhortation to \"make it new.\" However, the rise of feminist literary criticism in the 1960s and 1970s revived an interest in Millay's works.\nEarly life.\nMillay was born in Rockland, Maine, on February 22, 1892. Her parents were Cora Lounella Buzelle, a nurse, and Henry Tolman Millay, a schoolteacher who would later become a superintendent of schools. Her middle name derives from St. Vincent's Hospital in New York City, where her uncle's life had been saved just before her birth. Encouraged to read the classics at home, she was too rebellious to make a success of formal education, but she won poetry prizes from an early age.\nEdna's mother attended a Congregational church. In 1904, Cora officially divorced Millay's father for financial irresponsibility and domestic abuse, but they had already been separated for some years. Henry and Edna kept a letter correspondence for many years, but he never re-entered the family. Cora and her three daughters \u2013 Edna (who called herself \"Vincent\"), Norma Lounella, and Kathleen Kalloch (born 1896) \u2013 moved from town to town, living in poverty and surviving various illnesses. Cora travelled with a trunk full of classic literature, including Shakespeare and Milton, which she read to her children. The family settled in a small house on the property of Cora's aunt in Camden, Maine, where Millay would write the first of the poems that would bring her literary fame. The family's house in Camden was \"between the mountains and the sea where baskets of apples and drying herbs on the porch mingled their scents with those of the neighboring pine woods.\"\nThe three sisters were independent and spoke their minds, which did not always sit well with the authority figures in their lives. Millay's grade school principal, offended by her frank attitudes, refused to call her Vincent. Instead, he called her by any woman's name that started with a V. At Camden High School, Millay began developing her literary talents, starting at the school's literary magazine, \"The Megunticook\". At 14, she won the \"St. Nicholas\" Gold Badge for poetry, and by 15, she had published her poetry in the popular children's magazine \"St. Nicholas\", the \"Camden Herald\", and the high-profile anthology \"Current Literature\".\nEmerging fame and college education.\nMillay's fame began in 1912 when, at the age of 20, she entered her poem \"Renascence\" in a poetry contest in \"The Lyric Year\". The backer of the contest, Ferdinand P. Earle, chose Millay as the winner after sorting through thousands of entries, reading only two lines apiece. Earle sent a letter informing Millay of her win before consulting with the other judges, who had previously and separately agreed on a criterion for a winner to winnow down the massive flood of entrants. According to the remaining judges, the winning poem had to exhibit social relevance and \"Renascence\" did not. The entry of Orrick Glenday Johns, \"Second Avenue,\" was about the \"squalid scenes\" Johns saw on Eldridge Street and lower Second Avenue on New York's Lower East Side. Millay placed ultimately fourth.\nControversy in newspaper columns and editorial pages launched the careers of both Millay and Johns. Johns received hate mail, so he expressed that he felt her poem was the better one and avoided the awards banquet. He stated that \"the award was as much an embarrassment to me as a triumph.\" Additionally, the second-prize winner offered Millay his $250 prize money. In the immediate aftermath of the \"Lyric Year\" controversy, wealthy arts patron Caroline B. Dow heard Millay reciting her poetry and playing the piano at the Whitehall Inn in Camden, Maine, and was so impressed that she offered to pay for Millay's education at Vassar College.\nMillay entered Vassar College in 1913 at age 21, later than is typical. Her attendance at Vassar, which she called a \"hell-hole\", became a strain to her due to its strict nature. Before she attended the college, Millay had a liberal home life that included smoking, drinking, playing gin rummy, and flirting with men. Vassar, on the other hand, expected its students to be refined and live according to their status as young ladies. Millay often wouldn't be formally reprimanded out of respect of her work. At the end of her senior year in 1917, the faculty voted to suspend Millay indefinitely; however, in response to a petition by her peers, she was allowed to graduate. She was a prominent campus writer, becoming a regular contributor to \"The Vassar Miscellany\". She had relationships with many fellow students during her time there and kept scrapbooks including drafts of plays written during the period. While at school, she had several romantic relationships with women, including Edith Wynne Matthison, who would go on to become an actress in silent films.\nMove to Greenwich Village.\nAfter her graduation from Vassar in 1917, Millay moved to New York City. She lived in Greenwich Village just as it was becoming known as a bohemian writer's haven. She resided in a number of places, including a house owned by the Cherry Lane Theatre and 75\u00bd Bedford Street, renowned for being the narrowest in New York City.\nWhile in New York City, Millay was openly bisexual, developing passing relationships with both men and women. The critic Floyd Dell wrote that Millay was \"a frivolous young woman, with a brand-new pair of dancing slippers and a mouth like a valentine.\" She maintained relationships with \"The Masses-\"editor Floyd Dell and critic Edmund Wilson, both of whom proposed marriage to her and were refused. Counted among Millay's close friends were the writers Witter Bynner, Arthur Davison Ficke, and Susan Glaspell.\nIn 1919, she wrote the anti-war play \"Aria da Capo\", which starred her sister Norma Millay at the Provincetown Playhouse in New York City. In 1921, Millay would write \"The Lamp and the Bell,\" her first verse drama, at the request of the drama department of Vassar. While establishing her career as a poet, Millay initially worked with the Provincetown Players on Macdougal Street and the Theatre Guild. In 1923, Millay and others founded the Cherry Lane Theatre \"to continue the staging of experimental drama.\"\nDuring her stay in Greenwich Village, Millay learned to use her poetry for her feminist activism. She often went into detail about topics others found taboo, such as a wife leaving her husband in the middle of the night. Millay's 1920 collection \"A Few Figs From Thistles\" drew controversy for its exploration of female sexuality and feminism. She engaged in highly successful nationwide tours in which she offered public readings of her poetry.\nTo support her days in the Village, Millay wrote short stories for \"Ainslee's Magazine\". As an aesthete and a canny protector of her identity as a poet, she insisted on publishing this more mass-appeal work under the pseudonym Nancy Boyd.\nPulitzer Prize, marriage, and purchase of Steepletop.\nIn January 1921, Millay traveled to Paris, where she met and befriended the sculptors Thelma Wood and Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, photographer Man Ray, had affairs with journalists George Slocombe and John Carter, and became pregnant by a man named Daubigny. She secured a marriage license but instead returned to New England where her mother Cora helped induce an abortion with alkanet, as recommended in her old copy of Culpeper's \"Complete Herbal\". Possibly as a result, Millay was frequently ill and weak for much of the next four years.\nMillay won the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry in 1923 for \"The Ballad of the Harp-Weaver.\" She was the first woman to win the poetry prize, though two women (Sara Teasdale in 1918 and Margaret Widdemer in 1919) won special prizes for their poetry prior to the establishment of the award. In 1924, literary critic Harriet Monroe labeled Millay \u201cthe greatest woman poet since Sappho.\"\nAfter experiencing his remarkable attention to her during her illness, she married 43-year-old Eugen Jan Boissevain in 1923. Boissevain was the widower of labor lawyer and war correspondent Inez Milholland, a political icon Millay had met during her time at Vassar. A self-proclaimed feminist, Boissevain supported Millay's career and took primary care of domestic responsibilities. Both Millay and Boissevain had other lovers throughout their 26-year marriage. For Millay, one such significant relationship was with the poet George Dillon, a student 14 years her junior, whom she met in 1928 at one of her readings at the University of Chicago. Their relationship inspired the sonnets in the collection \"Fatal Interview\", which she published in 1931.\nIn 1925, Boissevain and Millay bought Steepletop near Austerlitz, New York, which had once been a blueberry farm. They built a barn (from a Sears Roebuck kit), and then a writing cabin and a tennis court. Millay grew her own vegetables in a small garden. Later, they bought Ragged Island in Casco Bay, Maine, as a summer retreat. Frequently having trouble with the servants they employed, Millay wrote, \"The only people I really hate are servants. They are not really human beings at all.\"\nMillay was commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera House to write a libretto for an opera composed by Deems Taylor. The result, \"The King's Henchman\", drew on the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle's\" account of Eadgar, King of Wessex. The opera began its production in 1927 to high praise; \"The New York Times\" described it as \"the most effectively and artistically wrought American opera that has reached the stage.\"\nIn August 1927, Millay, along with a number of other writers, was arrested for protesting the impending executions of the Italian American anarchist duo Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti. Due to her status, she was able to meet with the governor of Massachusetts, Alvan T. Fuller, to plead for a retrial. Her failure to prevent the executions would be a catalyst for her politicization in her later works, beginning with the poem \"Justice Denied In Massachusetts\" about the case.\nAccident and war effort.\nMillay was staying at the Sanibel Palms Hotel when, on May 2, 1936, a fire started after a kerosene heater on the second floor exploded. Everything was destroyed, including the only copy of Millay's long verse poem, \"Conversation at Midnight\", and a 1600s poetry collection written by the Roman poet Catullus of the first century BC. She would go on to rewrite \"Conversation at Midnight\" from memory and release it the following year.\nIn the summer of 1936, Millay was riding in a station wagon when the door suddenly swung open, and Millay \u201cwas hurled out into the pitch-darkness...and rolled for some distance down a rocky gully.\" The accident severely damaged nerves in her spine, requiring frequent surgeries and hospitalizations, and at least daily doses of morphine. Millay lived the rest of her life in \"constant pain\".\nDespite her accident, Millay was sufficiently alarmed by the rise of fascism to write against it. During World War I, she had been a dedicated and active pacifist; however, in 1940, she advocated for the U.S. to enter the war against the Axis and became an ardent supporter of the war effort. She later worked with the Writers' War Board to create propaganda, including poetry. Millay's reputation in poetry circles was damaged by her war work. Merle Rubin noted, \"She seems to have caught more flak from the literary critics for supporting democracy than Ezra Pound did for championing fascism.\"\nIn 1942 in \"The New York Times Magazine\", Millay mourned the destruction of the Czech village Lidice. Nazi forces had razed Lidice, slaughtered its male inhabitants and scattered its surviving residents in retaliation for the assassination of Reinhard Heydrich. Millay wrote: \"The whole world holds in its arms today / The murdered village of Lidice, / Like the murdered body of a little child.\" This article would serve as the basis of her 32-page work \"Murder of Lidice,\" published by Harper and Brothers in 1942. The poem loosely served as the basis of the 1943 MGM movie \"Hitler's Madman\".\nMillay was critical of capitalism and sympathetic to socialist ideals, which she labeled as \"of a free and equal society\", but she did not identify as a communist.166 She told Grace Hamilton King in 1941 that she had been \"almost a fellow-traveller with the communist idea as far as it went along with the socialist idea.\"166\nDespite the excellent sales of her books in the 1930s, her declining reputation, constant medical bills, and frequent demands from her mentally ill sister Kathleen meant that for most of her last years, Millay was in debt to her own publisher. Author Daniel Mark Epstein also concludes from her correspondence that Millay developed a passion for thoroughbred horse-racing, and spent much of her income investing in a racing stable of which she had quietly become an owner.\nPost-war and death.\nAlthough her work and reputation declined during the war years, possibly due to a morphine addiction she acquired following her accident, she subsequently sought treatment for it and was successfully rehabilitated. Boissevain died in 1949 of lung cancer, leaving Millay to live alone for the last year of her life. Her final collection of poems was published posthumously as the volume \"Mine the Harvest.\" The title sonnet recalls her career:\n&lt;poem&gt;Those hours when happy hours were my estate, \u2014\nEntailed, as proper, for the next in line,\nYet mine the harvest, and the title mine \u2014\nThose acres, fertile, and the furrows straight,\nFrom which the lark would rise \u2014 all of my late\nEnchantments, still, in brilliant colours, shine,&lt;/poem&gt;\nMillay died at her home on October 19, 1950, at age 58. She had fallen down the stairs and was found with a broken neck approximately eight hours after her death. Her physician reported that she had suffered a heart attack following a coronary occlusion. She is buried alongside her husband at Steepletop, Austerlitz, New York.\nLegacy.\nAfter her death, \"The New York Times\" described her as \"an idol of the younger generation during the glorious early days of Greenwich Village\" and as \"one of the greatest American poets of her time.\" Thomas Hardy said that America had two great attractions: the skyscraper and the poetry of Edna St. Vincent Millay. The poet Richard Wilbur asserted that Millay \"wrote some of the best sonnets of the century.\"\nA \"New York Times\" review of Milford noted that \"readers of poetry probably dismiss Millay as mediocre,\" and noted that within 20 years of Millay's death, \"the public was impatient with what had come to seem a poised, genteel emotionalism.\" However, it concludes that \"readers should come away from Milford's book with their understanding of Millay deepened and charged.\" The New York Review of Books called Milford's biography \"the story of the life that eclipsed the work,\" and dismissed much of Millay's work as \"soggy\" and \"doggerel.\"\nNancy Milford published a biography of the poet in 2001, \"Savage Beauty: The Life of Edna St Vincent Millay.\" Millay's sister, Norma Millay (then her only living relative), offered Milford access to the poet's papers based on her successful biography of F. Scott Fitzgerald's wife, \"Zelda\". Milford also edited and wrote an introduction for a collection of Millay's poems called \"The Selected Poetry of Edna St. Vincent Millay.\" Milford would label Millay as \"the herald of the New Woman.\"\nMillay was named by Equality Forum as one of their \"31 Icons\" of the 2015 LGBT History Month.\nProperties, conservation, and memorials.\nMillay's sister Norma and her husband, the painter and actor Charles Frederick Ellis, moved to Steepletop after Millay's death. In 1973, they established the Millay Colony for the Arts on seven acres near the house and barn. After the death of her husband in 1976, Norma continued to run the program until her death in 1986. At 17, the poet Mary Oliver visited Steepletop and became a close friend of Norma. She would later live at Steepletop off-and-on for seven years and helped to organize Millay's papers. Mary Oliver herself went on to become a Pulitzer Prize-winning poet, greatly inspired by Millay's work. In 2006, the state of New York paid $1.69 million to acquire of Steepletop, to add the land to a nearby state forest preserve. The proceeds of the sale were used by the Edna St. Vincent Millay Society to restore the farmhouse and grounds and turn it into a museum. The museum opened to the public in the summer of 2010. Conservation of the house has been ongoing.\nConservation of Millay's birthplace began in 2015 with the purchase of the double-house at 198\u2013200 Broadway, Rockland, Maine. Built in 1891, Henry T. and Cora B. Millay were the first tenants of the north side, where Cora gave birth to her first of three daughters during a February 1892 squall. Identified as the Singhi Double House, the home was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2019 not as the poet's birthplace, but as a \"good example\" of the \"modest double houses\" that made up almost 10% of residences in the largely working-class city between 1837 and the early 1900s. When fully restored by 2023, half the house will be dedicated to honoring Millay's legacy with workshops and classes, while the other half will be rented for income to sustain conservation and programs. A writer-in-residence will be funded by the Ellis Beauregard Foundation and the Millay House Rockland.Millay is also memorialized in Camden, Maine, where she lived beginning in 1900. A statue of the poet stands in Harbor Park, which shares with Mt. Battie the view of Penobscot Bay that opens \"Renascence\", the poem that launched Millay's career. Camden Public Library also shares Mt. Battie's view. It has the first couplets of \"Renascence\" inscribed along the perimeter of a large skylight: \"All I could see from where I stood / Was three long mountains and a wood; / I turned and looked another way, / And saw three islands in a bay.\" The library's Walsh History Center collection contains the scrapbooks created by Millay's high-school friend, Corinne Sawyer, as well as photos, letters, newspaper clippings, and other ephemera.\nIn popular culture.\nMillay has been referenced in popular culture, and her work has been the inspiration for music and drama:\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nMy candle burns at both ends;\nIt will not last the night;\nBut ah, my foes, and oh, my friends\u2014\nIt gives a lovely light!\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\"First Fig\" from \"A Few Figs from Thistles\" (1920)\nMillay wrote six verse dramas early in her career.\n\"\" (1922) is an homage to the geometry of Euclid. \"Renascence\" and \"The Ballad of the Harp-Weaver\" are considered her finest poems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9825", "revid": "36199094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9825", "title": "Enlightenment", "text": "Enlightenment or enlighten may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9827", "revid": "11112747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9827", "title": "Ethnocentrism", "text": "Judging another culture solely by the values and standards of one's own culture\nEthnocentrism in social science and anthropology\u2014as well as in colloquial English discourse\u2014means to apply one's own culture or ethnicity as a frame of reference to judge other cultures, practices, behaviors, beliefs, and people, instead of using the standards of the particular culture involved. Since this judgment is often negative, some people also use the term to refer to the belief that one's culture is superior to, or more correct or normal than, all others\u2014especially regarding the distinctions that define each ethnicity's cultural identity, such as language, behavior, customs, and religion. In common usage, it can also simply mean any culturally biased judgment. For example, ethnocentrism can be seen in the common portrayals of the Global South and the Global North.\nEthnocentrism is sometimes related to racism, stereotyping, discrimination, or xenophobia. However, the term \"ethnocentrism\" does not necessarily involve a negative view of the others' race or indicate a negative connotation. The opposite of ethnocentrism is cultural relativism, a guiding philosophy stating the best way to understand a different culture is through their perspective rather than judging them from the subjective viewpoints shaped by one's own cultural standards.\nThe term \"ethnocentrism\" was first applied in the social sciences by American sociologist William G. Sumner. In his 1906 book, \"Folkways,\" Sumner describes ethnocentrism as \"the technical name for the view of things in which one's own group is the center of everything, and all others are scaled and rated with reference to it.\" He further characterized ethnocentrism as often leading to pride, vanity, the belief in one's own group's superiority, and contempt for outsiders.\nOver time, ethnocentrism developed alongside the progression of social understandings by people such as social theorist Theodore W. Adorno. In Adorno's \"The Authoritarian Personality\", he and his colleagues of the Frankfurt School established a broader definition of the term as a result of \"in group-out group differentiation\", stating that ethnocentrism \"combines a positive attitude toward one's own ethnic/cultural group (the in-group) with a negative attitude toward the other ethnic/cultural group (the out-group).\" Both of these juxtaposing attitudes are also a result of a process known as \"social identification\" and \"social counter-identification.\"\nOrigins and development.\nThe term ethnocentrism derives from two Greek words: \"ethnos\", meaning nation, and \"kentron\", meaning center. Scholars believe this term was coined by Polish sociologist Ludwig Gumplowicz in the 19th century, although alternate theories suggest that he only popularized the concept as opposed to inventing it. He saw ethnocentrism as a phenomenon similar to the delusions of geocentrism and anthropocentrism, defining Ethnocentrism as \"the reasons by virtue of which each group of people believed it had always occupied the highest point, not only among contemporaneous peoples and nations, but also in relation to all peoples of the historical past.\"\nSubsequently, in the 20th century, American social scientist William G. Sumner proposed two different definitions in his 1906 book \"Folkways.\" Sumner stated that \"Ethnocentrism is the technical name for this view of things in which one's own group is the center of everything, and all others are scaled and rated with reference to it.\" In the \"War and Other Essays (1911)\", he wrote that \"the sentiment of cohesion, internal comradeship, and devotion to the in-group, which carries with it a sense of superiority to any out-group and readiness to defend the interests of the in-group against the out-group, is technically known as ethnocentrism.\" According to Boris Bizumic it is a popular misunderstanding that Sumner originated the term ethnocentrism, stating that in actuality he brought ethnocentrism into the mainstreams of anthropology, social science, and psychology through his English publications.\nSeveral theories have been reinforced through the social and psychological understandings of ethnocentrism including T.W Adorno's Authoritarian Personality Theory (1950), Donald T. Campbell's Realistic Group Conflict Theory (1972), and Henri Tajfel's Social identity theory (1986). These theories have helped to distinguish ethnocentrism as a means to better understand the behaviors caused by in-group and out-group differentiation throughout history and society.\nEthnocentrism in social sciences.\nIn social sciences, ethnocentrism means to judge another culture based on the standard of one's own culture instead of the standard of the other particular culture. When people use their own culture as a parameter to measure other cultures, they often tend to think that their culture is superior and see other cultures as inferior and bizarre. Ethnocentrism can be explained at different levels of analysis. For example, at an intergroup level, this term is seen as a consequence of a conflict between groups; while at the individual level, in-group cohesion and out-group hostility can explain personality traits. Also, ethnocentrism can helps us to explain the construction of identity. Ethnocentrism can explain the basis of one's identity by excluding the outgroup that is the target of ethnocentric sentiments and used as a way of distinguishing oneself from other groups that can be more or less tolerant. This practice in social interactions creates social boundaries, such boundaries define and draw symbolic boundaries of the group that one wants to be associated with or belong to. In this way, ethnocentrism is a term not only limited to anthropology but also can be applied to other fields of social sciences like sociology or psychology.\u00a0Ethnocentrism may be particularly enhanced in the presence of interethnic competition or hostility. On the other hand, ethnocentrism may negatively influence expatriate worker's performance.\nA more recent interpretation of ethnocentrism, which expands upon the work of Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss, highlights its positive dimension. Political sociologist Audrey Alejandro of the London School of Economics argues that, while ethnocentrism does produce social hierarchies, it also produces diversity by maintaining the different dispositions, practices, and knowledge of identity groups. Diversity is both fostered and undermined by ethnocentrism. Ethnocentrism, for Alejandro, is therefore neither something to be suppressed nor celebrated uncritically. Rather, observers can cultivate a 'balanced ethnocentrism', allowing themselves to be challenged and transformed by difference whilst still protecting difference.\nAnthropology.\nThe classifications of ethnocentrism originate from the studies of anthropology. With its omnipresence throughout history, ethnocentrism has always been a factor in how different cultures and groups related to one another. Examples including how historically, foreigners would be characterized as \"Barbarians\", or how China believed their nation to be the \"Empire of the Center\" and viewed foreigners as privileged subordinates. However, the anthropocentric interpretations initially took place most notably in the 19th century when anthropologists began to describe and rank various cultures according to the degree to which they had developed significant milestones, such as monotheistic religions, technological advancements, and other historical progressions.\nMost rankings were strongly influenced by colonization and the belief to improve societies they colonized, ranking the cultures based on the progression of their western societies and what they classified as milestones. Comparisons were mostly based on what the colonists believed as superior and what their western societies have accomplished. Victorian era politician and historian Thomas Macaulay once claimed that \"one shelf of a Western library\" had more knowledge than the centuries of text and literature written by Asian cultures. Ideas developed by Western scientists such as Herbert Spencer, including the concept of the \"survival of the fittest\", contained ethnocentric ideals; influencing the belief that societies which were 'superior' were most likely to survive and prosper. Edward Said's concept of Orientalism represented how Western reactions to non-Western societies were based on an \"unequal power relationship\" that the Western world developed due to its history of colonialism and the influence it held over non-Western societies.\nThe ethnocentric classification of \"primitive\" were also used by 19th and 20th century anthropologists and represented how unawareness in cultural and religious understanding changed overall reactions to non-Western societies. 19th-century anthropologist Edward Burnett Tylor wrote about \"primitive\" societies in \"Primitive Culture\" (1871), creating a \"civilization\" scale where it was implied that ethnic cultures preceded civilized societies. The use of \"savage\" as a classification is modernly known as \"tribal\" or \"pre-literate\" where it was usually referred as a derogatory term as the \"civilization\" scale became more common. Examples that demonstrate a lack of understanding include when European travelers judged different languages based on the fact that they could not understand it and displayed a negative reaction, or the intolerance displayed by Westerners when exposed to unknown religions and symbolisms. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, a German philosopher, justified Western imperialism by reasoning that since the non-Western societies were \"primitive\" and \"uncivilized\", their culture and history was not worth conserving and thus should welcome Westernization.\nAnthropologist Franz Boas saw the flaws in this formulaic approach to ranking and interpreting cultural development and committed himself to overthrowing this inaccurate reasoning due to many factors involving their individual characteristics. With his methodological innovations, Boas sought to show the error of the proposition that race determined cultural capacity. In his 1911 book \"The Mind of Primitive Man\", Boas wrote that:It is somewhat difficult for us to recognize that the value which we attribute to our own civilization is due to the fact that we participate in this civilization, and that it has been controlling all our actions from the time of our birth; but it is certainly conceivable that there may be other civilizations, based perhaps on different traditions and on a different equilibrium of emotion and reason, which are of no less value than ours, although it may be impossible for us to appreciate their values without having grown up under their influence.Together, Boas and his colleagues propagated the certainty that there are no inferior races or cultures. This egalitarian approach introduced the concept of cultural relativism to anthropology, a methodological principle for investigating and comparing societies in as unprejudiced a way as possible and without using a developmental scale as anthropologists at the time were implementing. Boas and anthropologist Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski argued that any human science had to transcend the ethnocentric views that could blind any scientist's ultimate conclusions.\nBoth had also urged anthropologists to conduct ethnographic fieldwork to overcome their ethnocentrism. To help, Malinowski would develop the theory of functionalism as guides for producing non-ethnocentric studies of different cultures. Classic examples of anti-ethnocentric anthropology include Margaret Mead's \"Coming of Age in Samoa\" (1928), which in time has met with severe criticism for its incorrect data and generalisations, Malinowski's \"The Sexual Life of Savages in North-Western Melanesia\" (1929), and Ruth Benedict's \"Patterns of Culture\" (1934). Mead and Benedict were two of Boas's students.\nScholars generally agree that Boas developed his ideas under the influence of the German philosopher Immanuel Kant. Legend has it that, on a field trip to the Baffin Islands in 1883, Boas would pass the frigid nights reading Kant's \"Critique of Pure Reason\". In that work, Kant argued that human understanding could not be described according to the laws that applied to the operations of nature, and that its operations were therefore free, not determined, and that ideas regulated human action, sometimes independent of material interests. Following Kant, Boas pointed out the starving Eskimos who, because of their religious beliefs, would not hunt seals to feed themselves, thus showing that no pragmatic or material calculus determined their values.\nCauses.\nEthnocentrism is believed to be a learned behavior embedded into a variety of beliefs and values of an individual or group.\nDue to enculturation, individuals in in-groups have a deeper sense of loyalty and are more likely to following the norms and develop relationships with associated members. Within relation to enculturation, ethnocentrism is said to be a transgenerational problem since stereotypes and similar perspectives can be enforced and encouraged as time progresses. Although loyalty can increase better in-grouper approval, limited interactions with other cultures can prevent individuals to have an understanding and appreciation towards cultural differences resulting in greater ethnocentrism.\nThe social identity approach suggests that ethnocentric beliefs are caused by a strong identification with one's own culture that directly creates a positive view of that culture. It is theorized by Henri Tajfel and John C. Turner that to maintain that positive view, people make social comparisons that cast competing cultural groups in an unfavorable light.\nAlternative or opposite perspectives could cause individuals to develop na\u00efve realism and be subject to limitations in understandings. These characteristics can also lead to individuals to become subject to ethnocentrism, when referencing out-groups, and black sheep effect, where personal perspectives contradict those from fellow in-groupers.\nRealistic conflict theory assumes that ethnocentrism happens due to \"real or perceived conflict\" between groups. This also happens when a dominant group may perceive the new members as a threat. Scholars have recently demonstrated that individuals are more likely to develop in-group identification and out-group negatively in response to intergroup competition, conflict, or threat.\nAlthough the causes of ethnocentric beliefs and actions can have varying roots of context and reason, the effects of ethnocentrism has had both negative and positive effects throughout history. The most detrimental effects of ethnocentrism resulting into genocide, apartheid, slavery, and many violent conflicts. Historical examples of these negative effects of ethnocentrism are The Holocaust, the Crusades, the Trail of Tears, and the internment of Japanese Americans. These events were a result of cultural differences reinforced inhumanely by a superior, majority group. In his 1976 book on evolution, \"The Selfish Gene\", evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins writes that \"blood-feuds and inter-clan warfare are easily interpretative in terms of Hamilton's genetic theory.\" Simulation-based experiments in evolutionary game theory have attempted to provide an explanation for the selection of ethnocentric-strategy phenotypes.\nThe positive examples of ethnocentrism throughout history have aimed to prohibit the callousness of ethnocentrism and reverse the perspectives of living in a single culture. These organizations can include the formation of the United Nations; aimed to maintain international relations, and the Olympic Games; a celebration of sports and friendly competition between cultures.\nEffects.\nA study in New Zealand was used to compare how individuals associate with in-groups and out-groupers and has a connotation to discrimination. Strong in-group favoritism benefits the dominant groups and is different from out-group hostility and/or punishment. A suggested solution is to limit the perceived threat from the out-group that also decreases the likeliness for those supporting the in-groups to negatively react.\nEthnocentrism also influences consumer preference over which goods they purchase. A study that used several in-group and out-group orientations have shown a correlation between national identity, consumer cosmopolitanism, consumer ethnocentrism, and the methods consumers choose their products, whether imported or domestic.Consumer Ethnocentrism in which beliefs held by consumers in which they determine which they determine what foreign goods to consume. A study based on the study of consumers was used to determine that Chinese, we skeptical about purchasing product from Japan, due to the deaths created by World War II. Ethnocentrism not only causes effects upon a product\nEthnocentrism and racism.\nEthnocentrism is usually associated with racism. However, as mentioned before, ethnocentrism does not necessarily implicate a negative connotation. In European research the term racism is not linked to ethnocentrism because Europeans avoid applying the concept of race to humans; meanwhile, using this term is not a problem for American researchers. Since ethnocentrism implicated a strong identification with one's in-group, it mostly automatically leads to negative feelings and stereotyping to the members of the outgroup, which can be confused with racism. Finally, scholars agree that avoiding stereotypes is an indispensable prerequisite to overcome ethnocentrism; and mass media play a key role regarding this issue. The differences that each culture possess causes could hinder one another leading to ethnocentrism and racism. A Canadian study established the differences among French Canadian and English Canadian respondents based on products that would be purchased due to ethnocentrism and racism. Due to how diverse the world has become society has begun to misinterpret the term cultural diversity, by using ethnocentrism to create controversy among all cultures.\nEffects of ethnocentrism in the media.\nMass media plays an important role in our current society. We are constantly exposed to media content every day. Researchers had found that ethnocentrism is dysfunctional in communication and similar fields because the lack of acceptance of other cultures leads to the creation of barriers for people of different backgrounds to interact with each other. The presence of ethnocentrism in media content creates an issue in the exchange of messages in the communication process. The media industry is dominated by the Global North, so Western ethnocentrism tends to be exposed in the media. This can be seen in the predominance of Western content in TV shows, film, and other forms of mass media. Some shows tend to depict foreign cultures as inferior or strange in contrast to their own culture.\nFilm.\nCinema has been around our society since the beginning of the 20th century, and it is an important tool that allow to entertain and/or educate the viewer. Western companies are usually the leaders of the film industry. Thus, it is common to be exposed to content based on Westerners' point of view. Examples of ethnocentrism are constantly seen in films whether intentionally or unintentionally. An example of this can be seen on the American animated film \"Aladdin\" by Disney in 1992; the opening song of the movie is \"Arabian Nights\", it is mentioned in the lyrics that \"it's barbaric, hey, but it's home,\" which had caused debates among the audience because it could lead to thinking that the Arabic culture is barbaric. Examples like this abound on many Hollywood films. Experts on the field propose that a way of overcoming ethnocentrism is to avoid the use of stereotypes in films. Therefore, the presence of ethnocentrism in cinema leads to stereotypical images of cultures that differ from ours. Another film example is a film called Crazy Rich Asians based of the book by Kevin Kwan, the film was produced in 2018.\nSocial media.\nA considerable number of people are exposed to social media, whose purpose is to encourage interaction among users. Social media has become a reliant source, to be able to interact among others across the world. The most common and popular social media platforms are Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, Snapchat, YouTube, and Tiktok. Social media tends to play a positively constructive role within a society in which it educates, guides/entertain the public, and the bring more awareness towards other cultures by illustrating how each one is different from one another. Even though social media can produce positive outcomes within ethnocentrism, there are also negatives in which it allows for other cultures to judge one another and create controversy. Someone who is ethnocentric may hinder the exchange of information by diminishing the interest of interacting with people from other cultures.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "9828", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9828", "title": "Execution unit", "text": "Part of a CPU which performs the operations instructed by the program\nIn computer engineering, an execution unit (E-unit or EU) is a part of the central processing unit (CPU) or graphics processing unit (GPU) that performs the operations and calculations forwarded from the instruction unit. It may have its own internal control sequence unit (not to be confused with the CPU's main control unit), some registers, and other internal units such as an arithmetic logic unit, address generation unit, floating-point unit, load\u2013store unit, branch execution unit or some smaller and more specific components.\nIt is common for modern CPUs to have multiple parallel functional units within its execution units, which is referred to as superscalar design. The simplest arrangement is to use a single bus manager unit to manage the memory interface, and the others to perform calculations. Additionally, modern CPUs' execution units are usually pipelined.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9829", "revid": "28568042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9829", "title": "Eskilstuna Municipality", "text": "Eskilstuna Municipality () is a municipality in S\u00f6dermanland County in southeast Sweden, between Lake M\u00e4laren and Lake Hj\u00e4lmaren. The seat of the municipality is in the city of Eskilstuna.\nThe present municipality was formed in 1971 by the merger of the City of Eskilstuna, the City of Torsh\u00e4lla and five rural municipalities. It is the largest municipality in the S\u00f6rmland region in terms of population, having more than 1/3 of the overall county population.\nGeography.\nEskilstuna Municipality is an inland municipality, although the low-lying M\u00e4laren renders the lengthy lakeshore to be at above sea level. The highest point is at \"Tyckenhed\" in the southwest of the municipality at above sea level.\nLocalities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nElections.\nRiksdag.\nThese are the results of the Riksdag elections of Eskilstuna Municipality since the 1972 municipality reform. The results of the Sweden Democrats were not published by SCB between 1988 and 1998 at a municipal level to the party's small nationwide size at the time. \"Votes\" denotes valid votes, whereas \"Turnout\" denotes also blank and invalid votes.\nBlocs\nThis lists the relative strength of the socialist and centre-right blocs since 1973, but parties not elected to the Riksdag are inserted as \"other\", including the Sweden Democrats results from 1988 to 2006, but also the Christian Democrats pre-1991 and the Greens in 1982, 1985, and 1991. The sources are identical to the table above. The coalition or government mandate marked in bold formed the government after the election. New Democracy got elected in 1991 but is still listed as \"other\" due to the short lifespan of the party. \"Elected\" is the total number of percentage points from the municipality that went to parties who were elected to the Riksdag.\nTwin towns - Sister cities.\nEskilstuna is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9830", "revid": "45382375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9830", "title": "European Convention on Human Rights", "text": "International treaty to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms in Europe\nThe European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR; formally the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms) is an international convention to protect human rights and political freedoms in Europe. Drafted in 1950 by the then newly formed Council of Europe, the convention entered into force on 3 September 1953. All Council of Europe member states are party to the convention and new members are expected to ratify the convention at the earliest opportunity.\nThe convention established the European Court of Human Rights (generally referred to by the initials ECtHR). Any person who feels their rights have been violated under the convention by a state party can take a case to the court. Judgments finding violations are binding on the states concerned and they are obliged to execute them. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe monitors the execution of judgments, particularly to ensure payments awarded by the court appropriately compensate applicants for the damage they have sustained.\nThe convention has several protocols, which amend the convention framework.\nThe convention has had a significant influence on the law in Council of Europe member countries and is widely considered the most effective international treaty for human rights protection.\nHistory.\nThe European Convention on Human Rights has played an important role in the development and awareness of human rights in Europe. The development of a regional system of human rights protections operating across Europe can be seen as a direct response to twin concerns. First, in the aftermath of the Second World War, the convention, drawing on the inspiration of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, can be seen as part of a wider response from the Allied powers in delivering a human rights agenda to prevent the most serious human rights violations which had occurred during the Second World War from happening again.\nSecond, the convention was a response to the growth of Stalinism in Central and Eastern Europe and was designed to protect the member states of the Council of Europe from communist subversion. This, in part, explains the constant references to values and principles that are \"necessary in a democratic society\" throughout the convention, despite the fact that such principles are not in any way defined within the convention itself.\nFrom 7 to 10 May 1948, politicians including Winston Churchill, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, and Konrad Adenauer; civil society representatives; academics; business leaders; trade unionists; and religious leaders convened the Congress of Europe in The Hague. At the end of the Congress, a declaration and following pledge to create the convention was issued. The second and third articles of the pledge state: \"We desire a Charter of Human Rights guaranteeing liberty of thought, assembly and expression as well as right to form a political opposition. We desire a Court of Justice with adequate sanctions for the implementation of this Charter.\"\nThe convention was drafted by the Council of Europe after the Second World War and Hague Congress. Over 100 parliamentarians from the twelve member states of the Council of Europe gathered in Strasbourg in the summer of 1949 for the first-ever meeting of the Council's Consultative Assembly to draft a \"charter of human rights\" and to establish a court to enforce it. British MP and lawyer Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe, the chair of the Assembly's Committee on Legal and Administrative Questions, was one of its leading members and guided the drafting of the convention, based on an earlier draft produced by the European Movement. As a prosecutor at the Nuremberg Trials, he had seen first-hand how international justice could be effectively applied. \nFrench former minister and Resistance fighter Pierre-Henri Teitgen submitted a report to the Assembly proposing a list of rights to be protected, selecting a number from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights that had recently been agreed to in New York, and defining how the enforcing judicial mechanism might operate. After extensive debates, the Assembly sent its final proposal to the Council's Committee of Ministers, which convened a group of experts to draft the convention itself.\nThe convention was designed to incorporate a traditional civil liberties approach to securing \"effective political democracy\", from the strongest traditions in the United Kingdom, France and other member states of the fledgling Council of Europe, as said by Guido Raimondi, President of the European Court of Human Rights:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The European system of protection of human rights with its Court would be inconceivable untied from democracy. In fact, we have a bond that is not only regional or geographic: a State cannot be party to the European Convention on Human Rights if it is not a member of the Council of Europe; it cannot be a member State of the Council of Europe if it does not respect pluralist democracy, the rule of law and human rights. So a non-democratic State could not participate in the ECHR system: the protection of democracy goes hand in hand with the protection of rights.\nThe convention was opened for signature on 4 November 1950 in Rome. It was ratified and entered into force on 3 September 1953. It is overseen and enforced by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, and the Council of Europe. Until procedural reforms in the late 1990s, the convention was also overseen by a European Commission on Human Rights.\nDrafting.\nThe convention is drafted in broad terms, in a similar (albeit more modern) manner to the 1689 Scottish Claim of Right Act 1689, to the 1689 English Bill of Rights, the 1791 U.S. Bill of Rights, the 1789 French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, or the first part of the German Basic Law. Statements of principle are, from a legal point of view, not determinative and require extensive interpretation by courts to bring out meaning in particular factual situations.\nConvention articles.\nAs amended by Protocol 11, the convention consists of three parts. The main rights and freedoms are contained in Section I, which consists of Articles 2 to 18. Section II (Articles 19 to 51) sets up the court and its rules of operation. Section III contains various concluding provisions.\nBefore the entry into force of Protocol 11, Section II (Article 19) set up the Commission and the court, Sections III (Articles 20 to 37) and IV (Articles 38 to 59) included the high-level machinery for the operation of, respectively, the Commission and the court, and Section V contained various concluding provisions.\nMany of the articles in Section I are structured in two paragraphs: the first sets out a basic right or freedom (such as Article 2(1) \u2013 the right to life) but the second contains various exclusions, exceptions or limitations on the basic right (such as Article 2(2) \u2013 which excepts certain uses of force leading to death).\nArticle 1 \u2013 respecting rights.\nArticle 1 simply binds the signatory parties to secure the rights under the other articles of the convention \"within their jurisdiction\". In exceptional cases, \"jurisdiction\" may not be confined to a contracting state's own national territory; the obligation to secure convention rights then also extends to foreign territories, such as occupied land in which the state exercises effective control.\nIn \"Loizidou v Turkey\", the European Court of Human Rights ruled that jurisdiction of member states to the convention extended to areas under that state's effective control as a result of military action.\nArticle 2 \u2013 life.\nArticle 2 protects the right of every person to their life. The right to life extends only to human beings, not to animals, or to \"legal persons\" such as corporations. In \"Evans v United Kingdom\", the court ruled that the question of whether the right to life extends to a human embryo fell within a state's margin of appreciation. In \"Vo v France\", the court declined to extend the right to life to an unborn child, while stating that \"it is neither desirable, nor even possible as matters stand, to answer in the abstract the question whether the unborn child is a person for the purposes of Article 2 of the Convention\".\nThe court has ruled that states have three main duties under Article 2:\nThe first paragraph of the article contains an exception for lawful executions, although this exception has largely been superseded by Protocols 6 and 13. Protocol 6 prohibits the imposition of the death penalty in peacetime, while Protocol 13 extends the prohibition to all circumstances. (For more on Protocols 6 and 13, see below).\nThe second paragraph of Article 2 provides that death resulting from defending oneself or others, arresting a suspect or fugitive, or suppressing riots or insurrections, will not contravene the Article when the use of force involved is \"no more than absolutely necessary\".\nSignatory states to the convention can only derogate from the rights contained in Article 2 for deaths which result from lawful acts of war.\nThe European Court of Human Rights did not rule upon the right to life until 1995, when in \"McCann and Others v United Kingdom\" it ruled that the exception contained in the second paragraph does not constitute situations when it is permitted to kill, but situations where it is permitted to use force which might result in the deprivation of life.\nArticle 3 \u2013 torture.\nArticle 3 prohibits torture and \"inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment\". There are no exceptions or limitations on this right. This provision usually applies, apart from torture, to cases of severe police violence and poor conditions in detention.\nThe court has emphasized the fundamental nature of Article 3 in holding that the prohibition is made in \"absolute terms\u00a0... irrespective of a victim's conduct\". The court has also held that states cannot deport or extradite individuals who might be subjected to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in the recipient state.\nThe first case to examine Article 3 was the Greek case, which set an influential precedent. In \"Ireland v. United Kingdom\" (1979\u20131980) the court ruled that the five techniques developed by the United Kingdom (wall-standing, hooding, subjection to noise, deprivation of sleep, and deprivation of food and drink), as used against fourteen detainees in Northern Ireland by the United Kingdom were \"inhuman and degrading\" and breached the European Convention on Human Rights, but did not amount to \"torture\".\nIn \"Aksoy v. Turkey\" (1997) the court found Turkey guilty of torture in 1996 in the case of a detainee who was suspended by his arms while his hands were tied behind his back.\n\"Selmouni v. France\" (2000) the court has appeared to be more open to finding states guilty of torture ruling that since the convention is a \"living instrument\", treatment which it had previously characterized as inhuman or degrading treatment might in future be regarded as torture.\nIn 2014, after new information was uncovered that showed the decision to use the five techniques in Northern Ireland in 1971\u20131972 had been taken by British ministers, the Irish Government asked the European Court of Human Rights to review its judgement. In 2018, by six votes to one, the court declined.\nArticle 4 \u2013 servitude.\nArticle 4 prohibits slavery, servitude and forced labour but exempts labour:\nArticle 5 \u2013 liberty and security.\nArticle 5 provides that everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. Liberty and security of the person are taken as a \"compound\" concept \u2013 security of the person has not been subject to separate interpretation by the court.\nArticle 5 provides the right to liberty, subject only to lawful arrest or detention under certain other circumstances, such as arrest on reasonable suspicion of a crime or imprisonment in fulfilment of a sentence. The article also provides those arrested with the right to be informed, in a language they understand, of the reasons for the arrest and any charge they face, the right of prompt access to judicial proceedings to determine the legality of the arrest or detention, to trial within a reasonable time or release pending trial, and the right to compensation in the case of arrest or detention in violation of this article.\nArticle 6 \u2013 fair trial.\nArticle 6 provides a detailed right to a fair trial, including the right to a public hearing before an independent and impartial tribunal within reasonable time, the presumption of innocence, and other minimum rights for those charged with a criminal offence (adequate time and facilities to prepare their defence, access to legal representation, right to examine witnesses against them or have them examined, right to the free assistance of an interpreter).\nThe majority of convention violations that the court finds today are excessive delays, in violation of the \"reasonable time\" requirement, in civil and criminal proceedings before national courts, mostly in Italy and France. Under the \"independent tribunal\" requirement, the court has ruled that military judges in Turkish state security courts are incompatible with Article 6. In compliance with this Article, Turkey has now adopted a law abolishing these courts.\nAnother significant set of violations concerns the \"confrontation clause\" of Article 6 (i.e. the right to examine witnesses or have them examined). In this respect, problems of compliance with Article 6 may arise when national laws allow the use in evidence of the testimonies of absent, anonymous and vulnerable witnesses.\nArticle 7 \u2013 retroactivity.\nArticle 7 prohibits the retroactive criminalisation of acts and omissions. No person may be punished for an act that was not a criminal offence at the time of its commission. The article states that a criminal offence is one under either national or international law, which would permit a party to prosecute someone for a crime which was not illegal under domestic law at the time, so long as it was prohibited by international law. The Article also prohibits a heavier penalty being imposed than was applicable at the time when the criminal act was committed.\nArticle 7 incorporates the legal principle \"nullum crimen, nulla poena sine lege\" (no crime, no penalty without law) into the convention.\nRelevant cases are:\nArticle 8 \u2013 privacy.\nArticle 8 provides a right to respect for one's \"private and family life, his home and his correspondence\", subject to certain restrictions that are \"in accordance with law\" and \"necessary in a democratic society\". This article clearly provides a right to be free of unlawful searches, but the court has given the protection for \"private and family life\" that this article provides a broad interpretation, taking for instance that prohibition of private consensual homosexual acts violates this article. There have been cases discussing consensual familial sexual relationships, and how the criminalisation of this may violate this article. However, the ECHR still allows such familial sexual acts to be criminal. \nThis may be compared to the jurisprudence of the United States Supreme Court, which has also adopted a somewhat broad interpretation of the right to privacy. Furthermore, Article\u00a08 sometimes comprises positive obligations: whereas classical human rights are formulated as prohibiting a state from interfering with rights, and thus \"not\" to do something (e.g. not to separate a family under family life protection), the effective enjoyment of such rights may also include an obligation for the state to become active, and to \"do\" something (e.g. to enforce access for a divorced parent to his/her child).\nNotable cases:\nArticle 9 \u2013 conscience and religion.\nArticle 9 provides a right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This includes the freedom to change a religion or belief, and to manifest a religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and observance, subject to certain restrictions that are \"in accordance with law\" and \"necessary in a democratic society\".\nRelevant cases are:\nArticle 10 \u2013 expression.\nArticle 10 provides the right to freedom of expression, subject to certain restrictions that are \"in accordance with law\" and \"necessary in a democratic society\". This right includes the freedom to hold opinions, and to receive and impart information and ideas, but allows restrictions for:\nRelevant cases are:\nArticle 11 \u2013 association.\nArticle 11 protects the right to freedom of assembly and association, including the right to form trade unions, subject to certain restrictions that are \"in accordance with law\" and \"necessary in a democratic society\".\nArticle 12 \u2013 marriage.\nArticle 12 provides a right for women and men of marriageable age to marry and establish a family.\nDespite a number of invitations, the court has so far refused to apply the protections of this article to same-sex marriage. The court has defended this on the grounds that the article was intended to apply only to different-sex marriage, and that a wide margin of appreciation must be granted to parties in this area.\nIn \"Goodwin v. United Kingdom\" the court ruled that a law which still classified post-operative transsexual persons under their pre-operative sex violated article 12 as it meant that transsexual persons were unable to marry individuals of their post-operative opposite sex. This reversed an earlier ruling in \"Rees v. United Kingdom\". This did not, however, alter the Court's understanding that Article 12 protects only different-sex couples.\nThe European Court of Human Rights ruled in \"Schalk and Kopf v. Austria\" that countries are not required to provide marriage licenses for same-sex couples; however, if a country allows same-sex couple marriage it must be done under the same conditions that opposite-sex couples marriage face, in order to prevent a breach of article 14 \u2013 the prohibition of discrimination. Additionally, the court ruled in the 2015 case of \"Oliari and Others v. Italy\" that states have a positive obligation to ensure there is a specific legal framework for the recognition and protection of same-sex couples.\nArticle 13 \u2013 effective remedy.\nArticle 13 provides for the right for an effective remedy before national authorities for violations of rights under the convention. The inability to obtain a remedy before a national court for an infringement of a Convention right is thus a free-standing and separately actionable infringement of the convention.\nArticle 14 \u2013 discrimination.\nArticle 14 contains a prohibition of discrimination. This prohibition is broad in some ways and narrow in others. It is broad in that it prohibits discrimination under a potentially unlimited number of grounds. While the article specifically prohibits discrimination based on \"sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinions, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other status\", the last of these allows the court to extend to Article 14 protection to other grounds not specifically mentioned such as has been done regarding discrimination based on a person's sexual orientation.\nAt the same time, the article's protection is limited in that it only prohibits discrimination with respect to rights under the convention. Thus, an applicant must prove discrimination in the enjoyment of a specific right that is guaranteed elsewhere in the convention (e.g. discrimination based on sex \u2013 Article 14 \u2013 in the enjoyment of the right to freedom of expression \u2013 Article 10).\nProtocol 12 extends this prohibition to cover discrimination in any legal right, even when that legal right is not protected under the convention, so long as it is provided for in national law.\nArticle 15 \u2013 derogations.\nArticle 15 allows contracting states to derogate from certain rights guaranteed by the convention in a time of \"war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation\". Permissible derogations under article 15 must meet three substantive conditions:\nIn addition to these substantive requirements, the derogation must be procedurally sound. There must be some formal announcement of the derogation and notice of the derogation and any measures adopted under it, and the ending of the derogation must be communicated to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe.\nAs of 2016, eight member states had ever invoked derogations. The court is quite permissive in accepting a state's derogations from the convention but applies a higher degree of scrutiny in deciding whether measures taken by states under a derogation are, in the words of Article 15, \"strictly required by the exigencies of the situation\". Thus in \"A\u00a0v\u00a0United Kingdom\", the court dismissed a claim that a derogation lodged by the British government in response to the September 11 attacks was invalid, but went on to find that measures taken by the United Kingdom under that derogation were disproportionate.\nExamples of such derogations include:\nArticle 16 \u2013 foreign parties.\nArticle 16 allows states to restrict the political activity of foreigners. The court has ruled that European Union member states cannot consider the nationals of other member states to be aliens.\nArticle 17 \u2013 abuse of rights.\nArticle 17 provides that no one may use the rights guaranteed by the convention to seek the abolition or limitation of rights guaranteed in the convention. This addresses instances where states seek to restrict a human right in the name of another human right, or where individuals rely on a human right to undermine other human rights (for example where an individual issues a death threat).\nArticle 18 \u2013 permitted restrictions.\nArticle 18 provides that any limitations on the rights provided for in the convention may be used only for the purpose for which they are provided. For example, Article 5, which guarantees the right to personal freedom, may be explicitly limited in order to bring a suspect before a judge. To use pre-trial detention as a means of intimidation of a person under a false pretext is, therefore, a limitation of right (to freedom) which does not serve an explicitly provided purpose (to be brought before a judge), and is therefore contrary to Article 18.\nConvention protocols.\nAs of January 2010[ [update]], fifteen protocols to the convention have been opened for signature. These can be divided into two main groups: those amending the framework of the convention system, and those expanding the rights that can be protected. The former require unanimous ratification by member states before coming into force, while the latter require a certain number of states to sign before coming into force.\nProtocol 1.\nThis Protocol contains three different rights which the signatories could not agree to place in the convention itself. Monaco and Switzerland have signed but never ratified Protocol 1.\nArticle 1 \u2013 property.\nArticle 1 (\"A1P1\") provides that \"every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions\". The European Court of Human Rights acknowledged a violation of the fair balance between the demands of the general interest of the community and the requirements of the protection of the individual's fundamental rights, also, in the uncertainty \u2013 for the owner \u2013 about the future of the property, and in the absence of an allowance.\nIn the case of \"Mifsud and others v Malta\" (38770/17) the Maltese state was found to have violated Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 to the convention. The case involved a plot of land owned by the Mifsud family and their heirs which was expropriated twice (in 1984 and in 2012). The court, in its judgment, stated that \"the (Maltese) Constitutional Court had no basis on which to ground its finding. The Court is disconcerted by the circumstances of the present case which led to an expropriation of property being endorsed without anyone being able to assert the reasons behind such an expropriation.\"\nArticle 2 \u2013 education.\nArticle 2 provides for the right not to be denied an education and the right for parents to have their children educated in accordance with their religious and other views. It does not however guarantee any particular level of education of any particular quality.\nAlthough phrased in the Protocol as a negative right, in \"\u015eahin v. Turkey\" the court ruled that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;it would be hard to imagine that institutions of higher education existing at a given time do not come within the scope of the first sentence of Article 2 of Protocol No 1. Although that Article does not impose a duty on the Contracting States to set up institutions of higher education, any State doing so will be under an obligation to afford an effective right of access to them. In a democratic society, the right to education, which is indispensable to the furtherance of human rights, plays such a fundamental role that a restrictive interpretation of the first sentence of Article 2 of Protocol No. 1 would not be consistent with the aim or purpose of that provision.\nArticle 3 \u2013 elections.\nArticle 3 provides for the right to elections performed by secret ballot, that are also free and that occur at regular intervals.\nProtocol 4 \u2013 civil imprisonment, free movement, expulsion.\nArticle 1 prohibits the imprisonment of people for inability to fulfil a contract. Article 2 provides for a right to freely move within a country once lawfully there and for a right to leave any country. Article 3 prohibits the expulsion of nationals and provides for the right of an individual to enter a country of their nationality. Article 4 prohibits the collective expulsion of foreigners.\nTurkey and the United Kingdom have signed but never ratified Protocol 4. Greece and Switzerland have neither signed nor ratified this protocol.\nThe United Kingdom's failure to ratify this protocol is due to concerns over the interaction of Article 2 and Article 3 with British nationality law. Specifically, several classes of \"British national\" (such as British National (Overseas)) do not have the right of abode in the United Kingdom and are subject to immigration control there. In 2009, the UK government stated that it had no plans to ratify Protocol 4 because of concerns that those articles could be taken as conferring that right.\nProtocol 6 \u2013 restriction of death penalty.\nRequires parties to restrict the application of the death penalty except for \"acts committed in time of war\" or of \"imminent threat of war\".\nEvery Council of Europe member state has signed and ratified Protocol 6.\nProtocol 7 \u2013 crime and family.\nDespite having signed the protocol more than thirty years ago Germany and the Netherlands have never ratified it. Turkey, which signed the protocol in 1985, ratified it in 2016, becoming the latest member state to do so. The United Kingdom has neither signed nor ratified the protocol.\nProtocol 12 \u2013 discrimination.\nProtocol 12 applies the current expansive and indefinite grounds of prohibited discrimination in Article 14 to the exercise of any legal right and to the actions (including the obligations) of public authorities.\nThe Protocol entered into force on 1 April 2005 and has (as of March 2018[ [update]]) been ratified by 20 member states. Several member states\u2014Bulgaria, Denmark, France, Lithuania, Monaco, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom\u2014have not signed the protocol.\nThe United Kingdom government has declined to sign Protocol 12 on the basis that they believe the wording of protocol is too wide and would result in a flood of new cases testing the extent of the new provision. They believe that the phrase \"rights set forth by law\" might include international conventions to which the UK is not a party, and would result in incorporation of these instruments by stealth.\nIt has been suggested that the protocol is therefore in a catch-22, since the UK will decline to either sign or ratify the protocol until the European Court of Human Rights has addressed the meaning of the provision, while the court is hindered in doing so by the lack of applications to the court concerning the protocol caused by the decisions of Europe's most populous states\u2014including the UK\u2014not to ratify the protocol. The UK government, nevertheless, stated in 2004 that it \"agrees in principle that the ECHR should contain a provision against discrimination that is free-standing and not parasitic on the other Convention rights\". The first judgment that found a violation of Protocol No. 12, \"Sejdi\u0107 and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina\", was delivered in 2009.\nProtocol 13 \u2013 complete abolition of death penalty.\nProtocol 13 provides for the total abolition of the death penalty. Currently all Council of Europe member states but two have ratified Protocol 13. Armenia has signed but not ratified the protocol. Azerbaijan has not signed it.\nProcedural and institutional protocols.\nThe Convention's provisions affecting institutional and procedural matters have been altered several times by means of protocols. These amendments have, with the exception of Protocol 2, amended the text of the convention. Protocol 2 did not amend the text of the convention as such but stipulated that it was to be treated as an integral part of the text. All of these protocols have required the unanimous ratification of all the member states of the Council of Europe to enter into force.\nProtocol 11.\nProtocols 2, 3, 5, 8, 9 and 10 have now been superseded by Protocol 11 which entered into force on 1 November 1998. It established a fundamental change in the machinery of the convention. It abolished the Commission, allowing individuals to apply directly to the court, which was given compulsory jurisdiction and altered the latter's structure. Previously states could ratify the convention without accepting the jurisdiction of the Court of Human Rights. The protocol also abolished the judicial functions of the Committee of Ministers.\nProtocol 14.\nProtocol 14 follows on from Protocol 11 in proposing to further improve the efficiency of the court. It seeks to \"filter\" out cases that have less chance of succeeding along with those that are broadly similar to cases brought previously against the same member state. Furthermore, a case will not be considered admissible where an applicant has not suffered a \"significant disadvantage\". This latter ground can only be used when an examination of the application on the merits is not considered necessary and where the subject-matter of the application had already been considered by a national court.\nA new mechanism was introduced by Protocol 14 to assist enforcement of judgements by the Committee of Ministers. The committee can ask the court for an interpretation of a judgement and can even bring a member state before the court for non-compliance of a previous judgement against that state. Protocol 14 also allows for European Union accession to the convention. The protocol has been ratified by every Council of Europe member state, Russia being last in February 2010. It entered into force on 1 June 2010.\nA provisional Protocol 14bis had been opened for signature in 2009. Pending the ratification of Protocol 14 itself, 14bis was devised to allow the court to implement revised procedures in respect of the states which have ratified it. It allowed single judges to reject manifestly inadmissible applications made against the states that have ratified the protocol. It also extended the competence of three-judge chambers to declare applications made against those states admissible and to decide on their merits where there already is a well-established case law of the court. Now that all Council of Europe member states have ratified Protocol 14, Protocol 14bis has lost its \"raison d'\u00eatre\" and according to its own terms ceased to have any effect when Protocol 14 entered into force on 1 June 2010.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9831", "revid": "32801982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9831", "title": "Ecclesia", "text": "Ecclesia (Greek: \u1f10\u03ba\u03ba\u03bb\u03b7\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 \"ekkl\u0113sia\") may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9833", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9833", "title": "Eureka Rebellion", "text": "1854 miners' revolt in Victoria, Australia\nThe Eureka Rebellion was a series of events involving gold miners who revolted against the British administration of the colony of Victoria, Australia during the Victorian gold rush. It culminated in the Battle of the Eureka Stockade, which took place on 3 December 1854 at Ballarat between the rebels and the colonial forces of Australia. The fighting resulted in an official total of 27 deaths and many injuries, the majority of casualties being rebels. There was a preceding period beginning in 1851 of peaceful demonstrations and civil disobedience on the Victorian goldfields. The miners had various grievances, chiefly the cost of mining permits and the officious way the system was enforced.\nTensions began in 1851 with the introduction of a tax on the occupation of the gold fields. Miners began to organize and protest the taxes; miners stopped paying the taxes en masse. The October 1854 murder of a gold miner, and the burning of a local hotel (which miners blamed on the government), ended the previously peaceful nature of the miner's dispute. Open rebellion broke out on November 29, 1854, as a crowd of some 10,000 swore allegiance to the Eureka Flag. Gold miner Peter Lalor became the de facto leader of the rebellion, as he had initiated the swearing of allegiance. The Battle of the Eureka Stockade ended the short-lived armed uprising on 3 December 1854. A group of 13 captured rebels (not including Lalor, who was in hiding) was put on trial for high treason in Melbourne, but mass public support led to their acquittal.\nThe legacy of the Eureka Rebellion is contested. Rebel leader Peter Lalor was elected to the parliament in 1856, though he proved to be less of an ally to the common man than expected. Several reforms sought by the rebels were subsequently implemented, including legislation providing for universal adult male suffrage for Legislative Assembly elections and the removal of property qualifications for Legislative Assembly members. The rebellion is controversially identified with the birth of democracy in Australia and interpreted by many as a political revolt.\nOrigins in the gold rush.\nThe Eureka rebellion found its origins in the Australian gold rush of 1851. Following the separation of Victoria from New South Wales on 1 July 1851, gold prospectors were offered 200 guineas for making discoveries within of Melbourne. In August 1851, the news was received around the world that, on top of several earlier finds, Thomas Hiscock, west of Buninyong, had found still more deposits. This led to gold fever taking hold as the colony's population increased from 77,000 in 1851 to 198,496 in 1853. In three years, the total number of people living in and around the Victorian goldfields stood at a 12-month average of 100,351. In 1851 the Australian population was 430,000 but in 1871 it was 1.7 million. Among this number was \"a heavy sprinkling of ex-convicts, gamblers, thieves, rogues and vagabonds of all kinds.\" The local authorities soon found themselves with fewer police and lacked the infrastructure needed to support the expansion of the mining industry. The number of public servants, factory and farm workers leaving for the goldfields to seek their fortune made for chronic labour shortages that needed to be resolved.\nProtests on the goldfields: 1851\u20131854.\nLa Trobe introduces monthly mining tax as protests begin.\nOn 16 August 1851, just days after Hiscock's lucky strike, Lieutenant-Governor Charles La Trobe issued two proclamations that reserved all crown land rights to the goldfields and introduced a mining licence (tax) of 30 shillings per month, effective 1 September. The universal mining tax was based on time stayed rather than what was seen as the more equitable option, being an export duty levied only on gold found, meaning it was always designed to make life unprofitable for most prospectors.\nThere were several mass public meetings and miners' delegations in the years leading up to the armed revolt. The earliest rally was held on 26 August 1851 at Hiscock's Gully in Buninyong and attracted 40-50 miners protesting the new mining regulations, and four resolutions to this end were passed. From the outset, there was a division between the \"moral force\" activists who favoured lawful, peaceful and democratic means and those who advocated \"physical force,\" with some in attendance suggesting that the miners take up arms against the lieutenant governor, who was irreverently viewed as a feather wearing, effeminate fop. This first meeting was followed by dissent all across the colony's mining settlements.\nFirst gold commissioner arrives in Ballarat.\nIn mid-September 1851, the first gold commissioner appointed by La Trobe arrived in Ballarat. At the beginning of December, there was discontent when it was announced that the licence fee would be raised to 3 pounds a month, a 200% increase, effective 1 January 1852. In Ballarat, some miners became so agitated that they began to gather arms. On 8 December, the rebellion continued to build momentum with an anti-mining tax banner put on public display at Forrest Creek. The Forest Creek Monster Meeting took place at Mount Alexander on 15 December 1851. This was the first truly mass demonstration of the Eureka Rebellion; according to high-end estimates, up to 20,000 miners turned out in a massive display of support for repealing the mining tax. Two days later, it was announced that La Trobe had reversed the planned one hundred per cent increase in the mining tax. Nevertheless, the oppressive licence hunts continued and increased in frequency, causing general dissent among the diggers. In addition, there was strong opposition to the strict prohibition of liquor imposed by the government at the goldfields settlements, whereby the sale and consumption of alcohol were restricted to licensed hotels.\nDespite the high turnover in population on the goldfields, discontent continued to simmer throughout 1852. On 2 September 1852, La Trobe received a petition from the people of Bendigo, drawing attention to the need for improvements in the road from Melbourne. The lack of police protection was also a major issue for the protesting miners. On 14 August 1852, a fight broke out among 150 men over land rights in Bendigo. An inquiry recommended increasing police numbers in the colony's mining settlements. Around this time, the first gold deposits at the Eureka lead in Ballarat were found. In October 1852, at Lever Flat near Bendigo, the miners attempted to respond to rising crime levels by forming a \"Mutual Protection Association.\" They pledged to withhold the licence fee, build detention centres, and commence nightly armed patrols, with privateers dispensing summary justice to those suspected of criminal activities. That month, Government House received a petition from Lever Flat, Forrest Creek and Mount Alexander about policing levels as the colony continued to strain due to the gold rush. On 25 November 1852, a police patrol was attacked by a mob of miners who wrongly believed they were obliged to take out a whole month's subscription for seven days at Oven's goldfield in Bendigo.\nIn 1852, it was decided by the UK government that the Australian colonies should each draft their own constitutions, pending final approval by the Imperial parliament.\nBendigo petition and the Red Ribbon Movement.\nThe disquiet on the goldfields continued in 1853, with public meetings held in Castlemaine, Heathcote and Bendigo. On 3 February 1853, a policeman accidentally caused the death of William Guest at Reid's Creek. Assistant Commissioner James Clow had to diffuse a difficult situation with a promise to conduct an inquiry into the circumstances. A group of one thousand angry miners overran the government camp and relieved the police of their sidearms and weapons, destroying a cache. George Black assisted Dr. John Owens in chairing a public meeting held at Ovens field on 11 February 1853 that called for the death of Guest to be fully investigated.\nThe Anti-Gold Licence Association was formed in June at a meeting in Bendigo, where 23,000 signatures were collected for a mass petition, including 8,000 from the mining settlement at McIvor.\nThere was an incident on 2 July 1853 in which police were assaulted in the vicinity of an anti-licence meeting at the Sandhurst goldfield in Bendigo, with rocks being thrown as they escorted an intoxicated miner to the holding cells. On 16 July 1853, an anti-licence demonstration in Sandhurst attracted 6,000 people, who also raised the issue of lack of electoral rights. The high commissioner of the goldfields, William Wright, advised La Trobe of his support for an export duty on gold found rather than the existing universal tax on all prospectors based on time stayed.\nOn 3 August, the Bendigo petition was placed before La Trobe, who refused to act on a request to suspend the mining tax again and give the miners the right to vote. The next day, there was a meeting held at Protestant Hall in Melbourne where the delegation reported on the exchange with La Trobe. The crowd reacted with \"loud disapprobation and showers of hisses\" when the lieutenant governor was mentioned. Clark speaks of one of the leaders of the \"moral force\" faction, George Thompson, who returned to Bendigo, where he attended another meeting on 28 July. Formerly there was very much talk of \"moral suasion\" and \"the genius of the English people to compose their differences without resort to violence.\" Now the emphasis had shifted to \"loyalty.\" Thompson pointed to the Union Jack and jokingly said that \"if the flag went, it would be replaced by a diggers' flag.\"\nThe Bendigo \"diggers flag\" was unfurled at a rally at View Point, Sandhurst, on 12 August. It was reported that the miners paraded under the flags of several nations, including the Irish tricolour, the saltire of Scotland, the Union Jack, revolutionary French and German flags, and the Stars and Stripes. The delegates returned from Melbourne with news of the failure of the Bendigo petition. During the winter of 1853, the Red Ribbon Movement was active across the goldfields. Supporters wore red ribbons in their hats and were determined to hand over only 10 shillings for the licence fee and allow the sheer numbers in custody to cause an administrative meltdown. Clark states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... ten to twelve thousand diggers turned up wearing a red ribbon in their hats. The old cabbage-tree hat of the Sydney radicals and republicans are now decorated with the red of revolution. Foreigners of all descriptions boasted that if the demands of the diggers were not instantly granted, they would lead them on to blood and victory. In alarm, George Thompson called three cheers for the good old Union Jack and asked them to remember that they were pledged to what he called 'necessary reform, not revolution'. William Dexter, waiving the diggers' flag, roared to them about the evils of 'English Tyranny' and the virtues of 'Republicanism'.\"\nOn 20 August 1853, just as an angry mob of 500\u2013600 miners went to assemble outside the government camp at Waranga, the authorities found a convenient legal technicality to release some mining tax evaders. A meeting in Beechworth called for reducing the licence fee to ten shillings and voting rights for the mining settlements. A larger rally attended by 20,000 people was held at Hospital Hill in Bendigo on 23 August 1853, which resolved to support a mining tariff fixed at 10 shillings a month. There was a second multinational-style assembly at View Point on 27 August. The next day a procession of miners passed by the government camp with the sounds of bands and shouting, and fifty pistol rounds, as an assembly of about 2,000 miners took place. On 29 August 1853, assistant commissioner Robert Rede at Jones Creek, which along with Sandhurst were known hotbeds of activity for the Red Ribbon Movement, counselled that a peaceful, political solution could still be found. In Ballarat, miners offered to surround the guard tent to protect gold reserves amid rumours of a planned robbery.\nA sitting of the goldfields committee of the Legislative Council in Melbourne on 6 September 1853 heard from goldfields activists Dr. William Carr, W Fraser and William Jones. \"An Act for the Better Management of the Goldfields\" was passed, which upon receiving royal assent on 1 December, reduced the licence fee to 40 shillings for every three months. The act featured increasing fines in the order of 5, 10 and 15 pounds for repeat offenders, with goldfields residents required to carry their permits which must be made available for inspection at all times. However, the malcontents welcomed the fee reduction, thereby temporarily relieving tensions in the colony. In November, the select committee bill proposed a licence fee of 1 pound for one month, 2 pounds for three months, 3 for six months and 5 pounds for 12 months, along with extending the franchise and land rights to the miners. La Trobe amended the scheme by increasing the six months licence to 4 pounds, with a fee of 8 pounds for 12 months.\nA crowd of 2,000\u20133,000 attended an anti-licence rally at View Point on 3 December 1853. Once again, on 31 December 1854, about 500 people gathered to elect a so-called \"Diggers Congress.\"\nLegislative Council calls for Commission of Inquiry.\nLa Trobe decided to cancel the September 1853 mining tax collections. The Legislative Council supported a Commission of Inquiry into goldfields grievances. It also considered a proposal to abolish the licence fee in return for a royalty on the gold and a nominal charge for maintaining the police service. In November, it was resolved by the Legislative Council that the licence fee be reinstated on a sliding scale of 1 pound per month, 2 pounds per three months, 4 pounds for six months, and 8 pounds for 12 months. License evasion was punishable by increasing fines of 5, 15 and 30 pounds, with serial offenders liable to be sentenced to imprisonment. Licence inspections, treated as a great sport and \"carried out in the style of an English fox-hunt\" by mounted officials, known to the miners by the warning call \"Traps\" or \"Joes,\" were henceforth able to take place at any time without notice. The latter sobriquet was a reference to La Trobe, whose proclamations posted around the goldfields were signed and sealed \"Walter Joseph Latrobe.\" Many of the police were former convicts from Tasmania and prone to brutal means. They would get a fifty per cent commission from all fines imposed on unlicensed miners and sly grog sellers. Prohibition was enforced by plainclothes officers, and those involved in the illegal sale of alcohol were initially handed 50-pound fines. However, there was no profit for police from subsequent offences that were instead punishable by months of hard labour. This led to the corrupt practice of police demanding blackmail of 5 pounds from repeat offenders. Miners were arrested for not carrying licences on their person, as they often left them in their tents due to the typically wet and dirty conditions in the mines, then subjected to such indignities as being chained to trees and logs overnight. The impost was most felt by the greater number who were finding the mining tax untenable without any more significant discoveries.\nIn March 1854, La Trobe sent a reform package to the Legislative Council, which was adopted and sent to London for the approval of the Imperial parliament. The franchise would be extended to all miners upon purchasing a 12-month permit.\nHotham replaces La Trobe.\nLa Trobe's successor as lieutenant-governor, Sir Charles Hotham, who would have preferred to be serving in the Crimean War, took up his commission in Victoria on 22 June 1854. He instructed Rede to introduce a strict enforcement system and conduct a weekly cycle of licence hunts, which it was hoped, would cause the exodus to the goldfields to be reversed. In August 1854, Hotham and his wife were well received in Ballarat during a tour of the Victorian goldfields. In September, Hotham imposed more frequent twice-weekly licence hunts, with more than half of the prospectors on the goldfields remaining non-compliant with the regulations.\nOn law enforcement in Ballarat, Carboni states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Up to the middle of September the search for licences happened once a month; at most, twice: perhaps once a week on the Gravel Pits. Now, licence-hunting became the order of the day. Twice a week on every line, and the more the diggers felt annoyed at it, the more our Camp officials persisted in goading us ... in October and November, when the weather allowed it, the Camp rode from the hunt every alternate day.\"\nThe miners in Bendigo responded to the increase in the frequency of licence hunts with threats of armed rebellion.\nTensions escalate.\nMurder of James Scobie and the burning of Bentley's Hotel.\nIn October 1854, the murder of gold miner James Scobie outside the Eureka Hotel, along with the prosecution of Johannes Gregorius, was the beginning of the end for those opposed to physical force in the mining tax protest movement. A subsequently discredited colonial inquest found no evidence of culpability by the Bentley Hotel owners for the fatal injuries, amid allegations the Magistrate D\u2019Ewes had a conflict of interest presiding over a case involving the prosecution of Bentley, said to be a friend and indebted business partner. Gregorius, a physically disabled servant who worked for Father Smyth of St Alipius chapel, was subjected to police brutality and false arrest for licence evasion even though he was exempt from the requirement. A mass meeting of predominantly Catholic miners took place on Bakery Hill in protest over the treatment of Gregorius on 15 October. Two days later, amid the uproar over the acquittal, a meeting of approximately 10,000 men took place near the Eureka Hotel in protest. Gold receiver John Green initially tried to read the riot act but was too overawed. The hotel was set alight as Rede was pelted with eggs and the available security forces were unable to restore order.\nIn a despatch dated 18 November 1854, Hotham stated that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I lost no time in making such dispositions as I concluded would enable the authorities to maintain the integrity of the law; and within four days, 450 military and police were on the ground, commanded by an officer in whom I had confidence, and who was instructed to enforce order and quiet, support the civil authority in the arrest of the ringleaders and to use force, whenever legally called upon to do so, without regard to the consequences which might ensue.\"\nOn 21 October, arrests over the arson attack begin as Andrew McIntyre and Thomas Fletcher were taken into custody. A third man, John Westerby, was also indicted. A committee meeting of miners on Bakery Hill agreed to indemnify the bail sureties for McIntyre and Fletcher. As a large mob approached the government camp, the two men were hurriedly released under their own recognisances and whisked away to the sound of gunfire from pistols.\nAs if to stir the pot further, Carboni recalls that around this time, the following two reward notices were plastered around Ballarat. One offered a 500-pound reward for information leading to an arrest in the James Scobie case. The other announced the reward for more information in relation to the Bank of Victoria heist in Ballarat that was carried out by robbers wearing black crepe paper masks had been increased from 500 to 1,600 pounds. A miner's delegation was received by Rede on 23 October, who heard that the police officers involved in the arrest of Gregorious should be dismissed. Two days later, a meeting led by Timothy Hayes and John Manning heard reports from the deputies sent to negotiate with Rede. The meeting resolved to petition Hotham for a retrial of Gregorius and the reassignment of the reviled assistant commissioner Johnston away from Ballarat.\nOn 27 October, Captain Thomas laid contingency plans for the defence of the government outpost. In the weeks leading up to the battle, the men of violence had already been aiming musket balls at the barely fortified barracks during the night. On 30 October, Hotham appointed a board of enquiry into the murder of James Scobie, which will sit in Ballarat on the 2nd and the 10th of November. The panel included Melbourne magistrate Evelyn Sturt, assisted by his local magistrate Hackett and William McCrea. After receiving representations from the US consul, Hotham released James Tarleton from custody. The inquiry into the Ballarat rioting concluded with a statement being made on 10 November in the name of the Ballarat Reform League - which by this stage apparently had a steering committee for some weeks - that was signed by Humffray, Fredrick Vern, Henry Ross and Samuel Irwin of the Geelong Advertiser. The final report agreed with the League's submission blaming the government camp for the unsatisfactory state of affairs. The recommendation that Magistrate Dewes and Sergeant Major-Milne of the constabulary should be dismissed was duly acted upon.\nAround 5,000 miners gathered in Bendigo on 1 November as a plan was drawn up to organise the diggers at all the mining settlements, as speakers openly advocating physical force addressed the crowd.\nBallarat Reform League meetings.\nOn 11 November 1854, a crowd of more than 10,000 gathered at Bakery Hill, directly opposite the government encampment. At this meeting, the Ballarat Reform League was formally established under the chairmanship of Chartist John Basson Humffray. Several other reform league leaders, including George Black, Henry Holyoake, and Tom Kennedy, are also believed to have been Chartists. It was reported by the \"Ballarat Times\" that at the appointed hour, the \"Union Jack and the American ensign were hoisted as signals for the people to assemble.\"\nIn setting its goals, the Ballarat Reform League used the first five of the British Chartist movement's principles as set out in the People's Charter of 1838. They did not adopt or agitate for the Chartist's sixth principle, secret ballots. The meeting passed a resolution \"that it is the inalienable right of every citizen to have a voice in making the laws he is called on to obey, that taxation without representation is tyranny.\" The meeting also resolved to secede from the United Kingdom if the situation did not improve.\nThroughout the following weeks, the League sought to negotiate with Rede and Hotham on the specific matters relating to Bentley and the death of Scobie, the men being tried for the burning of the Eureka Hotel, the broader issues of the abolition of the licence, suffrage and democratic representation of the goldfields, and disbanding of the Gold Commission.\nHotham send a message to England on 16 November, which revealed his intention to establish an inquiry into goldfields grievances. Notes to the royal commissioners had already been made on 6 November, where Hotham stated his opposition to an export duty on gold replacing the universal mining tax. W.C. Haines MLC was to be the chairman, serving alongside lawmakers John Fawkner, John O'Shanassy, William Westgarth, as well as chief gold commissioner William Wright. Geoffrey Blainey has stated that: \"It was perhaps the most generous concession offered by a governor to a major opponent in the history of Australia up to that time. The members of the commission were appointed before Eureka ... they were men who were likely to be sympathetic to the diggers.\" However, rather than hear the miners' grievances, Rede increased the police presence on the goldfields and summoned reinforcements from Melbourne. Many historians (most notably Manning Clark) attribute this to his belief in his right to exert authority over the \"rabble.\"\nThe James Scobie murder trial ended on 18 November 1854, with the accused, James Bentley, Thomas Farrell and William Hance, being convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to three years of hard labour on a road crew. Catherine Bentley was acquitted. Two days later, the miners Westerby, Fletcher and McIntyre were convicted for burning the Eureka Hotel and, in turn, were sentenced to jail terms of six, four and three months. The jury recommended the prerogative of mercy be evoked and noted that they held the local authorities in Ballarat responsible for the loss of property. One week later, a reform league delegation, including Humffray, met with Hotham, Stawell and Foster to negotiate the release of the three Eureka Hotel rioters. Hotham declared that he would take a stand on the word \"demand,\" satisfied that due process had been observed. Father Smyth informed Rede in confidence that he believed the miners may be about to march on the government outpost.\nEscalating violence as military convoy looted.\nFoot police reinforcements arrived in Ballarat on 19 October 1854, with a further detachment of the 40th (2nd Somersetshire) Regiment of Foot a few days behind. On 28 November, the 12th (East Suffolk) Regiment of Foot arrived to reinforce the government camp in Ballarat. As they moved alongside where the Eureka Stockade was about to be erected, there was a clash where a drummer boy John Egan and several other members of the convoy were attacked by a mob looking to loot the wagons. Tradition variously had it that Egan was either killed there and then or, alternatively, that he was the first casualty of the fighting on the day of the battle. However, his grave in Old Ballarat Cemetery was removed in 2001 as a result of research carried out by Dorothy Wickham that shows Egan actually survived and died in Sydney in 1860.\nBy the beginning of December, the police contingent at Ballarat had been surpassed by the number of soldiers from the 12th and 40th regiments. The strength of the various units in the government camp was: 40th regiment (infantry): 87 men; 40th regiment (mounted): 30 men; 12th regiment (infantry): 65 men; mounted police: 70 men; and the foot police: 24 men.\nOpen rebellion.\nParamilitary mobilisation and swearing allegiance to the Southern Cross.\nOn 29 November, a mass meeting involving a crowd of around 10,000 was held at Bakery Hill. The aggrieved miners heard from their deputies news of the unsuccessful outcome of their meeting with Hotham as the Eureka Flag flew over the platform for the first time. Samuel Douglas Smyth Huyghue, who lived through the rebellion, recalled it as \"the symbol of the revolutionary League.\" The crowd was incited by Timothy Hayes shouting, \"Are you ready to die?\" and Fredrick Vern, who had been accused of abandoning the garrison four days later as soon as the danger arrived, with suspicions he could have been a double agent. Wesleyan minister Reverend Theophilus Taylor wrote in his diary that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Today Ballaarat is thrown into great excitement by a monster meeting of the diggers, convened for the purpose of protesting against the Gold Digging Licences and their alleged grievances. At the head of the meeting appeared two Catholic priests, Fathers Downing and Smith [Smyth]. It was resolved to resist the government by burning licences which was done to a considerable extent.\"\nRede responded by ordering police to conduct a provocative licence search on 30 November. There was further rioting where missiles were once again directed at military and law enforcement by the protesting miners who had henceforth refused to cooperate with licence inspections \"en masse\". Eight defaulters were arrested, and most of the military resources available had to be summoned to extricate the arresting officers from the angry mob that had assembled.\nThere followed another spontaneous gathering on Bakery Hill. With none of the other leading lights in the protest movement in attendance amid the rising tide of anger and resentment amongst the miners, a more militant leader, Peter Lalor, who, at his first public appearance at the 17 November meeting, moved that a central rebel executive be formed, took the initiative and mounted a stump armed with a rifle to give a speech. Lalor proclaimed \"liberty\" and called for volunteers to step forward and be sworn into companies, and captains be appointed. Near the base of the flagpole, Lalor knelt with his head uncovered, pointed his right hand to the Eureka Flag and swore to the affirmation of his fellow demonstrators: \"We swear by the Southern Cross to stand truly by each other and fight to defend our rights and liberties.\"\nIn a dispatch dated 20 December 1854, Hotham reported: \"The disaffected miners ... held a meeting whereat the Australian flag of independence was solemnly consecrated and vows offered for its defence.\"\nFortification of the Eureka lead.\nAfter the oath swearing ceremony, about 1,000 rebels marched in double file from Bakery Hill to the Eureka lead behind the Eureka Flag being carried by Henry Ross, where construction of the stockade took place between 30 November and 2 December. The stockade itself was a ramshackle affair described in Carboni's 1855 memoirs as \"higgledy piggledy.\" There were existing mines within the stockade, and it consisted of diagonal wooden spikes made from materials including pit props and overturned horse carts. It encompassed an area said to be one acre; however, that is difficult to reconcile with other estimates that have the dimensions of the stockade as being around x .\nAccording to Lalor, the stockade \"was nothing more than an enclosure to keep our own men together, and was never erected with an eye to military defence.\" However, Peter FitzSimons asserts that Lalor may have downplayed the fact that the Eureka Stockade may have been intended as something of a fortress at a time when \"it was very much in his interests\" to do so. The construction work was overseen by Vern, who had apparently received instruction in military methods. John Lynch wrote that his \"military learning comprehended the whole system of warfare ... fortification was his strong point.\" Les Blake has noted how other descriptions of the stockade \"rather contradicted\" Lalor's recollection of it being a simple fence after the fall of the stockade. Testimony was heard at the high treason trials for the Eureka rebels that the stockade was four to seven feet high in places and was unable to be negotiated on horseback without being reduced.\nHotham feared that the \"network of rabbit burrows\" on the goldfields would prove readily defensible as his forces \"on the rough pot-holed ground would be unable to advance in regular formation and would be picked off easily by snipers,\" considerations that were part of the reasoning behind the decision to move into position in the early morning for a surprise attack. Carboni details the rebel dispositions along: \"The shepherds' holes inside the lower part of the stockade had been turned into rifle-pits, and were now occupied by Californians of the I.C. Rangers' Brigade, some twenty or thirty in all, who had kept watch at the 'outposts' during the night.\"\nHowever, the location of the stockade has been described as \"appalling from a defensive point of view,\" as it was situated on \"a gentle slope, which exposed a sizeable portion of its interior to fire from nearby high ground.\" A detachment of 800 men, which included \"two field pieces and two howitzers\" under the commander in chief of the British forces in Australia, Major General Sir Robert Nickle, who had also seen action during the 1798 Irish rebellion, would arrive after the insurgency had been put down.\nAt 4 am on the morning of 1 December, the rebels were observed to be massing on Bakery Hill, but a government raiding party found the area vacated. Again Rede ordered the riot act read to a mob that had gathered around Bath's Hotel, with mounted police breaking up the unlawful assembly. Raffaello Carboni, George Black and Father Smyth meet with Commissioner Rede to present a peace proposal. Rede is suspicious of the chartist undercurrent of the anti-mining tax movement and rejects the proposals as being the way forward.\nThe rebels sent out scouts and established picket lines in order to have advance warning of Rede's movements. Messengers were dispatched to other mining settlements, including Bendigo and Creswick, requesting reinforcements for the Eureka Stockade. The \"moral force\" faction, led by Humffray, withdrew from the protest movement the previous day as the men of violence moved into the ascendancy. The rebels continued to fortify their position as 300\u2013400 men arrived from Creswick's Creek to join the struggle. Carboni recalls they were: \"dirty and ragged, and proved the greatest nuisance. One of them, Michael Tuohy, behaved valiantly.\" The arrival of these reinforcements required the dispatch of foraging parties, leaving a garrison of around 200 men behind. Teddy Shanahan, a merchant whose store on the Eureka lead had been engulfed by the stockade, said the rebels immediately became very short on food, drink, and accommodation and that by the evening before the battle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Lalor was in charge, but large numbers of the men were constantly going out of the Stockade, and as the majority got drunk, they never came back ... The 500 or 600 from Creswick had nothing to eat, and they, too, went down to the Main Road that night ... Lalor seeing that none would be left if things went on, he gave orders to shoot any man who left.\"\nVinegar Hill blunder: Irish dimension factors in dwindling numbers at stockade.\n\"The Argus\" newspaper of 4 December 1854 reported that the Union Jack \"had\" to be hoisted underneath the Eureka Flag at the stockade and that both flags were in possession of the foot police. Peter FitzSimons has questioned whether this contemporaneous report of the otherwise unaccounted-for Union Jack known as the Eureka Jack being present is accurate. Among those willing to credit the first report of the battle as being true and correct it has been theorised that the hoisting of a Union Jack at the stockade was possibly an 11th-hour response to the divided loyalties among the heterogeneous rebel force which was in the process of melting away. At one point up to 1,500 of 17,280 men in Ballarat were garrisoning the stockade, with as few as 120 taking part in the battle. Lalor's choice of password for the night of 2 December \u2013 \"Vinegar Hill\" \u2013 causing support for the rebellion to fall away among those who were otherwise disposed to resist the military, as word spread that the question of Irish home rule had become involved. One survivor of the battle stated that \"the collapse of the rising at Ballarat may be regarded as mainly attributable to the password given by Lalor on the night before the assault.\" Asked by one of his subordinates for the \"night pass,\" he gave \"Vinegar Hill,\" the site of a battle during the 1798 Irish rebellion. The 1804 Castle Hill uprising, also known as the second battle of Vinegar Hill, was the site of a convict rebellion in the colony of New South Wales, involving mainly Irish transportees, some of whom were at Vinegar Hill. William Craig recalled that \"Many at Ballaarat, who were disposed before that to resist the military, now quietly withdrew from the movement.\" In his memoirs, Lynch states: \"On the afternoon of Saturday we had a force of seven hundred men on whom we thought we could rely.\" However, there was a false alarm from the picket line during the night. The subsequent roll call revealed there had been a sizable desertion that Lynch says \"ought to have been seriously considered, but it was not.\" There were miners from Bendigo, Forrest Creek, and Creswick that marched to Ballarat to take part in the armed struggle. The latter contingent was said to number a thousand men, \"but when the news circulated that Irish independence had crept into the movement, almost all turned back.\" FitzSimons points out that although the number of reinforcements converging on Ballarat was probably closer to 500, there is no doubt that as a result of the choice of password \"the Stockade is denied many strong-armed men because of the feeling that the Irish have taken over.\" Withers states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Lalor, it is said, gave 'Vinegar Hill' as the night's pass-word, but neither he nor his adherents expected that the fatal action of Sunday was coming, and some of his followers, incited by the sinister omen of the pass-word, abandoned that night what they saw was a badly organised and not very hopeful movement.\"\nIt is certain that Irish-born people were strongly represented at the Eureka Stockade. Most of the rebels inside the stockade at the time of the battle were Irish, and the area where the defensive position was established was overwhelmingly populated by Irish miners. Blainey has advanced the view that the white cross of the Eureka Flag is \"really an Irish cross rather than being [a] configuration of the Southern Cross.\"\nThere is another theory advanced by Gregory Blake, military historian and author of \"Eureka Stockade: A Ferocious and Bloody Battle\", who concedes that two flags may have been flown on the day of the battle, as the miners were claiming to be defending their British rights.\nIn a signed contemporaneous affidavit dated 7 December 1854, Private Hugh King, who was at the battle serving with the 40th regiment, recalled that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... three or four hundred yards a heavy fire from the stockade was opened on the troops and me. When the fire was opened on us we received orders to fire. I saw some of the 40th wounded lying on the ground but I cannot say that it was before the fire on both sides. I think some of the men in the stockade should-they had a flag flying in the stockade; it was a white cross of five stars on a blue ground. \u2013 flag was afterwards taken from one of the prisoners like a union jack \u2013 we fired and advanced on the stockade, when we jumped over, we were ordered to take all we could prisoners ...\"\nThere was a further report in \"The Argus\", 9 December 1854 edition, stating that Hugh King had given live testimony at the committal hearings for the Eureka rebels where he stated that the flag was found:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... rollen up in the breast of a[n] [unidentified] prisoner. He [King] advanced with the rest, firing as they advanced ... several shots were fired on them after they entered [the stockade]. He observed the prisoner [Hayes] brought down from a tent in custody.\"\nBlake leaves open the possibility that the flag being carried by the prisoner had been souvenired from the flag pole as the routed garrison was fleeing the stockade.\nDeparting detachment of Independent Californian Rangers leaves small garrison behind.\nAmid the rising number of rebels absent without leave throughout 2 December, a contingent of 200 Americans under James McGill arrived at 4 pm. Styled as \"The Independent Californian Rangers' Revolver Brigade,\" they had horses and were equipped with sidearms and Mexican knives. In a fateful decision, McGill decided to take most of his two hundred Californian Rangers away from the stockade to intercept rumoured British reinforcements coming from Melbourne. Many Saturday night revellers within the rebel garrison went back to their own tents, assuming that the government camp would not attack on the Sabbath day. A small contingent of miners remained at the stockade overnight, which the spies reported to Rede. Common estimates for the size of the garrison at the time of the attack on 3 December range from 120-150 men.\nAccording to Lalor's reckoning: \"There were about 70 men possessing guns, 30 with pikes and 30 with pistols, but many had no more than one or two rounds of ammunition. Their coolness and bravery were admirable when it is considered that the odds were 3 to 1 against.\" Lalor's command was riddled with informants, and Rede was kept well advised of his movements, particularly through the work of government agents Henry Goodenough and Andrew Peters, who were embedded in the rebel garrison. Initially outnumbering the government camp considerably, Lalor had already devised a strategy where \"if the government forces come to attack us, we should meet them on the Gravel Pits, and if compelled, we should retreat by the heights to the old Canadian Gully, and there we shall make our final stand.\" On being brought to battle that day, Lalor stated: \"we would have retreated, but it was then too late.\"\nOn the eve of the battle, Father Smyth issued a plea for Catholics to down their arms and attend mass the following day.\nBattle of the Eureka Stockade.\nRede planned to send the combined military police formation of 276 men under the command of Captain John Thomas to attack the Eureka Stockade when the rebel garrison was observed to be at a low watermark. The troopers planned their attack on the stockade at dawn on a Sunday \u2013 the Christian day of worship, which would be a complete surprise. The soldiers and police marched off in silence at around 3:30 am Sunday morning after the troopers had drunk the traditional tot of rum. The British commander used bugle calls to coordinate his forces. The 40th regiment was to provide covering fire from one end, with mounted police covering the flanks. Enemy contact began at approximately 150 yards as the two columns of regular infantry, and the contingent of foot police moved into position. Although Lalor claimed that the government forces fired the first shot, it appears from all the other remaining accounts as if it came from the rebel garrison.\nAccording to Gregory Blake, the fighting in Ballarat on 3 December 1854 was not one-sided and full of indiscriminate murder by the colonial forces. In his memoirs, one of Lalor's captains, John Lynch, mentions \"some sharp shooting.\" For at least 10 minutes, the rebels offered stiff resistance, with ranged fire coming from the Eureka Stockade garrison such that Thomas's best formation, the 40th regiment, wavered and had to be rallied. Blake says this is \"stark evidence of the effectiveness of the defender's fire.\"\nEventually, the rebels started to run short of ammunition and the government advance resumed. The Victorian police contingent led the way over the top as the forlorn hope in a bayonet charge. Lalor had his arm shattered by a musket ball and was secreted away by supporters, with his arm later requiring amputation. The Eureka flag was captured by Constable John King, who volunteered to scale the flagpole, which then snapped. The exact number of casualties cannot be determined. After the battle, the registrar of Ballarat entered the names of 27 people into the Victorian death register. Lalor lists 34 rebel casualties, of which 22 died. In his report, Captain Thomas also states that one soldier was killed in action, two died of wounds, and fourteen were wounded.\nAftermath.\nBlainey has commented that \"Every government in the world would probably have counter-attacked in the face of the building of the stockade.\" Hotham would receive the news that the government forces had been victorious the same day, with Stawell waiting outside Saint James church, where he was attending a service with Foster. He immediately set about firing up the government printing press to put out placards calling for support from among the colonists. A state of martial law was proclaimed with no lights allowed in any tent after 8 pm \"even though the legal basis for it was dubious.\" It was around this time that a number of unprovoked shots were fired from the government camp toward the diggings. Unrelated first-hand accounts variously state that a woman, her infant child and several men were killed or wounded in an episode of indiscriminate shooting.\nNews of the battle spread quickly to Melbourne and across the goldfields, turning a perceived government military victory in repressing a minor insurrection into a public relations disaster. On 5 December, reinforcements under Major General Nickle arrived at the government camp in Ballarat. Reverend Taylor expected further repression, stating that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs it happened, Nickle proved to be a wise, considered and even-handed military commander who calmed the tensions and Taylor \"found him to be a very affable and kind gentleman.\" Evans' diary records the effect of his conduct as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Sir Robert Nichol [\"sic\"] has taken the reins of power at the Camp. Already there is a sensible and gratifying deference in its appearance. The old General went round unattended to several tents early this morning &amp; made enquiries from the diggers relative to the cause of the outbreak. It is very probable from the humane &amp; temperate course he is taking that he will establish himself in the goodwill of the people.\"\nThe same day several thousand people attended a public meeting held in Swanston Street, Melbourne. There were howls of anger when several pro-government motions were proposed. When the seconder of one motion, which called for the maintenance of law and order, framed the issue as \"would they support the flag of old England...or the new flag of the Southern Cross,\" the speaker was drowned out by groans from the crowd. In response, it was then proposed that restoring order required removing the government that caused the disorder in the first place. Amid cheers from the crowd, the mayor of Melbourne as chairman declared the pro-government motions carried and hastily adjourned the meeting. However, a new chairman was elected, and motions condemning the government and calling for the resignation of Foster were passed. Foster had acted as the temporary administrator of Victoria during the transition from La Trobe to Hotham. As colonial secretary to the lieutenant governor, he rigorously enforced the mining licence requirement amid the colony's budget and labour crisis. Foster had already offered his resignation on 4 December as the protests began, which Hotham accepted a week later. On 6 December 1854, a 6000-strong crowd gathered at Saint Paul's Cathedral protesting against the government's response to the Eureka Rebellion, as a group of 13 rebel prisoners are indicted for treason. Newspapers in the colony also characterised it as a brutal overuse of force in a situation brought about by the actions of government officials, and public condemnation became insurmountable. Letters Patent formally appointing the members of the Royal Commission were finally signed and sealed on 7 December 1854. Hotham nevertheless managed to have an auxiliary force of 1,500 special constables from Melbourne sworn in along with others from Geelong, with his resolve that further \"rioting and sedition would be speedily put down\" undeterred by the rebuff his policies had received from the general public. In Ballarat, only one man stepped forward and answered the call to enlist. By the beginning of 1855 normalcy had returned to the streets of Ballarat with mounted patrols no longer being a feature of daily life.\nHotham was promoted on 22 May 1855 when the official title of the chief executive of the colony was changed from lieutenant governor to governor. He died in Melbourne on New Year's Eve that year while in a coma after suffering from a severe cold. Although serving as a scapegoat for the government's response to the revolt at Eureka, Foster remained a member of the Legislative Council. Briefly, he served as treasurer before returning to England in 1857, where he published his speeches on the Eureka Rebellion. Rede was recalled from Ballarat and kept on full pay until 1855. He served as the sheriff at Geelong (1857), Ballarat (1868), and Melbourne (1877) and was the Commandant of the Volunteer Rifles, being the second-in-command at Port Phillip. In 1880 Rede was sheriff at the trial of Ned Kelly and an official witness to his execution.\nTrials for sedition and high treason.\nThe first trial relating to the rebellion was a charge of sedition against Henry Seekamp of the \"Ballarat Times\". Seekamp was arrested in his newspaper office on 4 December 1854 for a series of articles that appeared in the \"Ballarat Times\". It has been speculated some of the offending articles were written by either John Manning, George Lang, the embezzling bank manager whose father was the prominent republican and Presbyterian Minister of Sydney, the Reverend John Dunmore Lang, or Clara Seekamp, Henry's defacto wife. Seekamp was tried and convicted of seditious libel by a Melbourne jury on 23 January 1855 and, after a series of appeals, sentenced to six months imprisonment on 23 March. He was released from prison on 28 June 1855, precisely three months early. During Seekamp's absence, Clara would serve as editor of the \"Ballarat Times\".\nOf the approximately 120 individuals detained after the battle, 13 were put on trial for high treason beginning on 22 February 1855, where matters of fact were determined by a lay jury chosen from among members of the general public who were largely sympathetic to the rebel cause. The 13 defendants were acquitted jointly and individually in seven separate trials held over two months in relation to four counts. The defendants were set to be tried in the same order as they were listed in the indictments as follows:\nHowever, due to pre-trial legal chicanery and the unavailability of witnesses, it was Joseph who was the first accused man to go on trial. He was one of three Americans taken into custody at the stockade, with the United States Consul intervening to secure the release of the other two detainees. There were two privates from the 40th regiment that testified they saw Joseph fire a double-barreled shotgun and, by implication, that he inflicted the fatal wounds sustained by Captain Wise.\nButler Cole Aspinall, who appeared pro bono as junior counsel for Joseph, was formerly chief of parliamentary reporting for \"The Argus\" before returning to practice and was elected to the Legislative Assembly in the wake of the Eureka trials. He would receive many other criminal briefs later in his legal career, including that of Henry James O\u2019Farrell, who was indicted for an 1868 assassination attempt on the Duke of Edinburgh in Sydney. Gavan Duffy said of Aspinall that he was: \"one of the half-dozen men whose undoubted genius gave the Parliament of Victoria a first place among colonial legislatures.\"\nThe prosecution was handled by Attorney-General William Stawell representing the Crown before Chief Justice William \u00e0 Beckett. As Molony points out, the legality of putting a foreign national on trial for treason had been settled as far back as 1649. However, the difficulty the Crown prosecutor faced was that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... it was another thing entirely to prove that any treasonable intent was harboured in the mind of John Joseph... These matters were weighty and more conclusive of proof than a charge of murder, but they left the Crown with an arduous task of convincing the jury that Joseph had acted with such an elevated intent.\"\nThe jury deliberated for about half an hour before returning a verdict of \"not guilty.\" \"The Argus\" reported that \"A sudden burst of applause arose in the court,\" but it was instantly checked by court officers. The Chief Justice condemned this as an attempt to influence the jury, as it could be construed that a jury could be encouraged to deliver a verdict that would receive such applause; he sentenced two men (identified by the Crown Solicitor as having applauded) to a week in prison for contempt. Over 10,000 people had come to hear the jury's verdict. Joseph was carried around the streets of Melbourne in a chair in triumph, according to \"The Ballarat Star\".\nManning's case was the next to be heard. The remaining trials were then presided over by Victorian Chief Justice Redmond Barry, with all the other accused men being acquitted in quick succession except Dignum, whose indictment was withdrawn nolle prosequi. The remaining five were all tried together on 27 March. The lead defence counsel Archibald Michie observed that the proceedings had become \"weary, stale, flat, dull and unprofitable.\" The trials have, on several occasions, been described as a farce. The Colonial Secretary Lord John Russell rebuked Hotham over the decision to prosecute the captured rebels, saying in a despatch:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... respecting the trial of the prisoners taken at Ballarat, I wish to say that, although I do not doubt you have acted to the best of your judgment, and under advice, yet I question the expediency of bringing these rioters to trial under a charge of High Treason, being one so difficult of proof, and so open to objections of the kind which appear to have prevailed with the jury.\"\nCommission of Inquiry report.\nOn 14 December 1854, the goldfields commission sat for the first time. The first Ballarat session is held four days later at Bath's Hotel. In a meeting with Hotham on 8 January 1855, the goldfields commissioners made an interim recommendation that the mining tax be scrapped, and two days later made a submission advising a general amnesty be granted in relation to all those persons criminally liable for their part in the Eureka Rebellion.\nThe final report of the Royal Commission into the Victorian goldfields was presented to Hotham on 27 March 1855. It was scathing in its assessment of all aspects of the administration of the goldfields, particularly the Eureka Stockade affair. Within 12 months, all but one of the demands of the Ballarat Reform League is implemented. The changes included the abolition of gold licences to be replaced with an export duty. An annual 1-pound miner's right that entitles the holder to voting rights for the lower house and a land deed is introduced. Mining wardens replaced the gold commissioners, and there was a reduction in police numbers. The Legislative Council was reconstituted to provide representation for the major gold field settlements.\nIn relation to the tensions caused by the Chinese presence on the goldfields, the report states inter alia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"A most serious social question with reference to the gold-fields, and one that has lately crept on with rapid but almost unobserved steps, is with reference to the great number of the Chinese. This number, although already almost incredible, yet appears to be still fast increasing ... The question of the influx of such large numbers of a pagan and inferior race is a very serious one ... The statement of one of this people, that \"all\" were coming, comprises an unpleasant possibility of the future, that a comparative handful of colonists may be buried in a countless throng of Chinamen ... some step is here necessary, if not to prohibit, at least to check and diminish this influx.\"\nThe legislative remedy came in the form of a poll tax, assented to on 12 June 1855, made payable by Chinese immigrants.\nHumffray commended the report in a letter to the editor, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The [commission] report is a most masterly and statesmanlike document, and if its wise suggestions are wisely and honestly carried out, that commission will have rendered a service to the colony ... the wrongs and grievances of the digging community are clearly set forth in the Report, and practical schemes suggested for their removal.\"\nPeter Lalor enters parliament.\nLalor, in his letter to the colonists of Victoria, lamented that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"There are two things connected with the late outbreak (Eureka) which I deeply regret. The first is, that we shouldn't have been forced to take up arms at all; and the second is, that when we were compelled to take the field in our own defence, we were unable (through want of arms, ammunition and a little organisation) to inflict on the real authors of the outbreak the punishment they so richly deserved.\"\nIn July 1855, the Victorian Constitution received royal assent, which provided for a fully elected bicameral parliament with a new Legislative Assembly of 60 seats and a reformed Legislative Council of 30 seats. The franchise was available to all holders of the miner's right for the inaugural Legislative Assembly election with members of parliament themselves subject to property qualifications. In the interim, five representatives from the mining settlements were appointed to the old part elected Legislative Council, including Lalor and Hummfray in Ballarat.\nLalor is said to have \"aroused hostility among his digger constituents\" by not supporting the principle of one vote, one value. He instead preferred the existing property-based franchise and plural voting, where ownership of a certain number of holdings conferred the right to cast multiple ballots. In the event when the \"Electoral Act of 1856\" (Vic) was enacted, these provisions were not carried forward, and universal adult male suffrage was then introduced in 1857 for Legislative Assembly elections. On another occasion, there were 17,745 signatures from Ballarat residents on a petition against a regressive land ownership bill Lalor supported that favoured the \"squattocracy,\" who came from pioneering families who had acquired their prime agricultural land through occupation and were not of a mind to give up their monopoly on the countryside, nor political representation. He is on record as having been opposed to payment for members of the Legislative Council, which had been another key demand of the Ballarat Reform League. In November 1855, under the new constitutional arrangements, Lalor was elected unopposed to the Legislative Assembly for the seat of North Grenville, which he held from 1856 to 1859.\nWithers and others have noted that those who considered Lalor a legendary folk hero were surprised that he should be more concerned with accumulating styles and estates than securing any gains from the Eureka Rebellion. Lalor had been found out as wanting by a critical mass of his supporters, who had hitherto sustained his political career. Lynch recalls that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The semi-Chartist, revolutionary Chief, the radical reformer thus suddenly metamorphosed into a smug Tory, was surely a spectacle to make good men weep. But good men did more than weep; they decried him with vehemence in keeping with the recoil of their sentiments.\"\nUnder pressure from constituents to clarify his position, in a letter dated 1 January 1857 published in the \"Ballarat Star\", Lalor would describe his political ideology in the following terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I would ask the gentlemen what they mean by the term 'Democracy'? Do they mean Chartism, or Communism, or Republicanism? If so, I never was, I am not now, nor do I ever intend to be a democrat. But if democracy means opposition to a tyrannical press, a tyrannical people, or a tyrannical government, then I have ever been, am still, and I ever will remain a democrat.\"\nFrom there on, he never represented a Ballarat-based constituency again, successfully contesting the Melbourne seat of South Grant in the Legislative Assembly in 1859 until being twice defeated at the polls in 1871, on the second occasion contesting the seat of North Melbourne. In 1874 he was once again elected as the member for South Grant, which he represented in parliament until he died in 1889.\nLalor served as chairman of committees from 1859 to 1868 before being sworn into the ministry. He was first appointed as Commissioner of Trade and Customs in 1875, an office he also held throughout 1877-1880, riding the fortunes of his parliamentary faction. He was also briefly Postmaster-General of Victoria from May to July 1877. Lalor would go on to serve as the speaker from 1880 and 1887. When his health situation forced him to step down, parliament awarded him a sum of 4,000 pounds. Lalor is said to have twice refused to accept the highest Imperial honour of a British knighthood.\nLocation.\nIn 1931, R.S. Reed claimed that \"an old tree stump on the south side of Victoria Street, near Humffray Street, is the historic tree at which the pioneer diggers gathered in the days before the Eureka Stockade to discuss their grievances against the officialdom of the time.\" Reed called for the formation of a committee of citizens to \"beautify the spot, and to preserve the tree stump\" upon which Lalor addressed the assembled rebels during the oath swearing ceremony. It was also reported the stump \"has been securely fenced in, and the enclosed area is to be planted with floriferous trees. The spot is adjacent to Eureka, which is famed alike for the stockade fight and for the fact that the Welcome Nugget. (sold for \u00a310,500) was discovered in 1858 within a stone's throw of it.\" A report commissioned by the City of Ballarat in 2015 found that given documentary evidence and its elevation, the most likely location of the oath swearing ceremony is 29 St. Paul's Way, Bakery Hill. As of 2016, the area was a car park awaiting residential development.\nThe exact site of the Eureka Stockade itself remains unknown. The materials used to build the stockade were rapidly removed to be used for the mines, and the entire surrounding area was so extensively worked that the original landscape became unrecognisable, making identifying the historical location of the stockade virtually impossible. In 1870, Ballarat born historian William Withers claimed that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It was an area of about an acre, rudely enclosed with slabs, and situated at the point where the Eureka Lead took its bend by the old Melbourne road, now called Eureka street...The site...lay about midway between what are now Stawell and Queen streets on the east and west, and close to Eureka street on the south.\"\nPolitical legacy.\nThe actual political significance of the Eureka Rebellion is contested. It has been variously interpreted as a revolt of free men against imperial tyranny, of independent free enterprise against burdensome taxation, of labour against a privileged ruling class, or as an expression of republicanism. Some historians believe that the prominence of the event in the public record has come about because Australian history does not include a major armed rebellion phase equivalent to the French Revolution, the English Civil War, or the American War of Independence, making the Eureka story inflated well beyond its real importance. Others, however, maintain that Eureka was a seminal event and that it marked a major change in the course of Australian history.\nIn modern times, there have been calls for the official Australian national flag to be replaced by the Eureka Flag.\nIn his eyewitness account, Carboni stated that \"amongst the foreigners ... there was no democratic feeling, but merely a spirit of resistance to the licence fee.\" He also disputes the accusations \"that have branded the miners of Ballarat as disloyal to their QUEEN.\"\nAmerican author Mark Twain, who journeyed to Ballarat, mentioned the Eureka Rebellion in his 1897 travel book \"Following the Equator\" saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"By and by there was a result; and I think it may be called the finest thing in Australasian history. It was a revolution - small in size; but great politically; it was a strike for liberty, a struggle for a principle, a stand against injustice and oppression. It was the Barons and John, over again; it was Hampden and Ship-Money; it was Concord and Lexington; small beginnings, all of them, but all of them great in political results, all of them epoch-making. It is another instance of a victory won by a lost battle. It adds an honorable page to history; the people know it and are proud of it. They keep green the memory of the men who fell at the Eureka Stockade, and Peter Lalor has his monument.\"\nH.V. Evatt, leader of the ALP, wrote that \"Australian democracy was born at Eureka.\" Liberal Prime Minister Robert Menzies said \"the Eureka revolution was an earnest attempt at democratic government.\" Ben Chifley, former ALP Prime Minister, expressed the view that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Eureka was more than an incident or passing phase. It was greater in significance than the short-lived revolt against tyrannical authority would suggest. The permanency of Eureka in its impact on our development was that it was the first real affirmation of our determination to be masters of our own political destiny.\"\nBlainey has described Evatt's view as \"slightly inflammatory\" for such reasons as the first parliamentary elections in Australian history actually took place in South Australia, albeit according to a more limited property-based franchise, acknowledging that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Eureka became a legend, a battlecry for nationalists, republicans, liberals, radicals, or communists, each creed finding in the rebellion the lessons they liked to see ... In fact the new colonies' political constitutions were not affected by Eureka, but the first Parliament that met under Victoria's new constitution was alert to the democratic spirit of the goldfields, and passed laws enabling each adult man in Victoria to vote at elections, to vote by secret ballot, to stand for the Legislative Assembly.\" \nHe has also drawn attention to the fact that many miners were temporary migrants from Britain and the United States who did not intend to settle permanently in Australia, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Nowadays it is common to see the noble Eureka Flag and the rebellion of 1854 as the symbol of Australian independence, of freedom from foreign domination; but many saw the rebellion in 1854 as an uprising by outsiders who were exploiting the country's resources and refusing to pay their fair share of taxes. So we make history do its handsprings.\"\nIn 1999, the Premier of New South Wales, Bob Carr, dismissed the Eureka Stockade as a \"protest without consequence.\" Deputy Prime Minister John Anderson made the Eureka Flag a federal election campaign issue in 2004 saying \"I think people have tried to make too much of the Eureka Stockade ... trying to give it a credibility and standing that it probably doesn't enjoy.\" In the opening address of the Eureka 150 Democracy Conference in 2004, the Premier of Victoria, Steve Bracks, said \"that Eureka was about the struggle for basic democratic rights. It was not about a riot \u2013 it was about rights.\"\nCommemoration.\n19th century.\nFollowing an earlier meeting on 22 November 1855 held at the location of the stockade where calls for compensation were made, Carboni returned to the rebel burial ground for the first anniversary of the battle and remained for the day selling copies of his self-published memoirs. The following year for the second anniversary, veteran John Lynch gave a speech as several hundred people gathered at the Eureka lead and the local cemetery to remember the fall of the Eureka Stockade.\nA diggers' memorial was erected in the Ballaarat Old Cemetery on 22 March 1856 near marked graves. Sculpted in stone from the Barrabool Hills by James Leggatt in Geelong, it features a pillar bearing the names of the deceased miners and bearing the inscription \"Sacred to the memory of those who fell on the memorable 3 December 1854 in resisting the unconstitutional proceedings of the Victorian Government.\"\nThe soldiers were also buried in the same cemetery as the rebels. In August 1872, the area surrounding the soldiers' graves was enclosed with a fence. A soldiers' memorial was constructed in 1879 and is an obelisk constructed of limestone sourced from Waurn Ponds with the words \"Victoria\" and \"Duty\" carved in its north and south faces, respectively.\nThe Eureka Stockade Memorial located within the Eureka Stockade Gardens dates from 1884 and has been added to the Australian National Heritage List.\nOver the next thirty years, press interest in the events that had taken place at the Eureka Stockade dwindled, but Eureka was kept alive at the campfires and in the pubs and at memorial events in Ballarat. In addition, key figures such as Lalor and Humffray were still in the public eye.\nSome of the earliest recorded examples of the Eureka Flag being used as a symbol of white nationalism and trade unionism are from the late 19th century. According to an oral tradition, the Eureka Flag was on display at a seaman's union protest against the use of cheap Asian labour on ships at Circular Quay in 1878. In August 1890, the Eureka Flag was draped from a platform in front of a crowd of 30,000 protesters assembled at the Yarra Bank in Melbourne in a show of solidarity with maritime workers. There was also a similar flag flown prominently above the camp at Barcaldine during the 1891 Australian shearers' strike.\nIn 1889, Melbourne businessmen employed renowned American cyclorama artist Thaddeus Welch, who teamed up with local artist Izett Watson to paint a canvas of the Eureka Stockade, wrapped around a wooden structure. When it opened in Melbourne, the exhibition was an instant hit. \"The Age\" reported in 1891 that \"it afforded a very good opportunity for people to see what it might have been like at Eureka.\" \"The Australasian\" stated \"that many persons familiar with the incidents depicted, were able to testify to the fidelity of the painted scene.\" The people of Melbourne flocked to the cyclorama, paid up and had their picture taken before it. Eventually, it was dismantled and disappeared from sight.\n20th century.\nFor the 50th anniversary in 1904, around sixty veterans gathered for a reunion at the Eureka Stockade memorial with large crowds in attendance. According to one report, there was a procession and \"much cheering and enthusiasm along the line of route, and the old pioneers received a very hearty greeting.\" The crowd heard from a number of speakers, including Ballarat-born Richard Crouch MP, who \"was not at all satisfied that the necessity for revolt had at all ended; in fact, he rather advocated a revolt against conventionalism and political cant.\"\nIn 1954 a committee of Ballarat locals was formed to coordinate events to mark the centenary of the Eureka Stockade. Geoffrey Blainey, who was in Ballarat then, recalls attending one function and finding that no one, apart from a small group of communists, was there. There are also reports of an oration at the Peter Lalor statue, a procession, a pageant at Sovereign Hill, a concert and dance, a dawn service, and a pilgrimage to the Eureka graves. Evidently, the procession was headed by mounted police and servicemen from the Royal Australian Airforce base at Ballarat dressed in 1850s soldier's uniforms. There were centenary commemoration events around Australia held under the auspices of the Communist Party of Australia, which in the 1940s named their youth organisation the Eureka Youth League. Catholic Church affiliates also endorsed a Eureka centenary supplement with commemorative events.\nBallarat's best-known tourist destination, Sovereign Hill, was opened on 29 November 1970 as an open-air museum set in the gold rush period. Since 1992 in commemoration of the Eureka Stockade Sovereign Hill has featured a 90-minute son et lumi\u00e8re \"Blood Under the Southern Cross,\" a sound and light show attraction played under the night skies that was revised and expanded from 2003. The Eureka Flag was temporarily on display at Sovereign Hill during 1987, whilst renovation work was being carried out at the Art Gallery of Ballarat.\nIn 1973, Gough Whitlam gave a speech to mark the largest and most celebrated fragments of the Eureka Flag donated by the descendants of John King going on permanent display to the general public at the Art Gallery of Ballarat. He predicted that: \"an event like Eureka, with all its associations, with all its potent symbolism, will acquire an aura of excitement and romance, and stir the imagination of the Australian people.\"\nA purpose-built interpretation centre was erected at the cost of $4 million in March 1998 in the suburb of Eureka near the Eureka Stockade memorial. Designed to be a new landmark for Ballarat, it was known as the Eureka Stockade Centre and then the Eureka Centre. The building originally featured an enormous sail emblazoned with the Eureka Flag. Before its development there was considerable debate over whether a replica or reconstruction of wooden structures was appropriate. However, it was eventually decided against, and this is seen by many as a reason for the apparent failure of the centre to draw significant tourist numbers. Due primarily to falling visitor numbers the \"controversial\" Eureka Centre was redeveloped between 2009 and 2011. In 2013 it was relaunched as the Museum of Australian Democracy at Eureka with the aid of a further $5 million in funding from both the Australian and Victorian governments and $1.1 million from the City of Ballarat. The centrepiece of MADE's collection was the \"King\" fragments of the Eureka Flag made available on loan from the Art Gallery of Ballarat, that represent 69.01% of the original specimen. In 2018, the City of Ballarat council resolved to assume responsibility for managing the facility. MADE was closed and since being reopened has been called the Eureka Centre Ballarat.\n21st century.\nIn 2004, the 150th anniversary of the Eureka Stockade was commemorated. In November, the Premier of Victoria Steve Bracks announced that the Ballarat V/Line rail service would be renamed the \"Eureka Line\" to mark the 150th anniversary taking effect from late 2005 at the same time as the renaming of Spencer Street railway station to Southern Cross, however, the proposal was criticised by community groups including the Public Transport Users Association. Renaming of the line did not go ahead. However, the redesignation of the Spencer Street Station was announced on 13 December 2005. Bracks stated that the change would resonate with Victorians because the Southern Cross \"stands for democracy and freedom because it flew over the Eureka Stockade.\" An Australian postage stamp featuring the Eureka Flag was released along with a set of commemorative coins. A ceremony in Ballarat known as the lantern walk was held at dawn. However, Prime Minister John Howard did not attend any commemorative events and refused to allow the Eureka Flag to fly over Parliament House.\nThe Eureka Tower in Melbourne, completed in 2006, is named in honour of the rebellion and features symbolic aspects such as blue glass and white stripes in reference to both the Eureka Flag and a surveyor's measuring staff and a crown of gold glass with a red stripe to represent the blood spilled on the goldfields.\nIn 2014 to mark the 160th anniversary of the Eureka Rebellion the Australian Flag Society released a commemorative folk cartoon entitled \"Fall Back with the Eureka Jack\" that was inspired by the Eureka Jack mystery.\nOn 1 June 2022, the City of Ballarat, in conjunction with Eureka Australia, unveiled a new Pathway of Remembrance at the Eureka Stockade Memorial Park commemorating the \"35 men who lost their lives during the Eureka Stockade in 1854.\"\nPopular culture.\nThe Eureka Rebellion has been the inspiration for numerous novels, poems, films, songs, plays and artworks. Much of the Eureka folklore relies heavily on Raffaello Canboni's 1855 book, \"The Eureka Stockade,\" which was the first and only comprehensive eyewitness account of the Eureka rebellion. Henry Lawson wrote a number of poems about Eureka, as have many novelists. There have been four motion pictures based on the uprising in Ballarat. The first was \"Eureka Stockade\", which was a silent film made in 1907, being only the second feature film produced in Australia. There have also been a number of plays and songs about the rebellion. The folk song \"German Teddy\" concerns Edward Thonen, one of the rebels who dies defending the Eureka Stockade.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9835", "revid": "1157615246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9835", "title": "Escape from New York", "text": "1981 science fiction action film by John Carpenter\nEscape from New York is a 1981 American science fiction action film co-written, co-scored and directed by John Carpenter, and starring Kurt Russell, Lee Van Cleef, Ernest Borgnine, Donald Pleasence, Isaac Hayes, Adrienne Barbeau and Harry Dean Stanton.\nThe film's storyline, set in the near-future world of 1997, concerns a crime-ridden United States, which has converted Manhattan Island in New York City into the country's sole maximum security prison. Air Force One is hijacked by anti-government insurgents who deliberately crash it into the walled borough. Ex-soldier and current federal prisoner Snake Plissken (Russell) is given just 24 hours to go in and rescue the President of the United States, after which, if successful, he will be pardoned.\nCarpenter wrote the film in the mid-1970s in reaction to the Watergate scandal. After the success of \"Halloween\" (1978), he had enough influence to begin production and filmed it mainly in St. Louis, Missouri, on an estimated budget of $6 million. Debra Hill and Larry J. Franco served as the producers. The film was co-written by Nick Castle, who had collaborated with Carpenter by portraying Michael Myers in \"Halloween\".\nReleased in the United States on July 10, 1981, the film received positive reviews from critics and was a commercial success, grossing more than $25.2 million at the box office. The film was nominated for four Saturn Awards, including Best Science Fiction Film and Best Direction. The film became a cult classic and was followed by a sequel, \"Escape from L.A.\" (1996), which was also directed and written by Carpenter and starred Russell.\nPlot.\nIn a dystopian 1988, amidst war against an alliance of China and the Soviet Union, the United States government has turned Manhattan into a maximum security prison to address a 400% increase in crime. The island is walled off from the outside world and under heavy police surveillance.\nIn 1997, while flying President John Harker to a peace summit in Hartford, Air Force One is hijacked by a terrorist. The President is handcuffed with a briefcase and put into an escape pod that drops into Manhattan as the aircraft crashes.\nPolice are dispatched to rescue the President. Romero, the right-hand man of the Duke of New York, a powerful crime boss, warns them that the President has been captured and will be killed if any further rescue attempts are made. Meanwhile, former Special Forces soldier Snake Plissken is about to be sent into Manhattan after being convicted of robbing the Federal Reserve. Police Commissioner Bob Hauk offers a deal to Snake: if he rescues the President in time for the summit, Hauk will arrange a presidential pardon for Snake. To ensure Snake's compliance, Hauk has him injected with micro-explosives that will sever his carotid arteries in 22 hours. If Snake is successful, Hauk will neutralize the explosives.\nUsing a stealth glider to land atop the World Trade Center, Snake follows the President's tracker to a vaudeville theater only to find it on the wrist of a deluded vagrant. Convinced the President is dead, Snake radios Hauk but is told he will be killed if he returns without the President. Inspecting the escape pod, Snake is ambushed by dozens of starving \"crazies\", and his radio is destroyed. He is rescued by \"Cabbie\", a jovial old man who drives an armored taxi.\nCabbie takes Snake to Harold \"Brain\" Hellman, an adviser to the Duke and a former associate of Snake's. A skilled engineer, Brain has established a small gasoline refinery, fueling the city's remaining cars, and tells Snake that the Duke plans to lead a mass escape across the 69th Street Bridge by using the President as a human shield. Snake forces Brain and his girlfriend Maggie to lead him to the Duke's hideout at Grand Central Terminal. Snake finds the President but gets shot in the leg with a crossbow bolt and overpowered by the Duke's men.\nWhile Snake is forced to fight against Duke's champion Slag in a deathmatch, Brain and Maggie kill Romero and flee with the President. Snake kills Slag and finds the trio trying to escape in the glider. Inmates drop the glider off the roof, so the group returns to street level and encounters Cabbie, who offers to take them across the bridge. Cabbie reveals that he bartered with Romero for the contents of the briefcase: a cassette tape that contains information about nuclear fusion, intended to be an international peace offering. The President demands the tape but Snake claims it.\nThe Duke pursues them onto the bridge in his customized Cadillac, setting off mines as he tries to catch up. Brain guides Snake, but they hit a mine and Cabbie is killed. As they continue on foot, Brain accidentally stumbles into another mine. A distraught Maggie sacrifices herself to slow down the Duke. Snake and the President reach the containment wall and guards hoist the President up. The Duke opens fire with Snake's MAC-10, killing the guards before Snake subdues him. As Snake is being lifted up by the rope the Duke attempts to shoot him, but the President takes up a dead guard's rifle and kills the Duke. Snake is hoisted to safety and Hauk's doctor removes the explosives with seconds to spare.\nAs the President prepares for a televised speech to the leaders at the summit meeting, he thanks Snake for saving him but offers only half-hearted regret for the deaths of his colleagues. Snake walks away in disgust. Hauk offers Snake a job as his deputy but he keeps walking. The President's speech commences and he plays the cassette tape. To his embarrassment, it only plays Cabbie's favorite song, \"Bandstand Boogie\". As Snake walks away a free man, he tears the magnetic strip out of the real tape.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Kurt Russell as Lieutenant S.D. \"Snake\" Plissken\nIn addition, frequent Carpenter collaborators Nancy Stephens appeared as the \"Hijacker\" and Buck Flower appeared as the \"Drunk with the president's tracker\", respectively, while then-active professional wrestler \nOx Baker played \"Slag\". The narrator was voiced by an uncredited Jamie Lee Curtis. Actor Joe Unger filmed scenes as Snake's partner-in-crime Bill Taylor, but they were cut from the final film.\nProduction.\nDevelopment and writing.\nCarpenter originally wrote the screenplay for \"Escape from New York\" in 1976, in the aftermath of Nixon's Watergate scandal. Carpenter said, \"The whole feeling of the nation was one of real cynicism about the president.\" He wrote the screenplay, but no studio wanted to make it because, according to Carpenter, \"[i]t was too violent, too scary, [and] too weird\". He had been inspired by the film \"Death Wish\", which was very popular at the time. He did not agree with this film's philosophy, but liked how it conveyed \"the sense of New York as a kind of jungle, and I wanted to make a science-fiction film along these lines\".\nInternational Film Investors agreed to provide 50% of the budget, and Goldcrest Films signed a co-financing deal with them. They ended up providing \u00a3720,000 of the budget and making a profit of \u00a3672,000 from their investment after earning \u00a31,392,000.\nCasting.\nAVCO Embassy Pictures, the film's financial backer, preferred either Charles Bronson or Tommy Lee Jones to play the role of Snake Plissken to Carpenter's choice of Kurt Russell, who was trying to overcome the \"lightweight\" screen image conveyed by his roles in several Disney comedies. Carpenter refused to cast Bronson on the grounds that he was too old, and because he worried that he could lose directorial control over the film with an experienced actor. At the time, Russell described his character as \"a mercenary, and his style of fighting is a combination of Bruce Lee, The Exterminator, and Darth Vader, with Eastwood's vocal-ness.\" All that matters to Snake, according to the actor, is \"the next 60 seconds. Living for exactly that next minute is all there is.\" Russell used a rigorous diet and exercise program to develop a lean and muscular build. He also endeavored to stay in character between takes and throughout the shooting, as he welcomed the opportunity to get away from the Disney comedies he had done previously. He did find it necessary to remove the eyepatch between takes, as wearing it constantly seriously affected his depth perception.\nPre-production.\nCarpenter had just made \"Dark Star\", but no one wanted to hire him as a director, so he assumed he would make it in Hollywood as a screenwriter. The filmmaker went on to do other films with the intention of making \"Escape\" later. After the success of \"Halloween\", Avco-Embassy signed producer Debra Hill and him to a two-picture deal. The first film from this contract was \"The Fog\". Initially, the second film he was going to make to finish the contract was \"The Philadelphia Experiment\", but because of script-writing problems, Carpenter rejected it in favor of this project. However, Carpenter felt something was missing and recalls, \"This was basically a straight action film. And at one point, I realized it really doesn't have this kind of crazy humor that people from New York would expect to see.\" He brought in Nick Castle, a friend from his film-school days at University of Southern California, who played \"The Shape\" in \"Halloween\". Castle invented the Cabbie character and came up with the film's ending.\nThe film's setting proved to be a potential problem for Carpenter, who needed to create a decaying, semi-destroyed version of New York City on a shoestring budget. The film's production designer Joe Alves and he rejected shooting on location in New York City because it would be too hard to make it look like a destroyed city. Carpenter suggested shooting on a movie back lot, but Alves nixed that idea \"because the texture of a real street is not like a back lot.\" They sent Barry Bernardi, their location manager (and associate producer), \"on a sort of all-expense-paid trip across the country looking for the worst city in America,\" producer Debra Hill remembers.\nBernardi suggested East St. Louis, Illinois because it was filled with old buildings \"that exist in New York now, and [that] have that seedy run-down quality\" that the team was looking for. East St. Louis, sitting across the Mississippi River from the more prosperous St. Louis, Missouri, had entire neighborhoods burned out in 1976 during a massive urban fire. Hill said in an interview, \"block after block was burnt-out rubble. In some places, there was absolutely nothing, so that you could see three and four blocks away.\" Also, Alves found an old bridge to serve as the \"69th St. Bridge\". The filmmaker purchased the Old Chain of Rocks Bridge for one dollar from the government and then gave it back to them, for the same amount, once production was completed, \"so that they wouldn't have any liability,\" Hill remembers. Locations across the river in St. Louis were used, including Union Station and the Fox Theatre, both of which have since been renovated, as well as the building that would eventually become the Schlafly Tap Room microbrewery.\nFilming.\nCarpenter and his crew persuaded the city to shut off the electricity to 10 blocks at a time at night. The film was shot from August to November 1980. It was a tough and demanding shoot for the filmmaker as he recalls. \"We'd finish shooting at about 6 am and I'd just be going to sleep at 7 when the sun would be coming up. I'd wake up around 5 or 6 pm, depending on whether or not we had dailies, and by the time I got going, the sun would be setting. So for about two and a half months I never saw daylight, which was really strange.\" The gladiatorial fight to the death scene between Snake and Slag (played by professional wrestler Ox Baker) was filmed in the Grand Hall at St. Louis Union Station. Russell has stated, \"That day was a nightmare. All I did was swing a [spiked] bat at that guy and get swung at in return. He threw a trash can in my face about five times ... I could have wound up in pretty bad shape.\" In addition to shooting on location in St. Louis, Carpenter shot parts of the film in Los Angeles. Various interior scenes were shot on a sound stage; the final scenes were shot at the Sepulveda Dam, in Sherman Oaks. New York served as a location, as did Atlanta, to use their futuristic-looking rapid-transit system (the latter scenes were cut from the final film). In New York City, Carpenter persuaded federal officials to grant access to Liberty Island. \"We were the first film company in history allowed to shoot on Liberty Island at the Statue of Liberty at night. They let us have the whole island to ourselves. We were lucky. It wasn't easy to get that initial permission. They'd had a bombing three months earlier and were worried about trouble\".\nCarpenter was interested in creating two distinct looks for the movie. \"One is the police state, high tech, lots of neon, a United States dominated by underground computers. That was easy to shoot compared to the Manhattan Island prison sequences, which had few lights, mainly torch lights, like feudal England\". Certain matte paintings were rendered by James Cameron, who was at the time a special-effects artist with Roger Corman's New World Pictures. Cameron was also one of the directors of photography on the film. As Snake pilots the glider into the city, three screens on his control panel display wireframe animations of the landing target on the World Trade Center and surrounding buildings. Carpenter wanted high-tech computer graphics, which were very expensive, even for such a simple animation. The effects crew filmed the miniature model set of New York City they used for other scenes under black light, with reflective tape placed along every edge of the model buildings. Only the tape is visible and appears to be a three-dimensional wireframe animation.\nRelease.\nHome media.\nLaserDisc releases.\n\"Escape from New York\" was released on LaserDisc 10 times between 1983 and 1998. A 1994 Collector's Edition includes a commentary track by John Carpenter and Kurt Russell that is still included on more recent DVD releases of the film.\nDVD releases.\n\"Escape from New York\" was released on DVD twice by MGM (USA), and once by Momentum Pictures (UK). One MGM release is a barebones edition containing just the theatrical trailer. Another version is the Collector's Edition, a two-disc set featuring a high definition remastered transfer with a 5.1 stereo audio track, two commentaries (one by John Carpenter and Kurt Russell, another by producer Debra Hill and Joe Alves), a making-of featurette, the first issue of a comic book series titled \"John Carpenter's Snake Plissken Chronicles\", and the 10-minute Colorado bank robbery deleted opening sequence.\nMGM's special edition of the 1981 film was not released until 2003 because the original negative had gone missing. The workprint containing deleted scenes finally turned up in the Hutchinson, Kansas, salt-mine film depository. The excised scenes feature Snake Plissken robbing a bank, introducing the character of Plissken and establishing a backstory. Director John Carpenter decided to add the original scenes into the special edition release as an extra only: \"After we screened the rough cut, we realized that the movie didn't really start until Snake got to New York. It wasn't necessary to show what sent him there.\" The film has been released on the UMD format for Sony's PlayStation Portable.\nBlu-ray release.\nOn August 3, 2010, MGM Home Entertainment released \"Escape From New York\" as a bare-bones Blu-ray. Scream Factory, in association with Shout! Factory, released the film on a special edition Blu-ray on April 21, 2015.\nReception and legacy.\nBox office.\n\"Escape from New York\" opened in New York and Los Angeles July 10, 1981. The film grossed $25.2 million in American theaters in summer 1981.\nCritical response.\nThe film received generally positive reviews. \"Newsweek\" magazine wrote of Carpenter: \"[He has a] deeply ingrained B-movie sensibility\u00a0\u2013 which is both his strength and limitation. He does clean work, but settles for too little. He uses Russell well, however\". In \"Time\" magazine, Richard Corliss wrote, \"John Carpenter is offering this summer's moviegoers a rare opportunity: to escape from the air-conditioned torpor of ordinary entertainment into the hothouse humidity of their own paranoia. It's a trip worth taking\". Vincent Canby, in his review for \"The New York Times\", wrote, \"[The film] is not to be analyzed too solemnly, though. It's a toughly told, very tall tale, one of the best escape (and escapist) movies of the season\". On the other hand, in his negative review for the \"Chicago Reader\", critic Dave Kehr, wrote \"it fails to satisfy \u2013 it gives us too little of too much\".\nChristopher John reviewed \"Escape from New York\" in \"Ares Magazine\" #10 and commented that \"It is solid summer entertainment of unusually high caliber. By not pretending to be more than it is, but by also not settling for any \"less\" than it could be, \"Escape\" becomes an exciting, fast-moving drama, the likes of which we haven't seen in years.\"\nOn Rotten Tomatoes it received an 86% positive rating based on reviews from 66 critics, with an average score of 7.20/10. The site's critical consensus was: \"Featuring an atmospherically grimy futuristic metropolis, \"Escape from New York\" is a strange, entertaining jumble of thrilling action and oddball weirdness\". On Metacritic it has a score of 76% based on reviews from 12 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\".\nCyberpunk pioneer William Gibson credits the film as an influence on his 1984 science fiction novel \"Neuromancer\". \"I was intrigued by the exchange in one of the opening scenes where the Warden says to Snake 'You flew the Gullfire over Leningrad, didn't you?' It turns out to be just a throwaway line, but for a moment it worked like the best SF where a casual reference can imply a lot\". Popular video game director Hideo Kojima has referred to the film frequently as an influence on his work, in particular the \"Metal Gear\" series. Solid Snake is partially influenced by the character Snake Plissken. In ' Snake uses the alias \"Pliskin\" to hide his real identity during most of the game. J. J. Abrams, producer of the 2008 film \"Cloverfield\", mentioned that a scene in his film, which shows the head of the Statue of Liberty crashing into a New York street, was inspired by the poster for \"Escape from New York\". \"Empire\" magazine ranked Snake Plissken number 29 in their \"The 100 Greatest Movie Characters\" poll.\nOther media.\nSequels.\nA sequel, \"Escape from L.A.\", was released in 1996, with Carpenter returning along with Russell, now also acting as producer and co-writer.\nA remake for \"Escape from New York\" began development in 2007, when New Line Cinema won the rights to remake in a bidding war. Gerard Butler was attached to play Snake Plissken, Neal H. Moritz would produce through his Original Film company, and Ken Nolan would be in charge of the screenplay. Len Wiseman was announced to direct, but was later replaced by Brett Ratner, who also stepped off the project. In April 2010, Variety reported that Breck Eisner was being looked at to direct a remake of \"Escape from New York\", with David Kajganich and Allan Loeb providing revisions to the script. It was later announced in 2011 that New Line had dropped the remake completely. In January 2015, 20th Century Fox purchased the remake rights, with The Picture Company producing. In March 2017, it was announced that Robert Rodriguez would direct a remake of the film with Carpenter producing it. In February 2019, it was reported that Leigh Whannell will be writing the script after \"Luther\" creator Neil Cross completed a recent iteration of the project. Wyatt Russell, son of Kurt, was considered to portray Snake Plissken, but he expressed no interest in playing the role, considering it \"career suicide.\" On November 17, 2022, it was revealed that Radio Silence would be directing the film, with Andrew Rona, Alex Heineman, and Radio Silence producing, and Carpenter serving as an executive producer. They are currently searching for a writer. In December 2022, the film was confirmed to be a sequel, rather than a remake.\nNovelization.\nIn 1981, Bantam Books published a movie tie-in novelization written by Mike McQuay that adopts a lean, humorous style reminiscent of the film. The novel includes significant scenes that were cut from the film, such as the Federal Reserve Depository robbery that results in Snake's incarceration. The novel provides background on the relationship between Snake and Hauk\u2014presenting the characters as disillusioned war veterans, and deepening the relationship that was only hinted in the film. The novel also explains how Snake lost his eye during the Battle for Leningrad in World War III, how Hauk became warden of New York, and Hauk's quest to find his crazed son, who lives somewhere in the prison. The novel gives greater detail on the world in which these characters live, at times presenting a future even bleaker than the one depicted in the film. It explains that the West Coast is a no-man's land, and the nation's population is gradually being driven insane by nerve gas as a result of World War III. The novel also clarifies that the president's plan for the cassette tape is not benevolent. Rather than presenting to the world a new energy source in the form of nuclear fusion (as claimed in the film), the tape actually reveals the successful development of a \"fallout-free thermonuclear weapon, which would grant the US supremacy in the global conflict.\nComic books.\nMarvel Comics released the one-shot \"The Adventures of Snake Plissken\" in January 1997. The story takes place sometime between \"Escape from New York\" and before his famous Cleveland escape mentioned in \"Escape from L.A.\" Snake has robbed Atlanta's Centers for Disease Control of some engineered metaviruses and is looking for buyers in Chicago. Finding himself in a deal that is really a set-up, he makes his getaway and exacts revenge on the buyer for ratting him out to the United States Police Force. In the meantime, a government lab has built a robot called ATACS (Autonomous Tracking And Combat System) that can catch criminals by imprinting their personalities upon its program to predict and anticipate a specific criminal's every move. The robot's first test subject is America's public enemy number one, Snake Plissken. After a brief battle, the tide turns when ATACS copies Snake to the point of fully becoming his personality. Now recognizing the government as the enemy, ATACS sides with Snake. Unamused, Snake sucker punches the machine and destroys it. As ATACS shuts down, it can only ask him, \"Why?\" Snake just walks off, answering, \"I don't need the competition\".\nIn 2003, CrossGen published \"John Carpenter's Snake Plissken Chronicles\", a four-part comic book miniseries. The story takes place a day or so after the events of \"Escape from New York\". Snake has been given a military Humvee after his presidential pardon and makes his way to Atlantic City. Although the director's cut of \"Escape from New York\" shows Snake was caught after a bank job, this story has Snake finishing up a second heist that was planned before his capture. The job entails stealing the car in which John F. Kennedy was assassinated from a casino before delivering it to a buyer in the Gulf of Mexico. Snake partners with a man named Marrs who ends up double-crossing him. Left for dead in a sinking crab cage, Snake escapes and is saved by a passing fisherman named Captain Ron (an in-joke referring to Kurt Russell's 1992 comedy, \"Captain Ron\"). When Ron denies Snake's request to use his boat to beat Marrs to the robbery, Snake decides to kill him. When Snake ends up saving Ron from the Russian mob, who wants money, Ron changes his mind and helps Snake. Once at the casino, Snake comes face-to-face with Marrs and his men, who arrive at the same time, ending in a high-speed shootout. Snake gets away with the car and its actress portraying Jackie Kennedy, leaving Marrs to be caught by the casino owner, who cuts him a deal to bring his car back and live. After some trouble, Snake manages to finally get the car to the buyer's yacht, using Ron's boat, and is then attacked by Marrs. Following the firefight, the yacht and car are destroyed, Marrs and Captain Ron are dead, and Snake makes his escape in a helicopter with the 30 million credits owed to him for the job.\nIn 2014, BOOM! Studios began publishing an \"Escape from New York\" comic book by writer, Christopher Sebela. The first issue of the series was released on December 3, 2014, and the story picks up moments after the end of the film.\nBOOM! released a crossover comics miniseries between Snake and Jack Burton titled \"Big Trouble in Little China/ Escape from New York\" in October 2016.\nBoard games.\nAn \"Escape from New York\" board game was released in 1981 by TSR, Inc. Another board game was crowd-funded in 2022.\nCancelled anime.\nIn 2003, Carpenter was planning an anime spin-off of \"Escape from New York\", with \"Outlaw Star\"'s Mitsuru Hongo slated to direct.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9837", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9837", "title": "Ethylene", "text": "Hydrocarbon compound (H\u2082C=CH\u2082)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nEthylene (IUPAC name: ethene) is a hydrocarbon which has the formula or . It is a colourless, flammable gas with a faint \"sweet and musky\" odour when pure. It is the simplest alkene (a hydrocarbon with carbon\u2013carbon double bonds).\nEthylene is widely used in the chemical industry, and its worldwide production (over 150 million tonnes in 2016) exceeds that of any other organic compound. Much of this production goes toward polyethylene, a widely used plastic containing polymer chains of ethylene units in various chain lengths. Ethylene is also an important natural plant hormone and is used in agriculture to force the ripening of fruits. The hydrate of ethylene is ethanol.\nStructure and properties.\nThis hydrocarbon has four hydrogen atoms bound to a pair of carbon atoms that are connected by a double bond. All six atoms that comprise ethylene are coplanar. The H-C-H angle is 117.4\u00b0, close to the 120\u00b0 for ideal sp\u00b2 hybridized carbon. The molecule is also relatively weak: rotation about the C-C bond is a very low energy process that requires breaking the \u03c0-bond by supplying heat at 50\u00b0C.\nThe \u03c0-bond in the ethylene molecule is responsible for its useful reactivity. The double bond is a region of high electron density, thus it is susceptible to attack by electrophiles. Many reactions of ethylene are catalyzed by transition metals, which bind transiently to the ethylene using both the \u03c0 and \u03c0* orbitals.\nBeing a simple molecule, ethylene is spectroscopically simple. Its UV-vis spectrum is still used as a test of theoretical methods.\nUses.\nMajor industrial reactions of ethylene include in order of scale: 1) polymerization, 2) oxidation, 3) halogenation and hydrohalogenation, 4) alkylation, 5) hydration, 6) oligomerization, and 7) hydroformylation. In the United States and Europe, approximately 90% of ethylene is used to produce ethylene oxide, ethylene dichloride, ethylbenzene and polyethylene. Most of the reactions with ethylene are electrophilic addition.\nPolymerization.\nPolyethylene consumes more than half of the world's ethylene supply. Polyethylene, also called \"polyethene\" and \"polythene\", is the world's most widely used plastic. It is primarily used to make films in packaging, carrier bags and trash liners. Linear alpha-olefins, produced by oligomerization (formation of short polymers) are used as precursors, detergents, plasticisers, synthetic lubricants, additives, and also as co-monomers in the production of polyethylenes.\nOxidation.\nEthylene is oxidized to produce ethylene oxide, a key raw material in the production of surfactants and detergents by ethoxylation. Ethylene oxide is also hydrolyzed to produce ethylene glycol, widely used as an automotive antifreeze as well as higher molecular weight glycols, glycol ethers, and polyethylene terephthalate.\nEthylene undergoes oxidation by palladium to give acetaldehyde. This conversion remains a major industrial process (10M kg/y). The process proceeds via the initial complexation of ethylene to a Pd(II) center.\nHalogenation and hydrohalogenation.\nMajor intermediates from the halogenation and hydrohalogenation of ethylene include ethylene dichloride, ethyl chloride, and ethylene dibromide. The addition of chlorine entails \"oxychlorination\", i.e. chlorine itself is not used. Some products derived from this group are polyvinyl chloride, trichloroethylene, perchloroethylene, methyl chloroform, polyvinylidene chloride and copolymers, and ethyl bromide.\nAlkylation.\nMajor chemical intermediates from the alkylation with ethylene is ethylbenzene, precursor to styrene. Styrene is used principally in polystyrene for packaging and insulation, as well as in styrene-butadiene rubber for tires and footwear. On a smaller scale, ethyltoluene, ethylanilines, 1,4-hexadiene, and aluminium alkyls. Products of these intermediates include polystyrene, unsaturated polyesters and ethylene-propylene terpolymers.\nOxo reaction.\nThe hydroformylation (oxo reaction) of ethylene results in propionaldehyde, a precursor to propionic acid and n-propyl alcohol.\nHydration.\nEthylene has long represented the major nonfermentative precursor to ethanol. The original method entailed its conversion to diethyl sulfate, followed by hydrolysis. The main method practiced since the mid-1990s is the direct hydration of ethylene catalyzed by solid acid catalysts:\nC2H4 + H2O \u2192 CH3CH2OH\nDimerization to butenes.\nEthylene is dimerized by hydrovinylation to give \"n\"-butenes using processes licensed by Lummus or IFP. The Lummus process produces mixed \"n\"-butenes (primarily 2-butenes) while the IFP process produces 1-butene. 1-Butene is used as a comonomer in the production of certain kinds of polyethylene.\nFruit and flowering.\nEthylene is a hormone that affects the ripening and flowering of many plants. It is widely used to control freshness in horticulture and fruits. The scrubbing of naturally occurring ethylene delays ripening.\nNiche uses.\nAn example of a niche use is as an anesthetic agent (in an 85% ethylene/15% oxygen ratio). Another use is as a welding gas. It is also used as a refrigerant gas for low temperature application under the name R-1150.\nProduction.\nGlobal ethylene production was 107 million tonnes in 2005, 109 million tonnes in 2006, 138 million tonnes in 2010, and 141 million tonnes in 2011. By 2013, ethylene was produced by at least 117 companies in 32 countries. To meet the ever-increasing demand for ethylene, sharp increases in production facilities are added globally, particularly in the Mideast and in China. As of 2022[ [update]] production releases significant greenhouse gas emissions.\nIndustrial process.\nEthylene is produced by several methods in the petrochemical industry. A primary method is steam cracking (SC) where hydrocarbons and steam are heated to 750\u2013950\u00a0\u00b0C. This process converts large hydrocarbons into smaller ones and introduces unsaturation. When ethane is the feedstock, ethylene is the product. Ethylene is separated from the resulting mixture by repeated compression and distillation. In Europe and Asia, ethylene is obtained mainly from cracking naphtha, gasoil and condensates with the coproduction of propylene, C4 olefins and aromatics (pyrolysis gasoline). Other technologies employed for the production of ethylene include oxidative coupling of methane, Fischer-Tropsch synthesis, methanol-to-olefins (MTO), and catalytic dehydrogenation.\nLaboratory synthesis.\nAlthough of great value industrially, ethylene is rarely synthesized in the laboratory and is ordinarily purchased. It can be produced via dehydration of ethanol with sulfuric acid or in the gas phase with aluminium oxide or activated alumina.\nBiosynthesis.\nEthylene is produced from methionine in nature. The immediate precursor is 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid.\nLigand.\nEthylene is a fundamental ligand in transition metal alkene complexes. One of the first organometallic compounds, Zeise's salt is a complex of ethylene. Useful reagents containing ethylene include Pt(PPh3)2(C2H4) and Rh2Cl2(C2H4)4. The Rh-catalysed hydroformylation of ethylene is conducted on industrial scale to provide propionaldehyde.\nHistory.\nSome geologists and scholars believe that the famous Greek Oracle at Delphi (the Pythia) went into her trance-like state as an effect of ethylene rising from ground faults.\nEthylene appears to have been discovered by Johann Joachim Becher, who obtained it by heating ethanol with sulfuric acid; he mentioned the gas in his \"Physica Subterranea\" (1669). Joseph Priestley also mentions the gas in his \"Experiments and observations relating to the various branches of natural philosophy: with a continuation of the observations on air\" (1779), where he reports that Jan Ingenhousz saw ethylene synthesized in the same way by a Mr. En\u00e9e in Amsterdam in 1777 and that Ingenhousz subsequently produced the gas himself. The properties of ethylene were studied in 1795 by four Dutch chemists, Johann Rudolph Deimann, Adrien Paets van Troostwyck, Anthoni Lauwerenburgh and Nicolas Bondt, who found that it differed from hydrogen gas and that it contained both carbon and hydrogen. This group also discovered that ethylene could be combined with chlorine to produce the \"oil of the Dutch chemists\", 1,2-dichloroethane; this discovery gave ethylene the name used for it at that time, \"olefiant gas\" (oil-making gas.) The term olefiant gas is in turn the etymological origin of the modern word \"olefin\", the class of hydrocarbons in which ethylene is the first member.\nIn the mid-19th century, the suffix \"-ene\" (an Ancient Greek root added to the end of female names meaning \"daughter of\") was widely used to refer to a molecule or part thereof that contained one fewer hydrogen atoms than the molecule being modified. Thus, \"ethylene\" (C2H4) was the \"daughter of ethyl\" (C2H5). The name ethylene was used in this sense as early as 1852.\nIn 1866, the German chemist August Wilhelm von Hofmann proposed a system of hydrocarbon nomenclature in which the suffixes -ane, -ene, -ine, -one, and -une were used to denote the hydrocarbons with 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8 fewer hydrogens than their parent alkane. In this system, ethylene became \"ethene\". Hofmann's system eventually became the basis for the Geneva nomenclature approved by the International Congress of Chemists in 1892, which remains at the core of the IUPAC nomenclature. However, by that time, the name ethylene was deeply entrenched, and it remains in wide use today, especially in the chemical industry.\nFollowing experimentation by Luckhardt, Crocker, and Carter at the University of Chicago, ethylene was used as an anesthetic. It remained in use through the 1940s use even while chloroform was being phased out. Its pungent odor and its explosive nature limit its use today.\nNomenclature.\nThe 1979 IUPAC nomenclature rules made an exception for retaining the non-systematic name \"ethylene\"; however, this decision was reversed in the 1993 rules, and it remains unchanged in the newest 2013 recommendations, so the IUPAC name is now \"ethene\". In the IUPAC system, the name \"ethylene\" is reserved for the divalent group -CH2CH2-. Hence, names like \"ethylene oxide\" and \"ethylene dibromide\" are permitted, but the use of the name \"ethylene\" for the two-carbon alkene is not. Nevertheless, use of the name \"ethylene\" for H2C=CH2 (and propylene for H2C=CHCH3) is still prevalent among chemists in North America.\nSafety.\nLike all hydrocarbons, ethylene is a combustible asphyxiant. It is listed as an IARC class 3 carcinogen, since there is no current evidence that it causes cancer in humans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9838", "revid": "45853089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9838", "title": "Eiffel (programming language)", "text": "Object-oriented programming language\nEiffel is an object-oriented programming language designed by Bertrand Meyer (an object-orientation proponent and author of \"Object-Oriented Software Construction\") and Eiffel Software. Meyer conceived the language in 1985 with the goal of increasing the reliability of commercial software development; the first version becoming available in 1986. In 2005, Eiffel became an ISO-standardized language.\nThe design of the language is closely connected with the Eiffel programming method. Both are based on a set of principles, including design by contract, command\u2013query separation, the uniform-access principle, the single-choice principle, the open\u2013closed principle, and option\u2013operand separation.\nMany concepts initially introduced by Eiffel later found their way into Java, C#, and other languages. New language design ideas, particularly through the Ecma/ISO standardization process, continue to be incorporated into the Eiffel language.\nCharacteristics.\nThe key characteristics of the Eiffel language include:\nDesign goals.\nEiffel emphasizes declarative statements over procedural code and attempts to eliminate the need for bookkeeping instructions.\nEiffel shuns coding tricks or coding techniques intended as optimization hints to the compiler. The aim is not only to make the code more readable, but also to allow programmers to concentrate on the important aspects of a program without getting bogged down in implementation details. Eiffel's simplicity is intended to promote simple, extensible, reusable, and reliable answers to computing problems. Compilers for computer programs written in Eiffel provide extensive optimization techniques, such as automatic in-lining, that relieve the programmer of part of the optimization burden.\nBackground.\nEiffel was originally developed by Eiffel Software, a company founded by Bertrand Meyer. \"Object-Oriented Software Construction\" contains a detailed treatment of the concepts and theory of the object technology that led to Eiffel's design.\nThe design goal behind the Eiffel language, libraries, and programming methods is to enable programmers to create reliable, reusable software modules. Eiffel supports multiple inheritance, genericity, polymorphism, encapsulation, type-safe conversions, and parameter covariance. Eiffel's most important contribution to software engineering is design by contract (DbC), in which assertions, preconditions, postconditions, and class invariants are employed to help ensure program correctness without sacrificing efficiency.\nEiffel's design is based on object-oriented programming theory, with only minor influence of other paradigms or concern for support of legacy code. Eiffel formally supports abstract data types. Under Eiffel's design, a software text should be able to reproduce its design documentation from the text itself, using a formalized implementation of the \"Abstract Data Type\".\nImplementations and environments.\nEiffelStudio is an integrated development environment available under either an open source or a commercial license. It offers an object-oriented environment for software engineering. EiffelEnvision is a plug-in for Microsoft Visual Studio that allows users to edit, compile, and debug Eiffel projects from within the Microsoft Visual Studio IDE. Five other open source implementations are available: \"The Eiffel Compiler\" tecomp; Gobo Eiffel; SmartEiffel, the GNU implementation, based on an older version of the language; LibertyEiffel, based on the SmartEiffel compiler; and Visual Eiffel.\nSeveral other programming languages incorporate elements first introduced in Eiffel. Sather, for example, was originally based on Eiffel but has since diverged, and now includes several functional programming features. The interactive-teaching language Blue, forerunner of BlueJ, is also Eiffel-based. The Apple Media Tool includes an Eiffel-based Apple Media Language.\nSpecifications and standards.\nThe Eiffel language definition is an international standard of the ISO. The standard was developed by ECMA International, which first approved the standard on 21 June 2005 as Standard ECMA-367, Eiffel: Analysis, Design and Programming Language. In June 2006, ECMA and ISO adopted the second version. In November 2006, ISO first published that version. The standard can be found and used free of charge on the ECMA site. The ISO version is identical in all respects except formatting.\nEiffel Software, \"The Eiffel Compiler\" tecomp and Eiffel-library-developer Gobo have committed to implementing the standard; Eiffel Software's EiffelStudio 6.1 and \"The Eiffel Compiler\" tecomp implement some of the major new mechanisms\u2014in particular, inline agents, assigner commands, bracket notation, non-conforming inheritance, and attached types. The SmartEiffel team has turned away from this standard to create its own version of the language, which they believe to be closer to the original style of Eiffel. Object Tools has not disclosed whether future versions of its Eiffel compiler will comply with the standard. LibertyEiffel implements a dialect somewhere in between the SmartEiffel language and the standard.\nThe standard cites the following, predecessor Eiffel-language specifications:\nThe current version of the standard from June 2006 contains some inconsistencies (e.g. covariant redefinitions). The ECMA committee has not yet announced any timeline and direction on how to resolve the inconsistencies.\nSyntax and semantics.\nOverall structure.\nAn Eiffel \"system\" or \"program\" is a collection of \"classes\". Above the level of classes, Eiffel defines \"cluster\", which is essentially a group of classes, and possibly of \"subclusters\" (nested clusters). Clusters are not a syntactic language construct, but rather a standard organizational convention. Typically an Eiffel program will be organized with each class in a separate file, and each cluster in a directory containing class files. In this organization, subclusters are subdirectories. For example, under standard organizational and casing conventions, codice_1 might be the name of a file that defines a class called X.\nA class contains \"features\", which are similar to \"routines\", \"members\", \"attributes\" or \"methods\" in other object-oriented programming languages. A class also defines its invariants, and contains other properties, such as a \"notes\" section for documentation and metadata. Eiffel's standard data types, such as codice_2, codice_3 and codice_4, are all themselves classes.\nEvery system must have a class designated as \"root\", with one of its creation procedures designated as \"root procedure\". Executing a system consists of creating an instance of the root class and executing its root procedure. Generally, doing so creates new objects, calls new features, and so on.\nEiffel has five basic executable instructions: assignment, object creation, routine call, condition, and iteration. Eiffel's control structures are strict in enforcing structured programming: every block has exactly one entry and exactly one exit.\nScoping.\nUnlike many object-oriented languages, but like Smalltalk, Eiffel does not permit any assignment into attributes of objects, except within the features of an object, which is the practical application of the principle of information hiding or data abstraction, requiring formal interfaces for data mutation. To put it in the language of other object-oriented programming languages, all Eiffel attributes are \"protected\", and \"setters\" are needed for client objects to modify values. An upshot of this is that \"setters\" can and normally do, implement the invariants for which Eiffel provides syntax.\nWhile Eiffel does not allow direct access to the features of a class by a client of the class, it does allow for the definition of an \"assigner command\", such as:\n some_attribute: SOME_TYPE assign set_some_attribute\n set_some_attribute (v: VALUE_TYPE)\n -- Set value of some_attribute to `v'.\n do\n some_attribute := v\n end\nWhile a slight bow to the overall developer community to allow something looking like direct access (e.g. thereby breaking the Information Hiding Principle), the practice is dangerous as it hides or obfuscates the reality of a \"setter\" being used. In practice, it is better to redirect the call to a setter rather than implying a direct access to a feature like codice_5 as in the example code above.\nUnlike other languages, having notions of \"public\", \"protected\", \"private\" and so on, Eiffel uses an exporting technology to more precisely control the scoping between client and supplier classes. Feature visibility is checked statically at compile-time. For example, (below), the \"{NONE}\" is similar to \"protected\" in other languages. Scope applied this way to a \"feature set\" (e.g. everything below the 'feature' keyword to either the next feature set keyword or the end of the class) can be changed in descendant classes using the \"export\" keyword.\nfeature {NONE} -- Initialization\n default_create\n -- Initialize a new `zero' decimal instance.\n do\n make_zero\n end\nAlternatively, the lack of a {x} export declaration implies {ANY} and is similar to the \"public\" scoping of other languages.\nfeature -- Constants\nFinally, scoping can be selectively and precisely controlled to any class in the Eiffel project universe, such as:\nfeature {DECIMAL, DCM_MA_DECIMAL_PARSER, DCM_MA_DECIMAL_HANDLER} -- Access\nHere, the compiler will allow only the classes listed between the curly braces to access the features within the feature group (e.g. DECIMAL, DCM_MA_DECIMAL_PARSER, DCM_MA_DECIMAL_HANDLER).\n\"Hello, world!\".\nA programming language's look and feel is often conveyed using a \"Hello, world!\" program. Such a program written in Eiffel might be:\nclass\n HELLO_WORLD\ncreate\n make\nfeature\n make\n do\n print (\"Hello, world!%N\")\n end\nend \nThis program contains the class codice_6. The constructor (create routine) for the class, named codice_7, invokes the codice_8 system library routine to write a codice_9\u00a0codice_10 message to the output.\nDesign by contract.\nThe concept of Design by Contract is central to Eiffel. The contracts assert what must be true before a routine is executed (precondition) and what must hold to be true after the routine finishes (post-condition). Class Invariant contracts define what assertions must hold true both before and after any feature of a class is accessed (both routines and attributes). Moreover, contracts codify into executable code developer and designers assumptions about the operating environment of the features of a class or the class as a whole by means of the invariant.\nThe Eiffel compiler is designed to include the feature and class contracts in various levels. EiffelStudio, for example, executes all feature and class contracts during execution in the \"Workbench mode.\" When an executable is created, the compiler is instructed by way of the project settings file (e.g. ECF file) to either include or exclude any set of contracts. Thus, an executable file can be compiled to either include or exclude any level of contract, thereby bringing along continuous levels of unit and integration testing. Moreover, contracts can be continually and methodically exercised by way of the Auto-Test feature found in EiffelStudio.\nThe Design by Contract mechanisms are tightly integrated with the language and guide redefinition of features in inheritance:\nIn addition, the language supports a \"check instruction\" (a kind of \"assert\"), loop invariants, and loop variants (which guarantee loop termination).\nVoid-safe capability.\nVoid-safe capability, like static typing, is another facility for improving software quality. Void-safe software is protected from run time errors caused by calls to void references, and therefore will be more reliable than software in which calls to void targets can occur. The analogy to static typing is a useful one. In fact, void-safe capability could be seen as an extension to the type system, or a step beyond static typing, because the mechanism for ensuring void safety is integrated into the type system.\nThe guard against void target calls can be seen by way of the notion of attachment and (by extension) detachment (e.g. detachable keyword). The void-safe facility can be seen in a short re-work of the example code used above:\n some_attribute: detachable SOME_TYPE\n use_some_attribute\n -- Set value of some_attribute to `v'.\n do\n if attached some_attribute as l_attribute then\n do_something (l_attribute)\n end\n end\n do_something (a_value: SOME_TYPE)\n -- Do something with `a_value'.\n do\n ... doing something with `a_value' ...\n end\nThe code example above shows how the compiler can statically address the reliability of whether codice_5 will be attached or detached at the point it is used. Notably, the codice_12 keyword allows for an \"attachment local\" (e.g. codice_13), which is scoped to only the block of code enclosed by the if-statement construct. Thus, within this small block of code, the local variable (e.g. codice_13) can be statically guaranteed to be non-void (i.e. void safe).\nFeatures: commands and queries.\nThe primary characteristic of a class is that it defines a set of features: as a class represents a set of run-time objects, or \"instances\", a feature is an operation on these objects. There are two kinds of features: queries and commands. A query provides information about an instance. A command modifies an instance.\nThe command-query distinction is important to the Eiffel method. In particular:\nOverloading.\nEiffel does not allow argument overloading. Each feature name within a class always maps to a specific feature within the class. One name, within one class, means one thing. This design choice helps the readability of classes, by avoiding a cause of ambiguity about which routine will be invoked by a call. It also simplifies the language mechanism; in particular, this is what makes Eiffel's multiple inheritance mechanism possible.\nNames can, of course, be reused in different classes. For example, the feature plus (along with its infix alias \"+\") is defined in several classes: INTEGER, REAL, STRING, etc.\nGenericity.\nA generic class is a class that varies by type (e.g. LIST [PHONE], a list of phone numbers; ACCOUNT [G-&gt;ACCOUNT_TYPE], allowing for ACCOUNT [SAVINGS] and ACCOUNT [CHECKING], etc.). Classes can be generic, to express that they are parameterized by types. Generic parameters appear in square brackets:\nclass LIST [G] ...\nG is known as a \"formal generic parameter\". (Eiffel reserves \"argument\" for routines, and uses \"parameter\" only for generic classes.) With such a declaration G represents within the class an arbitrary type; so a function can return a value of type G, and a routine can take an argument of that type:\nitem: G do ... end\nput (x: G) do ... end\nThe codice_17 and codice_18 are \"generic derivations\" of this class. Permitted combinations (with codice_19, codice_20, codice_21, codice_22) are:\nn := il.item\nwl.put (w)\ncodice_2 and codice_24 are the \"actual generic parameters\" in these generic derivations.\nIt is also possible to have 'constrained' formal parameters, for which the actual parameter must inherit from a given class, the \"constraint\". For example, in\n class HASH_TABLE [G, KEY -&gt; HASHABLE]\na derivation codice_25 is valid only if codice_3 inherits from codice_27 (as it indeed does in typical Eiffel libraries). Within the class, having codice_28 constrained by codice_27 means that for codice_30 it is possible to apply to codice_31 all the features of codice_27, as in codice_33.\nInheritance basics.\nTo inherit from one or more others, a class will include an codice_34 clause at the beginning:\nclass C inherit\n A\n B\n-- ... Rest of class declaration ...\nThe class may redefine (override) some or all of the inherited features. This must be explicitly announced at the beginning of the class through a codice_35 subclause of the inheritance clause, as in\nclass C inherit\n A\n redefine f, g, h end\n B\n redefine u, v end\nSee for a complete discussion of Eiffel inheritance.\nDeferred classes and features.\nClasses may be defined with codice_36 rather than with codice_37 to indicate that the class may not be directly instantiated. Non-instantiatable classes are called abstract classes in some other object-oriented programming languages. In Eiffel parlance, only an \"effective\" class can be instantiated (it may be a descendant of a deferred class). A feature can also be deferred by using the codice_38 keyword in place of a codice_39 clause. If a class has any deferred features it must be declared as deferred; however, a class with no deferred features may nonetheless itself be deferred.\nDeferred classes play some of the same role as interfaces in languages such as Java, though many object-oriented programming theorists believe interfaces are themselves largely an answer to Java's lack of multiple inheritance (which Eiffel has).\nRenaming.\nA class that inherits from one or more others gets all its features, by default under their original names. It may, however, change their names through codice_40 clauses. This is required in the case of multiple inheritance if there are name clashes between inherited features; without renaming, the resulting class would violate the no-overloading principle noted above and hence would be invalid.\nTuples.\nTuples types may be viewed as a simple form of class, providing only attributes and the corresponding \"setter\" procedure. A typical tuple type reads\n TUPLE [name: STRING; weight: REAL; date: DATE]\nand could be used to describe a simple notion of birth record if a class is not needed. An instance of such a tuple is simply a sequence of values with the given types, given in brackets, such as\n [\"Brigitte\", 3.5, Last_night]\nComponents of such a tuple can be accessed as if the tuple tags were attributes of a class, for example if codice_41 has been assigned the above tuple then codice_42 has value 3.5.\nThanks to the notion of assigner command (see below), dot notation can also be used to assign components of such a tuple, as in\n t.weight := t.weight + 0.5\nThe tuple tags are optional, so that it is also possible to write a tuple type as codice_43. (In some compilers this is the only form of tuple, as tags were introduced with the ECMA standard.)\nThe precise specification of e.g. codice_44 is that it describes sequences of \"at least\" three elements, the first three being of types codice_45, codice_46, codice_47 respectively. As a result, codice_44 conforms to (may be assigned to) codice_49, to codice_50 and to codice_51 (without parameters), the topmost tuple type to which all tuple types conform.\nAgents.\nEiffel's \"agent\" mechanism wraps operations into objects. This mechanism can be used for iteration, event-driven programming, and other contexts in which it is useful to pass operations around the program structure. Other programming languages, especially ones that emphasize functional programming, allow a similar pattern using continuations, closures, or generators; Eiffel's agents emphasize the language's object-oriented paradigm, and use a syntax and semantics similar to code blocks in Smalltalk and Ruby.\nFor example, to execute the codice_52 block for each element of codice_53, one would write:\n my_list.do_all (agent my_action)\nTo execute codice_52 only on elements satisfying codice_55, a limitation/filter can be added:\n my_list.do_if (agent my_action, agent my_condition)\nIn these examples, codice_52 and codice_55 are routines. Prefixing them with codice_58 yields an object that represents the corresponding routine with all its properties, in particular the ability to be called with the appropriate arguments. So if codice_59 represents that object (for example because codice_59 is the argument to codice_61), the instruction\n a.call ([x])\nwill call the original routine with the argument codice_31, as if we had directly called the original routine: codice_63. Arguments to codice_64 are passed as a tuple, here codice_65.\nIt is possible to keep some arguments to an agent open and make others closed. The open arguments are passed as arguments to codice_64: they are provided at the time of \"agent use\". The closed arguments are provided at the time of agent \"definition\". For example, if codice_67 has two arguments, the iteration\n my_list.do_all (agent action2 (?, y))\niterates codice_68 for successive values of codice_31, where the second argument remains set to codice_70. The question mark codice_71 indicates an open argument; codice_70 is a closed argument of the agent. Note that the basic syntax codice_73 is a shorthand for codice_74 with all arguments open. It is also possible to make the \"target\" of an agent open through the notation codice_75 where codice_76 is the type of the target.\nThe distinction between open and closed operands (operands = arguments + target) corresponds to the distinction between bound and free variables in lambda calculus. An agent expression such as codice_77 with some operands closed and some open corresponds to a version of the original operation \"curried\" on the closed operands.\nThe agent mechanism also allows defining an agent without reference to an existing routine (such as codice_52, codice_55, codice_67), through inline agents as in\nmy_list.do_all (agent (s: STRING)\n require\n not_void: s /= Void\n do\n s.append_character (',')\n ensure\n appended: s.count = old s.count + 1\n end)\nThe inline agent passed here can have all the trappings of a normal routine, including precondition, postcondition, rescue clause (not used here), and a full signature. This avoids defining routines when all that's needed is a computation to be wrapped in an agent. This is useful in particular for contracts, as in an invariant clause that expresses that all elements of a list are positive:\n my_list.for_all (agent (x: INTEGER): BOOLEAN do Result := (x &gt; 0) end)\nThe current agent mechanism leaves a possibility of run-time type error (if a routine with \"n\" arguments is passed to an agent expecting \"m\" arguments with \"m\" &lt; \"n\"). This can be avoided by a run-time check through the precondition codice_81 of codice_64. Several proposals for a purely static correction of this problem are available, including a language change proposal by Ribet et al.\nOnce routines.\nA routine's result can be cached using the codice_83 keyword in place of codice_39. Non-first calls to a routine require no additional computation or resource allocation, but simply return a previously computed result. A common pattern for \"once functions\" is to provide shared objects; the first call will create the object, subsequent ones will return the reference to that object. The typical scheme is:\nshared_object: SOME_TYPE\n once\n create Result.make (args)\n -- This creates the object and returns a reference to it through `Result'.\n end\nThe returned object\u2014codice_85 in the example\u2014can itself be mutable, but its reference remains the same.\nOften \"once routines\" perform a required initialization: multiple calls to a library can include a call to the initialization procedure, but only the first such call will perform the required actions. Using this pattern initialization can be decentralized, avoiding the need for a special initialization module. \"Once routines\" are similar in purpose and effect to the singleton pattern in many programming languages, and to the used in Python.\nBy default, a \"once routine\" is called \"once per thread\". The semantics can be adjusted to \"once per process\" or \"once per object\" by qualifying it with a \"once key\", e.g. codice_86.\nConversions.\nEiffel provides a mechanism to allow conversions between various types. The mechanisms coexists with inheritance and complements it. To avoid any confusion between the two mechanisms, the design enforces the following principle:\n (Conversion principle) A type may not both conform and convert to another.\nFor example, codice_87 may conform to codice_88, but codice_2 converts to codice_90 (and does not inherit from it).\nThe conversion mechanism simply generalizes the ad hoc conversion rules (such as indeed between codice_2 and codice_90) that exist in most programming languages, making them applicable to any type as long as the above principle is observed. For example, a codice_93 class may be declared to convert to codice_3; this makes it possible to create a string from a date simply through\n my_string := my_date\nas a shortcut for using an explicit object creation with a conversion procedure:\n create my_string.make_from_date (my_date)\nTo make the first form possible as a synonym for the second, it suffices to list the creation procedure (constructor) codice_95 in a codice_96 clause at the beginning of the class.\nAs another example, if there is such a conversion procedure listed from codice_97, then one can directly assign a tuple to a date, causing the appropriate conversion, as in\n Bastille_day := [14, \"July\", 1789]\nException handling.\nException handling in Eiffel is based on the principles of design by contract. For example, an exception occurs when a routine's caller fails to satisfy a precondition, or when a routine cannot ensure a promised postcondition. In Eiffel, exception handling is not used for control flow or to correct data-input mistakes.\nAn Eiffel exception handler is defined using the rescue keyword. Within the rescue section, the retry keyword executes the routine again. For example, the following routine tracks the number of attempts at executing the routine, and only retries a certain number of times:\nconnect_to_server (server: SOCKET)\n -- Connect to a server or give up after 10 attempts.\n require\n server /= Void and then server.address /= Void\n local\n attempts: INTEGER\n do\n server.connect\n ensure\n connected: server.is_connected\n rescue\n if attempts &lt; 10 then\n attempts := attempts + 1\n retry\n end\n end\nThis example is arguably flawed for anything but the simplest programs, however, because connection failure is to be expected. For most programs a routine name like attempt_connecting_to_server would be better, and the postcondition would not promise a connection, leaving it up to the caller to take appropriate steps if the connection was not opened.\nConcurrency.\nA number of networking and threading libraries are available, such as EiffelNet and EiffelThreads. A concurrency model for Eiffel, based on the concepts of design by contract, is SCOOP, or \"Simple Concurrent Object-Oriented Programming\", not yet part of the official language definition but available in EiffelStudio. CAMEO is an (unimplemented) variation of SCOOP for Eiffel. Concurrency also interacts with exceptions. Asynchronous exceptions can be troublesome (where a routine raises an exception after its caller has itself finished).\nOperator and bracket syntax, assigner commands.\nEiffel's view of computation is completely object-oriented in the sense that every operation is relative to an object, the \"target\". So for example an addition such as\na + b\nis conceptually understood as if it were the method call\na.plus (b)\nwith target codice_59, feature codice_99 and argument codice_100.\nOf course, the former is the conventional syntax and usually preferred. Operator syntax makes it possible to use either form by declaring the feature (for example in codice_2, but this applies to other basic classes and can be used in any other for which such an operator is appropriate):\nplus alias \"+\" (other: INTEGER): INTEGER\n -- ... Normal function declaration...\n end\nThe range of operators that can be used as \"alias\" is quite broad; they include predefined operators such as \"+\" but also \"free operators\" made of non-alphanumeric symbols. This makes it possible to design special infix and prefix notations, for example in mathematics and physics applications.\nEvery class may in addition have \"one\" function aliased to \"[]\", the \"bracket\" operator, allowing the notation codice_102 as a synonym for codice_103 where codice_104 is the chosen function. This is particularly useful for container structures such as arrays, hash tables, lists etc. For example, access to an element of a hash table with string keys can be written\n number := phone_book [\"JILL SMITH\"]\n\"Assigner commands\" are a companion mechanism designed in the same spirit of allowing well-established, convenient notation reinterpreted in the framework of object-oriented programming. Assigner commands allow assignment-like syntax to call \"setter\" procedures. An assignment proper can never be of the form codice_105 as this violates information hiding; you have to go for a setter command (procedure). For example, the hash table class can have the function and the procedure\nitem alias \"[]\" (key: STRING): ELEMENT [3]\n -- The element of key `key'.\n -- (\"Getter\" query)\n do\n end\nput (e: ELEMENT; key: STRING)\n -- Insert the element `e', associating it with the key `key'.\n -- (\"Setter\" command)\n do\n end\nThen to insert an element you have to use an explicit call to the setter command:\n [4] phone_book.put (New_person, \"JILL SMITH\")\nIt is possible to write this equivalently as\n [5] phone_book [\"JILL SMITH\"] := New_person\n(in the same way that codice_106 is a synonym for codice_107), provided the declaration of codice_108 now starts (replacement for [3]) with\n item alias \"[]\" (key: STRING): ELEMENT assign put\nThis declares codice_109 as the assigner command associated with codice_108 and, combined with the bracket alias, makes [5] legal and equivalent to [4]. (It could also be written, without taking advantage of the bracket, as codice_111.\nNote: The argument list of a's assigner is constrained to be: (a's return type;all of a's argument list...)\nLexical and syntax properties.\nEiffel is not case-sensitive. The tokens codice_7, codice_113 and codice_114 all denote the same identifier. See, however, the \"style rules\" below.\nComments are introduced by codice_115 (two consecutive dashes) and extend to the end of the line.\nThe semicolon, as instruction separator, is optional. Most of the time the semicolon is just omitted, except to separate multiple instructions on a line. This results in less clutter on the program page.\nThere is no nesting of feature and class declarations. As a result, the structure of an Eiffel class is simple: some class-level clauses (inheritance, invariant) and a succession of feature declarations, all at the same level.\nIt is customary to group features into separate \"feature clauses\" for more readability, with a standard set of basic feature tags appearing in a standard order, for example:\nclass HASH_TABLE [ELEMENT, KEY -&gt; HASHABLE] inherit TABLE [ELEMENT]\n feature -- Initialization\n -- ... Declarations of initialization commands (creation procedures/constructors) ...\n feature -- Access\n -- ... Declarations of non-boolean queries on the object state, e.g. item ...\n feature -- Status report\n -- ... Declarations of boolean queries on the object state, e.g. is_empty ...\n feature -- Element change\n -- ... Declarations of commands that change the structure, e.g. put ...\n -- etc.\nend\nIn contrast to most curly bracket programming languages, Eiffel makes a clear distinction between expressions and instructions. This is in line with the Command-Query Separation principle of the Eiffel method.\nStyle conventions.\nMuch of the documentation of Eiffel uses distinctive style conventions, designed to enforce a consistent look-and-feel. Some of these conventions apply to the code format itself, and others to the standard typographic rendering of Eiffel code in formats and publications where these conventions are possible.\nWhile the language is case-insensitive, the style standards prescribe the use of all-capitals for class names (codice_116), all-lower-case for feature names (codice_7), and initial capitals for constants (codice_118). The recommended style also suggests underscore to separate components of a multi-word identifier, as in codice_119.\nThe specification of Eiffel includes guidelines for displaying software texts in typeset formats: keywords in bold, user-defined identifiers and constants are shown in \"codice_120\", comments, operators, and punctuation marks in codice_121, with program text in codice_122 as in the present article to distinguish it from explanatory text. For example, the \"Hello, world!\" program given above would be rendered as below in Eiffel documentation:\nclass\n HELLO_WORLD\ncreate\n make\nfeature\n make\n do\n print (\"Hello, world!\")\n end\nend\nInterfaces to other tools and languages.\nEiffel is a purely object-oriented language but provides an open architecture for interfacing with \"external\" software in any other programming language.\nIt is possible for example to program machine- and operating-system level operations in C. Eiffel provides a straightforward interface to C routines, including support for \"inline C\" (writing the body of an Eiffel routine in C, typically for short machine-level operations).\nAlthough there is no direct connection between Eiffel and C, many Eiffel compilers (Visual Eiffel is one exception) output C source code as an intermediate language, to submit to a C compiler, for optimizing and portability. As such, they are examples of transcompilers. The Eiffel Compiler tecomp can execute Eiffel code directly (like an interpreter) without going via an intermediate C code or emit C code which will be passed to a C compiler in order to obtain optimized native code. On .NET, the EiffelStudio compiler directly generates CIL (Common Intermediate Language) code. The SmartEiffel compiler can also output Java bytecode.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9839", "revid": "1156680007", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9839", "title": "Ezra", "text": "Figure in early Jewish history\nEzra or Esdras (; , '; fl. 480\u2013440 BCE), also called Ezra the Scribe (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e2\u05b6\u05d6\u05b0\u05e8\u05b8\u05d0 \u05d4\u05b7\u05e1\u05bc\u05d5\u05b9\u05e4\u05b5\u05e8\u200e ') in Chazalic literature, and Ezra the Priest was an important Jewish scribe (\"sofer\") and priest (\"kohen\") in the early Second Temple period. In Greco-Latin Ezra is called Esdras (Greek: ). His name is probably a shortened Aramaic translation of the Hebrew name &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e2\u05d6\u05e8\u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u200e ', \"Yah helps\". In the Greek Septuagint the name is rendered ' (), from which the Latin name comes.\nIn the Hebrew Bible, or the Christian Old Testament, Ezra is an important figure in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, which he is said to have written and edited, respectively. According to tradition, Ezra was also the author of Books of Chronicles and the Book of Malachi. Ezra was instrumental in restoring the Jewish scriptures and religion to the people after the return from the Babylonian Captivity and is a highly respected figure in Judaism. He is regarded as a saint in the Roman Catholic Church and his feast day is July 13.\nLife.\nIn the Hebrew Bible.\nThe canonical Book of Ezra and Book of Nehemiah are the oldest sources for the activity of Ezra, whereas many of the other books ascribed to Ezra (First Esdras, 3\u20136 Ezra) are later literary works dependent on the canonical books of Ezra and Nehemiah. The book of Ezra\u2013Nehemiah was always written as one scroll. In late medieval Christian bibles, the single book was divided in two, as First and Second Ezra; and this division became Jewish practice in the first printed Hebrew bibles. Modern Hebrew Bibles call the two books Ezra and Nehemiah, as do other modern Bible translations. A few parts of the Book of Ezra (4:8 to 6:18 and 7:12\u201326) were written in Aramaic, and the majority in Hebrew, Ezra himself being skilled in both languages.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible he was a descendant of Seraiah, the last High Priest to serve in Solomon's Temple, and a close relative of Joshua, the first High Priest of the Second Temple. He returned from Babylonian exile and reintroduced the Torah in Jerusalem. According to 1 Esdras, a Greek translation of the Book of Ezra still in use in Eastern Orthodox Church, he was also a High Priest. Rabbinic tradition holds that he was an ordinary member of the priesthood. Ezra was living in Babylon when in the seventh year of Artaxerxes I, the Achaemenid emperor (c.\u2009457 BCE), the emperor sent him to Jerusalem to teach the laws of God to any who did not know them. The Book of Ezra describes how he led a group of Judean exiles living in Babylon to their home city of Jerusalem where he is said to have enforced observance of the Torah. \nWhen Ezra discovered that Jewish men had been marrying foreign pagan women, he tore his garments in despair and confessed the sins of Israel before God, then braved the opposition of some of his own countrymen to purify the community by enforcing the dissolution of the sinful marriages. He was described as exhorting the Israelite people to be sure to follow the Torah Law so as not to intermarry with people of particular different religions, a set of commandments described in the Pentateuch. Some years later, Artaxerxes sent Nehemiah (a Jewish noble in his personal service) to Jerusalem as governor with the task of rebuilding the city walls. Once this task was completed Nehemiah had Ezra read the Torah to the assembled Israelites, and the people and priests entered into a covenant to keep the law and separate themselves from all other peoples.\nBurial place.\nSeveral traditions have developed over his place of burial. One tradition says that he is buried in al-Uzayr near Basra (Iraq), while another tradition alleges that he is buried in Tadif near Aleppo, in northern Syria.\nAccording to Josephus, Ezra died and was buried \"in a magnificent manner in Jerusalem.\" If the tradition that Ezra wrote under the pen name \"Malachi\" is correct, then he was probably buried in the Tomb of the Prophets, the traditional resting place of Malachi, along with two other prophets from Ezra's lifetime, Haggai and Zechariah.\nIn later Second Temple period literature.\n1 Esdras.\n1 Esdras, probably from the late 2nd/early 1st centuries BCE, preserves a Greek text of Ezra and a part of Nehemiah distinctly different from that of Ezra\u2013Nehemiah \u2013 in particular it eliminates Nehemiah from the story and gives some of his deeds to Ezra, as well as telling events in a different order. Scholars are divided on whether it is based on Ezra\u2013Nehemiah, or reflects an earlier literary stage before the combination of Ezra and Nehemiah accounts.\nJosephus.\nThe first-century Jewish historian Josephus deals with Ezra in his \"Antiquities of the Jews\". He uses the name Xerxes for Artaxerxes I reserving the name Artaxerxes for the later Artaxerxes II whom he identifies as the Ahasuerus of Esther, thus placing Ezra before the events of the book of Esther. Josephus' account of the deeds of Ezra derives entirely from 1 Esdras, which he cites as the 'Book of Ezra' in his numeration of the Hebrew bible. Contrariwise, Josephus does not appear to recognise Ezra-Nehemiah as a biblical book, does not quote from it, and relies entirely on other traditions in his account of the deeds of Nehemiah.\nThe apocalyptic Ezra traditions.\nThe apocalyptic fourth book of Ezra (also sometimes called the 'second book of Esdras' or the 'third book of Esdras') was written c. CE 100, probably in Judeo-Aramaic, but now survives in Latin, Slavonic and Ethiopic. In this book, Ezra has a seven part prophetic revelation, converses with an angel of God three times and has four visions. Ezra, thirty years into the Babylonian Exile (4 Ezra 3:1 / 2 Esdras 1:1), recounts the siege of Jerusalem and the destruction of Solomon's Temple. The central theological themes are \"the question of theodicy, God's justness in the face of the triumph of the heathens over the pious, the course of world history in terms of the teaching of the four kingdoms, the function of the law, the eschatological judgment, the appearance on Earth of the heavenly Jerusalem, the Messianic Period, at the end of which the Messiah will die, the end of this world and the coming of the next, and the Last Judgment.\" Ezra restores the law that was destroyed with the burning of the Temple in Jerusalem. He dictates 24 books for the public (i.e. the Hebrew Bible) and another 70 for the wise alone (70 unnamed revelatory works). At the end, he is taken up to heaven like Enoch and Elijah. Ezra is seen as a new Moses in this book.\nThere is also another work, thought to be influenced by this one, known as the \"Greek Apocalypse of Ezra\".\nIn rabbinic literature.\nTraditionally Judaism credits Ezra with establishing the Great Assembly of scholars and prophets, the forerunner of the Sanhedrin, as the authority on matters of religious law. The Great Assembly is credited with establishing numerous features of contemporary traditional Judaism in something like their present form, including Torah reading, the Amidah, and celebration of the feast of Purim.\nIn Rabbinic traditions, Ezra is metaphorically referred to as the \"flowers that appear on the earth\" signifying the springtime in the national history of Judaism. A disciple of Baruch ben Neriah, he favored study of the Law over the reconstruction of the Temple and thus because of his studies, he did not join the first party returning to Jerusalem in the reign of Cyrus. According to another opinion, he did not join the first party so as not to compete, even involuntarily, with Jeshua ben Jozadak for the office of chief priest.\nAccording to Jewish tradition, Ezra was the writer of the Books of Chronicles, and is the same prophet known also as Malachi. There is a slight controversy within rabbinic sources as to whether or not Ezra had served as High Priest of Israel.\nAccording to the Babylonian Talmud, Ezra the scribe is said to have enacted ten standing laws and orders, which are as follows:\nIn the Syrian village of Tedef, a synagogue said to be the place where Ezra stopped over has been venerated by Jews for centuries. Another tradition locates his tomb near Basra, Iraq.\nIn Christian traditions.\nIn Christian tradition, Ezra is considered to be the author of the book of Ezra and 1 and 2 Chronicles. Due to the strong similarity between the books of Malachi and Ezra, some Christian traditions adopt the Jewish view that Ezra was Malachi, and St. Jerome was one prominent Christian who held this view. Early Christian writers occasionally cited Ezra as author of the apocalyptic books attributed to him. Clement of Alexandria in his \"Stromata\" referred to Ezra as an example of prophetic inspiration, quoting a section from 2 Esdras. Where early Christian writers refer to the 'Book of Ezra' it is always the text of 1 Esdras that is being cited.\nIn Islam.\nIn Islam, he is known as Uzair (). He was mentioned in the Qur'an. Although he was not mentioned as one of the Prophets of Islam, he is considered one of them by some Muslim scholars, based on Islamic traditions. His tomb at Al-\u02bbUzer on the banks of the Tigris near Basra, Iraq, is a pilgrimage site for the local Marsh Arabs. Many Islamic scholars and modern Western academics do not view Uzer as \"Ezra\"; for example, Professor Gordon Darnell Newby associates Uzer with Enoch and Metatron.\nAcademic view.\nTimeline.\nScholars are divided over the chronological sequence of the activities of Ezra and Nehemiah. Ezra came to Jerusalem \"in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the King\". The text does not specify whether the king in the passage refers to Artaxerxes I (465\u2013424 BCE) or to Artaxerxes II (404\u2013359 BCE). Most scholars hold that Ezra lived during the rule of Artaxerxes I, though some have difficulties with this assumption: Nehemiah and Ezra \"seem to have no knowledge of each other; their missions do not overlap\", however, in Nehemiah 12, both are leading processions on the wall as part of the wall dedication ceremony. So, they clearly were contemporaries working together in Jerusalem at the time the wall and the city of Jerusalem was rebuilt in contrast to the previously stated viewpoint.;.\" These difficulties have led many scholars to assume that Ezra arrived in the seventh year of the rule of Artaxerxes II, i.e. some 50 years after Nehemiah. This assumption would imply that the biblical account is not chronological. The last group of scholars regard \"the seventh year\" as a scribal error and hold that the two men were contemporaries.\nHistoricity.\nMary Joan Winn Leith in \"The Oxford History of the Biblical World\" believes that Ezra was a historical figure whose life was enhanced in the scripture and given a theological buildup. Gosta W. Ahlstrom argues the inconsistencies of the biblical tradition are insufficient to say that Ezra, with his central position as the 'father of Judaism' in the Jewish tradition, has been a later literary invention. Those who argue against the historicity of Ezra argue that the presentation style of Ezra as a leader and lawgiver resembles that of Moses. There are also similarities between Ezra the priest-scribe (but not high priest) and Nehemiah the secular governor on the one hand and Joshua and Zerubbabel on the other hand. The early 2nd-century BCE Jewish author Ben Sira praises Nehemiah, but makes no mention of Ezra.\nRichard Friedman argues in his book \"Who Wrote the Bible?\" that Ezra is the one who redacted the Torah, and in fact effectively produced the first Torah. It has been argued that even if one does not accept the documentary hypothesis, Ezra was instrumental in the start of the process of bringing the Torah together.\nOne particular aspect of Ezra's story considered dubious historically is the account in Ezra 7 of his commission. According to it, Ezra was given truly exalted status by the king: he was seemingly put in charge of the entire western half of the Persian Empire, a position apparently above even the level of the satraps (regional governors). Ezra was given vast hoards of treasure to take with him to Jerusalem as well as a letter where the king seemingly acknowledges the sovereignty of the God of Israel. Yet, his actions in the story do not appear to be that of someone with near unlimited government power, and the alleged letter from a Persian king is written with Hebraisms and Jewish idiom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9840", "revid": "414998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9840", "title": "Elijah", "text": "Biblical prophet\nElijah ( ; , meaning \"My God is Yahweh/YHWH\"; Greek form: Elias ) was, according to the Books of Kings in the Hebrew Bible, a prophet and a miracle worker who lived in the northern kingdom of Israel during the reign of King Ahab (9th century BCE). In 1 Kings 18, Elijah defended the worship of the Hebrew God over that of the Canaanite deity Baal. God also performed many miracles through Elijah, including resurrection, bringing fire down from the sky, and entering heaven alive \"by fire\". He is also portrayed as leading a school of prophets known as \"the sons of the prophets\". Following his ascension, Elisha, his disciple and most devoted assistant, took over his role as leader of this school. The Book of Malachi prophesies Elijah's return \"before the coming of the great and terrible day of the LORD\", making him a harbinger of the Messiah and of the eschaton in various faiths that revere the Hebrew Bible. References to Elijah appear in Sirach, the New Testament, the Mishnah and Talmud, the Quran, the Book of Mormon, and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings.\nIn Judaism, Elijah's name is invoked at the weekly Havdalah rite that marks the end of Shabbat, and Elijah is invoked in other Jewish customs, among them the Passover Seder and the brit milah (ritual circumcision). He appears in numerous stories and references in the Haggadah and rabbinic literature, including the Babylonian Talmud. According to some Jewish interpretations, Elijah will return during the End of Times.\nThe Christian New Testament notes that some people thought that Jesus was, in some sense, Elijah, but it also makes clear that John the Baptist is \"the Elijah\" who was promised to come in ; . According to accounts in all three of the Synoptic Gospels, Elijah appeared with Moses during the Transfiguration of Jesus.\nIn Islam, Elijah or Ilyas appears in the Quran as a prophet and messenger of God, where his biblical narrative of preaching against the worshipers of Baal is recounted in a concise form. Due to his importance to Muslims, Catholics, and Orthodox Christians, Elijah has been venerated as the patron saint of Bosnia and Herzegovina since 1752.\nBiblical accounts.\nAccording to the Bible, by the 9th\u00a0century BCE, the Kingdom of Israel, once united under Solomon, had been divided into the northern Kingdom of Israel and the southern Kingdom of Judah (which retained the historical capital of Jerusalem along with its Temple). Omri, King of Israel, continued policies dating from the reign of Jeroboam, contrary to religious law, that were intended to reorient religious focus away from Jerusalem: encouraging the building of local temple altars for sacrifices, appointing priests from outside the family of the Levites, and allowing or encouraging temples dedicated to Baal, an important deity in ancient Canaanite religion. Omri achieved domestic security with a marriage alliance between his son Ahab and princess Jezebel, a worshipper of Baal and the daughter of the king of Sidon in Phoenicia. These solutions brought security and economic prosperity to Israel for a time, but did not bring peace with the Israelite prophets, who advocated a strict deuteronomic interpretation of the religious law.\nUnder Ahab's kingship tensions exacerbated. Ahab built a temple for Baal, and his wife Jezebel brought a large entourage of priests and prophets of Baal and Asherah into the country. In this context Elijah is introduced in 1 Kings 17:1 as Elijah \"the Tishbite\". He warns Ahab that there will be years of catastrophic drought so severe that not even dew will form, because Ahab and his queen stand at the end of a line of kings of Israel who are said to have \"done evil in the sight of the Lord\".\nBooks of Kings.\nNo background for the person of Elijah is given except for his brief characterization as a Tishbite. His name in Hebrew means \"My God is Yahweh\", and may be a title applied to him because of his challenge to worship of Baal.\nAs told in the Hebrew Bible, Elijah's challenge is bold and direct. Baal was the Canaanite god responsible for rain, thunder, lightning, and dew.\nElijah thus, when he initially announces the drought, not only challenges Baal on behalf of God himself, but he also challenges Jezebel, her priests, Ahab and the people of Israel.\nWidow of Zarephath.\nAfter Elijah's confrontation with Ahab, God tells him to flee out of Israel, to a hiding place by the brook Chorath, east of the Jordan, where he will be fed by ravens. When the brook dries up, God sends him to a widow living in the town of Zarephath in Phoenicia.\nWhen Elijah finds her and asks to be fed, she says that she does not have sufficient food to keep her and her own son alive. Elijah tells her that God will not allow her supply of flour or oil to run out, saying, \"Do not be afraid ... For thus says the Lord the God of Israel: The jar of meal will not be emptied and the jug of oil will not fail until the day that the Lord sends rain on the earth.\" She feeds him the last of their food, and Elijah's promise miraculously comes true.\nSome time later the widow's son dies and the widow cries, \"You have come to me to bring my sin to remembrance, and to cause the death of my son!\" Elijah prays that God might restore her son so that the trustworthiness of God's word might be demonstrated, and \"[God] listened to the voice of Elijah; the life of the child came into him again, and he revived.\" This is the first instance of raising the dead recorded in Scripture. The widow cried, \"the word of the Lord in your mouth is truth.\"\nAfter more than three years of drought and famine, God tells Elijah to return to Ahab and announce the end of the drought. While on his way, Elijah meets Obadiah, the head of Ahab's household, who had hidden a hundred Jewish prophets from Jezebel's violent purge. Obadiah fears that when he reports to Ahab about Elijah's whereabouts, Elijah would disappear, provoking Ahab to execute him. Elijah reassures Obadiah and sends him to Ahab.\nChallenge to Baal.\nWhen Ahab confronts Elijah, he denounces him as being the \"troubler of Israel\" but Elijah retorts that Ahab himself is the one who troubled Israel by allowing the worship of false gods (shedim).\nAt Elijah's instruction, Ahab summons the people of Israel, 450 prophets of Baal, and 400 prophets of Asherah to Mount Carmel. Elijah then berates the people for their acquiescence in Baal worship: \"How long will you go limping with two different opinions? If the LORD is God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.\"\nElijah proposes a direct test of the powers of Baal and Yahweh (both Asherah and her prophets disappear from the story entirely): he and Baal's prophets will each take one of two bulls, prepare it for sacrifice and lay it on wood, but put no fire to it. The prophets of Baal choose and prepare a bull accordingly. Elijah then invites them to pray for fire to light the sacrifice. They pray from morning to noon without success. Elijah ridicules their efforts. \"At noon Elijah mocked them, saying, 'Cry aloud! Surely he is a god; either he is meditating, or he has wandered away, or he is on a journey, or perhaps he is asleep and must be awakened.'\" They respond by shouting louder and slashing themselves with swords and spears. They continue praying until evening without success.\nElijah then repairs Yahweh's altar with twelve stones, representing the twelve tribes of Israel. Elijah digs a trench around it and prepares the other bull for sacrifice as before. He then orders that the sacrifice and altar be drenched with water from \"four large jars\" poured three times, filling also the trench. He asks Yahweh to accept the sacrifice. Fire falls from the sky, consuming the sacrifice, the stones of the altar itself, the earth and the water in the trench as well. When the people see this, they declare, \"The LORD\u2014he is God; the LORD\u2014he is God.\" Elijah then orders them to seize the prophets of Baal, which they do, and Elijah kills them beside the River Kishon, at which the rains begin, signaling the end of the famine.\nMount Horeb.\nJezebel, enraged that Elijah has killed the prophets of Baal, threatens to kill him. Elijah flees to Beersheba in Judah, continues alone into the wilderness, and finally sits down under a shrub, praying for death and eventually falling asleep. At length an angel of the Lord rouses him gently, telling him to wake up and eat. When he awakens he finds bread and a jar of water, eats, drinks, and goes back to sleep. The angel then comes to him a second time, telling him to eat and drink afresh, because he has a long journey ahead of him.\nElijah travels for forty days and forty nights to Mount Horeb, where Moses had received the Ten Commandments. Elijah is the only person described in the Bible as returning to Horeb, after Moses and his generation had left Horeb several centuries before. He seeks shelter in a cave. Elijah is told to \"Go out and stand on the mountain in the presence of the LORD, for the LORD is about to pass by.\" There comes a mighty wind, then an earthquake and then fire, but Yahweh is not in any of these, choosing to come instead as a , which bids Elijah go forth again - this time to Damascus to anoint Hazael as king of Aram, Jehu as king of Israel, and Elisha as the old prophet\u2019s successor.\nVineyard of Naboth.\nElijah encounters Ahab again in 1 Kings 21, after Ahab has acquired possession of a vineyard by murder. Ahab desires to have the vineyard of Naboth of Jezreel. He offers a better vineyard or a fair price for the land. But Naboth tells Ahab that God has told him not to part with the land. Ahab accepts this answer with sullen bad grace. Jezebel, however, plots a method for acquiring the land. She sends letters, in Ahab's name, to the elders and nobles who lived near Naboth. They are to arrange a feast and invite Naboth. At the feast, false charges of cursing God and Ahab are to be made against him. The plot is carried out and Naboth is stoned to death. When word comes that Naboth is dead, Jezebel tells Ahab to take possession of the vineyard.\nGod again speaks to Elijah and sends him to confront Ahab with a question and a prophecy: \"Have you killed, and also taken possession?\" and, \"In the place where dogs licked up the blood of Naboth, dogs will also lick up your blood.\" Ahab begins the confrontation by calling Elijah his enemy. Elijah responds by throwing the charge back at him, telling him that he has made himself the enemy of God by his own actions. Elijah tells Ahab that his entire kingdom will reject his authority; that Jezebel will be eaten by dogs within Jezreel; and that his family will be consumed by dogs as well (if they die in a city) or by birds (if they die in the country). When Ahab hears this he repents so sincerely that God stays his hand in punishing Ahab, choosing instead to vent his wrath upon Jezebel and her son by Ahab, Ahaziah.\nAhaziah.\nElijah's story continues now from Ahab to an encounter with Ahaziah (2 Kings 1). The scene opens with Ahaziah seriously injured in a fall. He sends to the priests of Baalzebub in Ekron, outside the kingdom of Israel, to know if he will recover. Elijah intercepts his messengers and sends them back to Ahaziah with a message \"Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are sending to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?\" Ahaziah asks the messengers to describe the person who gave them this message. They tell him he was a hairy man with a leather belt around his waist and he instantly recognizes the description as Elijah the Tishbite.\nAhaziah sends out three groups of soldiers to arrest Elijah. The first two are destroyed by fire which Elijah calls down from heaven. The leader of the third group asks for mercy for himself and his men. Elijah agrees to accompany this third group to Ahaziah, where he gives his prophecy in person. Ahaziah dies without recovering from his injuries in accordance with Elijah's word.\nDeparture.\nAccording to 2 Kings 2:3\u20139, Elisha (Eliseus) and \"the sons of the prophets\" knew beforehand that Elijah would one day be assumed into heaven. Elisha asked Elijah to \"let a double portion\" of Elijah's \"spirit\" be upon him. Elijah agreed, with the condition that Elisha would see him be \"taken\".\nElijah, in company with Elisha, approaches the Jordan. He rolls up his mantle and strikes the water. The water immediately divides and Elijah and Elisha cross on dry land. Suddenly, a chariot of fire and horses of fire appear and Elijah is lifted up in a whirlwind. As Elijah is lifted up, his mantle falls to the ground and Elisha picks it up.\nBooks of Chronicles.\nElijah is mentioned once more in 2 Chronicles 21:12, which will be his final mention in the Hebrew Bible. A letter is sent under the prophet's name to Jehoram of Judah. It tells him that he has led the people of Judah astray in the same way that Israel was led astray. The prophet ends the letter with a prediction of a painful death.\nThis letter is a puzzle to readers for several reasons. First, it concerns a king of the southern kingdom, while Elijah concerned himself with the kingdom of Israel. Second, the message begins with \"Thus says YHVH, God of your father David...\" rather than the more usual \"...in the name of YHVH the God of Israel.\" Also, this letter seems to come after Elijah's ascension into the whirlwind.\nMichael Wilcock, formerly of Trinity College, Bristol, suggests a number of possible reasons for this letter, among them that it may be an example of a better known prophet's name being substituted for that of a lesser known prophet. John Van Seters, however, rejects the letter as having any connection with the Elijah tradition. However, Wilcock argues that Elijah's letter \"does address a very 'northern' situation in the southern kingdom\", and thus is authentic.\nIn Malachi.\nWhile the final mention of Elijah in the Hebrew Bible is in the Book of Chronicles, the Christian Bible\u2019s reordering places the Book of Malachi (which prophesies a messiah) as the final book of the Old Testament, before the New Testament gospels. Thus, Elijah's final Old Testament appearance is in the Book of Malachi, where it is written, \"Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and awesome day of the Lord comes. And he will turn the hearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of children to their fathers, lest I come and strike the land with a decree of utter destruction.\"\nHistoricity.\nScholars generally agree that a prophet named Elijah existed in the Kingdom of Israel during the reigns of Kings Ahab and Ahaziah, that he was a religious figure of great personal dynamism and conservative zeal and the leader of resistance to the rise of Baal worship in Israel in the ninth century BCE.\nIn the opinion of some scholars, however, the biblical presentation of the prophet cannot be taken as historical documentation of his activity. The biblical texts present his career through the eyes of popular legend and subsequent theological reflection, which consider him a personality of heroic proportions. In this process his actions and relations to the people and the King became stereotyped, and the presentation of his behavior paradigmatic.\nIn the Aggadah, Talmud, and extra-canonical books.\nJewish legends about Elijah abound in the Aggadah, which is found throughout various collections of rabbinic literature, including the Babylonian Talmud. This varied literature does not merely discuss his life, but has created a new history of him, which, beginning with his death\u2014or \"translation\"\u2014ends only with the close of the history of the human race. The volume of references to Elijah in Jewish Tradition stands in marked contrast to that in the Canon. As in the case of most figures of Jewish legend, so in the case of Elijah, the biblical account became the basis of later legend. Elijah the precursor of the Messiah, Elijah zealous in the cause of God, Elijah the helper in distress: these are the three leading notes struck by the Aggadah, endeavoring to complete the biblical picture with the Elijah legends. His career is extensive, colorful, and varied. He has appeared the world over in the guise of a beggar and scholar.\nFrom the time of Malachi, who says of Elijah that God will send him before \"the great and dreadful day\", down to the later stories of the Chasidic rabbis, reverence and love, expectation and hope, were always connected in the Jewish consciousness with Elijah.\nOrigin.\nThree different theories regarding Elijah's origin are presented in the Aggadah literature:\n(1) he belonged to the tribe of Gad,\n(2) he was a Benjamite from Jerusalem, identical with the Elijah mentioned in 1 Chronicles 8:27, and\n(3) he was a priest.\nMany Christian Church fathers also have stated that Elijah was a priest. Some rabbis have speculated that he should be identified with Phinehas.\nAccording to later Kabbalistic literature, Elijah was really an angel in human form, so that he had neither parents nor offspring.\nThe Midrash Rabbah Exodus 4:2 states \"Elijah should have revived his parents as he had revived the son of the Zarephathite\" indicating he surely had parents.\nThe Talmud states \"Said he [Rabbah] to him (Elijah): Art thou not a priest: why then dost thou stand in a cemetery?\"\nZeal for God.\nA midrash tells that they even abolished the sign of the covenant, and the prophet had to appear as Israel's accuser before God.\nIn the same cave where God once appeared to Moses and revealed Himself as gracious and merciful, Elijah was summoned to appear before God. By this summons he perceived that he should have appealed to God's mercy, instead of becoming Israel's accuser. The prophet, however, remained relentless in his zeal and severity, so that God commanded him to appoint his successor.\nThe vision in which God revealed Himself to Elijah gave him at the same time a picture of the destinies of man, who has to pass through \"four worlds.\" This world was shown to the prophet by God through symbolism: in the form of the wind, since the world disappears as the wind; storm is the day of death, before which man trembles; fire is the judgment in Gehenna; and the stillness is the last day.\nThree years after this vision, Elijah was \"translated.\" Concerning the place to which Elijah was transferred, opinions differ among Jews and Christians, but the old view was that Elijah was received among the heavenly inhabitants, where he records the deeds of men.\nBut as early as the middle of the 2nd century, when the notion of translation to heaven underwent divergent possible interpretations by Christian theologians, the assertion was made that Elijah never entered into heaven proper. In later literature paradise is generally designated as the abode of Elijah, but since the location of paradise is itself uncertain, the last two statements may be identical.\nEcclesiasticus.\nIn the Book of Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), Elijah's tasks are altered to:\nIn Judaism.\nElijah's chair.\nAt Jewish circumcision ceremonies, a chair is set aside for the use of the prophet Elijah. Elijah is said to be a witness at all circumcisions when the sign of the covenant is placed upon the body of the child. This custom stems from the incident at Mount Horeb: Elijah had arrived at Mount Horeb after the demonstration of God's presence and power on Mount Carmel. God asks Elijah to explain his arrival, and Elijah replies: \"I have been very jealous for the Lord, the God of hosts; for the people of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thy altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away\". According to Rabbinic tradition, Elijah's words were patently untrue, and since Elijah accused Israel of failing to uphold the covenant, God would require Elijah to be present at every covenant of circumcision.\nElijah's cup.\nIn the Talmudic literature, Elijah would visit rabbis to help solve particularly difficult legal problems. Malachi had cited Elijah as the harbinger of the eschaton. Thus, when confronted with reconciling impossibly conflicting laws or rituals, the rabbis would set aside any decision \"until Elijah comes\".\nOne such decision was whether the Passover Seder required four or five cups of wine. Each serving of wine corresponds to one of the \"four expressions of redemption\" in the Book of Exodus:\nI am the Lord, and \"I will bring you out\" from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and \"I will deliver you\" from their bondage, and \"I will redeem you\" with an out-stretched arm and with great acts of judgment, and \"I will take you\" for my people, and I will be your God; and you shall know that I am the Lord your God, who has brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.\"\nThe next verse, \"And \"I will bring you\" into the land which I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; I will give it to you for a possession. I am the Lord.\" was not fulfilled until the generation following the Passover story, and the rabbis could not decide whether this verse counted as part of the Passover celebration (thus deserving of another serving of wine). Thus, a cup was left for the arrival of Elijah.\nIn practice the fifth cup has come to be seen as a celebration of future redemption. Today, a place is reserved at the seder table and a cup of wine is placed there for Elijah. During the seder, the door of the house is opened and Elijah is invited in. Traditionally, the cup is viewed as Elijah's and is used for no other purpose.\nHavdalah.\nHavdalah is the ceremony that concludes the Sabbath Day (Saturday evening in Jewish tradition). As part of the concluding hymn, an appeal is made to God that Elijah will come during the following week. \"Elijah the Prophet, Elijah the Tishbite, Elijah from Gilead. Let him come quickly, in our day with the messiah, the son of David.\"\nIn Jewish folklore.\nThe volume of references to Elijah in folklore stands in marked contrast to that in the canon. Elijah's miraculous transferral to heaven led to speculation as to his true identity. Louis Ginzberg equates him with Phinehas the grandson of Aaron. Because of Phinehas' zealousness for God, he and his descendants were promised, \"a covenant of lasting priesthood.\" Therefore, Elijah is a priest as well as a prophet. Elijah is also equated with the Archangel Sandalphon, whose four wing beats will carry him to any part of the earth. When forced to choose between death and dishonor, Rabbi Kahana chose to leap to his death. Before he could strike the ground, Elijah/Sandalphon had appeared to catch him. Yet another name for Elijah is \"Angel of the Covenant\"\nRabbi Joshua ben Levi.\nReferences to Elijah in Jewish folklore range from short observations (e. g. It is said that when dogs are happy for no reason, it is because Elijah is in the neighborhood) to lengthy parables on the nature of God's justice.\nOne such story is that of Rabbi Joshua ben Levi. The rabbi, a friend of Elijah's, was asked what favor he might wish. The rabbi answered only that he be able to join Elijah in his wanderings. Elijah granted his wish only if he refrained from asking any questions about any of the prophet's actions. He agreed and they began their journey. The first place they came to was the house of an elderly couple who were so poor they had only one old cow. The old couple gave of their hospitality as best they could. The next morning, as the travelers left, Elijah prayed that the old cow would die and it did. The second place they came to was the home of a wealthy man. He had no patience for his visitors and chased them away with the admonition that they should get jobs and not beg from honest people. As they were leaving, they passed the man's wall and saw that it was crumbling. Elijah prayed that the wall be repaired and it was so. Next, they came to a wealthy synagogue. They were allowed to spend the night with only the smallest of provisions. When they left, Elijah prayed that every member of the synagogue might become a leader.\nFinally, they came to a very poor synagogue. Here they were treated with great courtesy and hospitality. When they left, Elijah prayed that God might give them a single wise leader. At this Rabbi Joshua could no longer hold back. He demanded of Elijah an explanation of his actions. At the house of the old couple, Elijah knew that the Angel of Death was coming for the old woman. So he prayed that God might have the angel take the cow instead. At the house of the wealthy man, there was a great treasure hidden in the crumbling wall. Elijah prayed that the wall be restored thus keeping the treasure away from the miser. The story ends with a moral: A synagogue with many leaders will be ruined by many arguments. A town with a single wise leader will be guided to success and prosperity. \"Know then, that if thou seest an evil-doer prosper, it is not always unto his advantage, and if a righteous man suffers need and distress, think not God is unjust.\"\nRabbi Eliezer.\nThe Elijah of legend did not lose any of his ability to afflict the comfortable. The case of Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Simon ben Yohai is illustrative. Once, when walking on a beach, he came upon a hideously ugly man\u2014the prophet in disguise. The man greeted him courteously, \"Peace be with thee, Rabbi.\" Instead of returning the greeting, the rabbi could not resist an insult, \"How ugly you are! Is there anyone as ugly as you in your town?\" Elijah responded with, \"I don't know. Perhaps you should tell the Master Architect how ugly is this, His construction.\" The rabbi realized his wrong and asked for pardon. But Elijah would not give it until the entire city had asked for forgiveness for the rabbi and the rabbi had promised to mend his ways.\nLilith.\nElijah was always seen as deeply pious, it seems only natural that he would be pitted against an equally evil individual. This was found in the person of Lilith. Lilith in legend was the first wife of Adam. She rebelled against Adam, the angels, and even God. She came to be seen as a demon and a witch.\nElijah encountered Lilith and instantly recognized and challenged her, \"Unclean one, where are you going?\" Unable to avoid or lie to the prophet, she admitted she was on her way to the house of a pregnant woman. Her intention was to kill the woman and eat the child.\nElijah pronounced his malediction, \"I curse you in the Name of the Lord. Be silent as a stone!\" But, Lilith was able to make a bargain with Elijah. She promises to \"forsake my evil ways\" if Elijah will remove his curse. To seal the bargain she gives Elijah her names so that they can be posted in the houses of pregnant women or new born children or used as amulets. Lilith promises, \"where I see those names, I shall run away at once. Neither the child nor the mother will ever be injured by me.\"\nIn Christianity.\nNew Testament.\nIn the New Testament, Jesus would say for those who believed, John the Baptist was Elijah, who would come before the \"great and terrible day\" as predicted by Malachi.\nSome English translations of the New Testament use Elias, a Greek form of the name. In the King James Version, \"Elias\" appears only in the texts translated from Greek.\nJohn the Baptist.\nJohn the Baptist preached a message of repentance and baptism. He predicted the day of judgment using imagery similar to that of Malachi. He also preached that the Messiah was coming. All of this was done in a style that immediately recalled the image of Elijah to his audience. He wore a coat of camel's hair secured with a leather girdle. He also frequently preached in wilderness areas near the Jordan River.\nIn the Gospel of John, when John the Baptist was asked by a delegation of priests (present tense) \"Art thou Elias\", he replied \"I am not\". Matthew 11:14 and Matthew 17:10\u201313 however, make it clear that John was the spiritual successor to Elijah. In the Nativity of St. John the Baptist in Luke, Gabriel appears to Zechariah, John's father, and told him that John \"will turn many of the sons of Israel to the Lord their God,\" and that he will go forth \"in the spirit and power of Elijah.\"\nTransfiguration.\nElijah makes an appearance in the New Testament during an incident known as the Transfiguration.\nAt the summit of an unnamed mount, Jesus' face begins to shine. The disciples who are with Him hear the voice of God announce that Jesus is \"My beloved Son.\" The disciples also see Moses and Elijah appear and talk with Jesus. This apparently relates to how both Elijah and Moses, the latter according to tradition but not the Bible, both were translated to heaven instead of dying. Peter is so struck by the experience that he asks Jesus if they should build three \"tabernacles\": one for Elijah, one for Jesus and one for Moses.\nThere is agreement among some Christian theologians that Elijah appears to hand over the responsibility of the prophets to Jesus as the woman by the well said to Jesus \"I perceive thou art a prophet.\" Moses also likewise came to hand over the responsibility of the law for the divinely announced Son of God.\nOther references.\nElijah is mentioned four more times in the New Testament: in Luke, Romans, Hebrews, and James. In Luke 4:24\u201327, Jesus uses Elijah as an example of rejected prophets. Jesus says, \"No prophet is accepted in his own country,\" and then mentions Elijah, saying that there were many widows in Israel, but Elijah was sent to one in Phoenicia. In Romans 11:1\u20136, Paul cites Elijah as an example of God's never forsaking his people (the Israelites). Hebrews 11:35 (\"Women received their dead raised to life again...\") refers to both Elijah raising the son of the widow of Zarephath and Elisha raising the son of the woman of Shunem, citing both Elijah and Elisha as Old Testament examples of faith. In James 5:16\u201318, James says, \"The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much,\" and then cites Elijah's prayers which started and ended the famine in Israel as examples.\nProphet saint.\nIn Western Christianity, Elijah is commemorated as a saint with a feast day on 20 July by the Roman Catholic Church and the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod. Catholics believe that he was unmarried and celibate.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine Rite, he is commemorated on the same date (in the 21st century, Julian Calendar 20 July corresponds to Gregorian Calendar 2 August). He is greatly revered among the Orthodox as a model of the contemplative life. He is also commemorated on the Orthodox liturgical calendar on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers (the Sunday before the Nativity of the Lord).\nElijah has been venerated as the patron saint of Bosnia and Herzegovina since 26 August 1752, replacing George of Lydda at the request of Bishop Pavao Dragi\u010devi\u0107. The reasons for the replacement are unclear. It has been suggested that Elijah was chosen because of his importance to all three main religious groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina\u2014Catholics, Muslims and Orthodox Christians. Pope Benedict XIV is said to have approved Bishop Dragi\u010devi\u0107's request with the remark that a wild nation deserved a wild patron.\nProphet Elias is commemorated by the Catholic Church on 17 June. He is also commemorated by Eastern Orthodox Church on April 14 with all saint Sinai monks.\nCarmelite tradition.\nElijah is revered as the spiritual Father and traditional founder of the Catholic religious Order of Carmelites. In addition to taking their name from Mt. Carmel where the first hermits of the order established themselves, the Calced Carmelite and Discalced Carmelite traditions pertaining to Elijah focus upon the prophet's withdrawal from public life. The medieval Carmelite Book of the First Monks offers some insight into the heart of the Orders' contemplative vocation and reverence for the prophet.\nIn the 17th century the Bollandist Society, whose declared aim was to search out and classify materials concerning the saints venerated by the Church, and to print what seemed to be the most reliable sources of information entered into controversy with the Carmelites on this point. In writing of St. Albert, Patriarch of Jerusalem and author of the Carmelite rule, the Bollandist Daniel Papebroch stated that the attribution of Carmelite origin to Elijah was insufficiently grounded. The Carmelites reacted strongly. From 1681 to 1698 a series of letters, pamphlets and other documents was issued by each side. The Carmelites were supported by a Spanish tribunal, while the Bollandists had the support of Jean de Launoy and the Sorbonne. In November 1698, Pope Innocent XII ordered an end to the controversy.\nLiturgical commemorations.\nSince most Eastern Churches either use Greek as their liturgical language or translated their liturgies from the Greek, \"Elias\" (or its modern iotacized form \"Ilias\") is the form of the prophet's name used among most members of the Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine Rite.\nThe feast day of Saint Elias falls on 20 July of the Orthodox liturgical calendar (for those churches which follow the traditional Julian Calendar, 20 July currently falls on 2 August of the modern Gregorian Calendar). This day is a major holiday in Lebanon and is one of a handful of holidays there whose celebration is accompanied by a launching of fireworks by the general public. The full name of St. Elias in Lebanon translates to St. Elias the Living because it is believed that he did not die but rode his fiery chariot to heaven. The reference to the fiery chariot is likely why the Lebanese celebrate this holiday with fireworks.\nElias is also commemorated, together with all of the righteous persons of the Old Testament, on the Sunday of the Holy Fathers (the Sunday before the Nativity of the Lord).\nThe Apolytikion in the Fourth Tone for St. Elias:\nThe incarnate Angel, the Cornerstone of the Prophets, the second Forerunner of the Coming of Christ, the glorious Elias, who from above, sent down to Elisha the grace to dispel sickness and cleanse lepers, abounds therefore in healing for those who honor him.\nThe Kontakion in the Second Tone for St. Elias:\nO Prophet and foreseer of the great works of God, O greatly renowned Elias, who by your word held back the clouds of rain, intercede for us to the only Loving One.\nPagan associations and mountaintops.\nStarting in the fifth century, Elias is often connected with Helios, the Sun. The two words have very similar pronunciations in post-classical Greek; Elijah rode in his chariot of fire to heaven just as Helios drove the chariot of the sun across the sky; and the holocaust sacrifice offered by Elijah and burned by fire from heaven corresponds to the sun warming the earth.\nSedulius writes poetically in the fifth century that the \"bright path to glittering heaven\" suits Elias both \"in merits and name\", as changing one letter makes his name \"Helios\"; but he does not identify the two. A homily entitled \"De ascensione Heliae\", misattributed to Chrysostom, claims that poets and painters use the ascension of Elijah as a model for their depictions of the sun, and says that \"Elijah is really Helios\". Saint Patrick appears to conflate Helios and Elias. In modern times, much Greek folklore also connects Elias with the sun.\nIn Greece, chapels and monasteries dedicated to Prophet Elias (\u03a0\u03c1\u03bf\u03c6\u03ae\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \u0397\u03bb\u03af\u03b1\u03c2) are often found on mountaintops, which themselves are often named after him. Since Wachsmuth (1864), the usual explanation for this has been that Elias was identified with Helios, who had mountaintop shrines. But few shrines of Helios were on mountaintops, and sun-worship was subsumed by Apollo-worship by Christian times, and so could not be confused with Elias. The modern folklore is not good evidence for the \"origin\" of the association of the sun, Elias, and mountaintops. Perhaps Elias is simply a \"natural patron of high places\".\nThe association of Elias with mountaintops seems to come from a different pagan tradition: Elias took on the attributes and the locales associated with Zeus, especially his associations with mountains and his powers over rain, thunder, lightning, and wind. When Elias prevailed over the priests of Baal, it was on Mount Carmel which later became known as Mount St. Elias. When he spent forty days in a cave, it was on Mount Horeb. When Elias confronted Ahab, he stopped the rains for three years.\nA map of mountain-cults of Zeus shows that most of these sites are now dedicated to Elias, including Mount Olympus, Mount Lykaion, Mount Arachnaion, and Mount Taleton on the mainland, and Mount Kenaion, Mount Oche, and Mount Kynados in the islands. Of these, the only one with a recorded tradition of a Helios cult is Mount Taleton.\nElias is associated with pre-Christian lightning gods in many other European traditions.\nAmong Albanians, pilgrimages are made to mountaintops to ask for rain during the summer. One such tradition that is gaining popularity is the 2 August pilgrimage to Ljuboten on the Sharr mountains. Muslims refer to this day as \"Aligjyn\" (\"Ali Day\"), and it is believed that Ali becomes Elias at midday.\nAs Elijah was described as ascending into heaven in a fiery chariot, the Christian missionaries who converted Slavic tribes likely found him an ideal analogy for Perun, the supreme Slavic god of storms, thunder and lightning bolts. In many Slavic countries Elijah is known as Elijah the Thunderer (\"Ilija Gromovnik\"), who drives the heavens in a chariot and administers rain and snow, thus actually taking the place of Perun in popular beliefs. Perun is also sometimes conflated with the legendary hero Elijah of Murom. The feast of St. Elias is known as \"Ilinden\" in South Slavic, and was chosen as the day of the Ilinden-Preobrazhenie Uprising in 1903; it is now the holiday of Republic Day in North Macedonia.\nIn Estonian folklore Elijah is considered to be the successor of Ukko, the lightning spirit.\nIn Georgian mythology, he replaces Elwa. A Georgian story about Elijah:\nOnce Jesus, the prophet Elijah, and St. George were going through Georgia. When they became tired and hungry they stopped to dine. They saw a Georgian shepherd and decided to ask him to feed them. First, Elijah went up to the shepherd and asked him for a sheep. After the shepherd asked his identity Elijah said that, he was the one who sent him rain to get him a good profit from farming. The shepherd became angry at him and told him that he was the one who also sent thunderstorms, which destroyed the farms of poor widows. (After Elijah, Jesus and St. George attempt to get help and eventually succeed).\nAmong other peoples of the Caucasus, including the Ossetians and Kabardians, Elijah is understood as a kind of thunder-divinity named Uac-illa, Ilia, or Yeli, and was traditionally invoked in \"choppa\" ritual associated with lightning strikes and certain mental illnesses. If a person or animal was struck by lightning, a circle dance was performed immediately around the site, even if the storm was still ongoing, and Elijah's name was invoked alongside a nonsense word \"choppa\" or \"coppay\". If the victim had died, their family were forbidden from grieving and were required to bury them where they fell instead of in the village cemetery. If the victim survived, their lives were dedicated to Elijah: human survivors were prophets, while animals were released with a mark so that others would know not to take them home. In other versions of this tradition, the one venerated was not Elijah, but other traditional thunder-divinities like Shyble (\u0429\u044b\u0431\u043b\u044d), Afy (\u0410\u0444\u044b), or Antswa (\u0410\u043d\u0446\u0443\u0430).\nElias has other pagan associations: a modern legend about Elias mirrors precisely the legend of Odysseus seeking a place where the locals would not recognize an oar\u2014hence the mountaintops.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints acknowledges Elijah as a prophet. The Church teaches that the Malachi prophecy of the return of Elijah was fulfilled on 3 April 1836, when Elijah visited the prophet and founder of the church, Joseph Smith, along with Oliver Cowdery, in the Kirtland Temple as a resurrected being. This event is chronicled in . This experience forms the basis for the church's focus on genealogy and family history and belief in the eternal nature of marriage and families.\nIn Latter-day Saint theology, the name-title Elias is not always synonymous with Elijah and is often used for people other than the biblical prophet. According to Joseph Smith,\nThe spirit of Elias is first, Elijah second, and Messiah last. Elias is a forerunner to prepare the way, and the spirit and power of Elijah is to come after, holding the keys of power, building the Temple to the capstone, placing the seals of the Melchizedek Priesthood upon the house of Israel, and making all things ready; then Messiah comes to His Temple, which is last of all.\nPeople to whom the title Elias is applied in Mormonism include Noah, the angel Gabriel (who is considered to be the same person as Noah in Mormon doctrine), Elijah, John the Baptist, John the Apostle, and an unspecified man who was a contemporary of Abraham.\nDetractors of Mormonism have often alleged that Smith, in whose time and place the King James Version was the only available English translation of the Bible, simply failed to grasp the fact that the Elijah of the Old Testament and the Elias of the New Testament are the same person. Latter-day Saints deny this and say that the difference they make between the two is deliberate and prophetic. The names Elias and Elijah refer to one who prepares the way for the coming of the Lord. This is applicable to John the Baptist coming to prepare the way for the Lord and His baptism; it also refers to Elijah appearing during the transfiguration to prepare for Jesus by restoring keys of sealing power. Jesus then gave this power to the Twelve saying, \"Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.\"\nIn Islam.\nElijah () is mentioned as a prophet in Quran 6:85. Elijah's narrative in the Quran and later Muslim tradition resembles closely that in the Hebrew Bible and Muslim literature records Elijah's primary prophesying as taking place during the reign of Ahab and Jezebel as well as Ahaziah. He is seen by Muslims to be the prophetic predecessor to Elisha. While neither the Bible nor the Quran mentions the genealogy of Elijah, some scholars of Islam believe he may have come from the priestly family of the prophet Aaron. While Elijah is associated with Islamic eschatology, Islam views Jesus as the Messiah. However, Elijah is expected to come back along with the mysterious figure known as Khidr during the Last Judgment. Elijah's figure has been identified with a number of other prophets and saints, including Idris, which is believed by some scholars to have been another name for Elijah, and Khidr. Islamic legend later developed the figure of Elijah, greatly embellishing upon his attributes, and some apocryphal literature gave Elijah the status of a half-human, half-angel. Elijah also appears in later works of literature, including the \"Hamzanama\".\nQuran.\nElijah is mentioned in the Quran, where his preaching is recounted in a concise manner. The Quran narrates that Elijah told his people to come to the worship of God and to leave the worship of Baal, the primary idol of the area. The Quran states, \"And Elias was indeed one of the messengers. \u02f9Remember\u02fa when he said to his people, \u201cWill you not fear \u02f9Allah\u02fa? Do you call upon \u02f9the idol of\u02fa Ba\u2019l and abandon the Best of Creators\u2014 Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?\u201d \" \nThe Quran makes it clear that the majority of Elijah's people denied the prophet and continued to follow idolatry. However, it mentions that a small number of devoted servants of God among them followed Elijah and believed in and worshiped God. The Quran states, \"But they rejected him, so they will certainly be brought \u02f9for punishment\u02fa. But not the chosen servants of Allah. We blessed him \u02f9with honourable mention\u02fa among later generations: \"\nIn the Quran, God praises Elijah in two places:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cPeace be upon Elias.\u201d Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers. He was truly one of Our faithful servants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Likewise, \u02f9We guided\u02fa Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elias, who were all of the righteous.\nNumerous commentators, including Abdullah Yusuf Ali, have offered commentary on VI: 85 saying that Elijah, Zechariah, John the Baptist and Jesus were all spiritually connected. Abdullah Yusuf Ali says, \"The third group consists not of men of action, but Preachers of Truth, who led solitary lives. Their epithet is: \"the Righteous.\" They form a connected group round Jesus. Zachariah was the father of John the Baptist, who is referenced as \"Elias, which was for to come\" (Matt 11:14); and Elias is said to have been present and talked to Jesus at the Transfiguration on the Mount (Matt. 17:3).\"\nLiterature and tradition.\nMuslim literature and tradition recounts that Elijah preached to the Kingdom of Israel, ruled over by Ahab and later his son Ahaziah. He is believed to have been a \"prophet of the desert\u2014like John the Baptist\". Elijah is believed to have preached with zeal to Ahab and his wife Jezebel, who according to Muslim tradition was partly responsible for the worship of false idols in this area. Muslims believe that it was because the majority of people refused to listen to Elijah that Elisha had to continue preaching the message of God to Israel after him.\nElijah has been the subject of legends and folktales in Muslim culture, usually involving his meeting with Khidr, and in one legend, with Muhammad himself. In Islamic mysticism, Elijah is associated closely with the sage Khidr. One hadith reported that Elijah and Khidr met together every year in Jerusalem to go on the pilgrimage to Mecca. Elijah appears also in the \"Hamzanama\" numerous times, where he is spoken of as being the brother of Khidr as well as one who drank from the Fountain of Youth.\nFurther, It is narrated in Kitab al-Kafi that Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq was reciting the prostration of Ilyas (Elijah) in the Syrian language and began to weep. He then translated the supplication in Arabic to a group of visiting scholars: \n&lt;poem&gt;\n\"O Lord, will I find that you punish me although you know of my thirst in the heat of midday? Will I find that you punish me although you know that I rub my face on Earth to worship you? Will I find that you punish me although you know that I give up sins for you? Will I find that you punish me although you know that I stay awake all night just for you?\" To which Allah then inspired to Ilyas, \"Raise your head from the Earth for I will not punish you\".\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nAlthough most Muslim scholars believed that Elijah preached in Israel, some early commentators on the Quran stated that Elijah was sent to Baalbek, in Lebanon. Modern scholars have rejected this claim, stating that the connection of the city with Elijah would have been made because of the first half of the city's name, that of \"Baal\", which was the deity that Elijah exhorted his people to stop worshiping. Scholars who reject identification of Elijah's town with Baalbek further argue that the town of Baalbek is not mentioned with the narrative of Elijah in either the Quran or the Hebrew Bible.\nIn Druze Faith.\nDruze tradition honors several \u201cmentors\u201d and \u201cprophets\u201d, and Elijah is honored as a prophet. Druze venerate Elijah, and he is considered a central figure in Druzism. And due to his importance in Druzism, the settlement of Druze on Mount Carmel had partly to do with Elijah's story and devotion. There are two large Druze towns on the eastern slopes of Mount Carmel: Daliyat al-Karmel and Isfiya. The Druze regard the Cave of Elijah as holy, and they identify Elijah as \"al-Khidr\", the green prophet who symbolizes water and life, a miracle who cures the sick. He and Jethro (Shuaib) are considered patron saints of the Druze people.\nDruze, like some Christians, believe that Elijah came back as John the Baptist, since they belief in reincarnation and the transmigration of the soul, Druze believe that El Khidr and John the Baptist are one and the same; along with Saint George.\nIn Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, the B\u00e1b, founder of the B\u00e1b\u00ed Faith, is believed to be the return of Elijah and John the Baptist. Both Elijah and John the Baptist are considered to be Lesser Prophets, whose stations are below that of a Manifestation of God like Jesus Christ, Buddha, the B\u00e1b or Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h. The B\u00e1b is buried on Mount Carmel, where Elijah had his confrontation with the prophets of Baal.\nControversies.\nMiracle of the ravens.\nThat ravens fed Elijah by the brook Chorath has been questioned. The Hebrew text at 1 Kings 17:4\u20136 uses the word \"`\u014drv\u012bm\", which means \"ravens\", but with a different vocalization might equally mean \"Arabs\". The Septuagint has , \"ravens\", and other traditional translations followed.\nAlternatives have been proposed for many years; for example Adam Clarke (d. 1832) treated it as a discussion already of long standing. Objections to the traditional translation are that ravens are ritually unclean as well as physically dirty; it is difficult to imagine any method of delivery of the food which is not disgusting. The parallelism with the incident that follows, where Elijah is fed by the widow, also suggests a human, if mildly improbable, agent.\nProf. John Gray chooses \"Arabs\", saying \"We adopt this reading solely because of its congruity with the sequel, where Elijah is fed by an alien Phoenician woman.\" His translation of the verses in question is:\nAnd the word of Jehovah came to Elijah saying, Go hence and turn eastward and hide thyself in the Wadi Chorath east of the Jordan, and it shall be that thou shalt drink of the wadi, and I have commanded the Arabs to feed thee there. And he went and did according to the word of Jehovah and went and dwelt in the Wadi Chorath east of the Jordan. And the Arabs brought him bread in the morning and flesh in the evening and he would drink of the wadi.\nFire on Mount Carmel.\nThe challenge to the priests of Baal had the two-fold purpose of demonstrating that the God of Israel was greater than Baal, and that it was he who was the giver of rain. According to J. Robinson, \"Some scholars have suggested that the pouring of water was a piece of sympathetic magic.\"\nHugo Gressmann suggested that the fire that destroyed the offering and altar was lightning, while Ferdinand Hitzig and others thought the water poured on the sacrifice and into the ditch might have been flammable naphtha. Baptist scholar H. H. Rowley rejects both views. Robinson dismisses the suggestion of naphtha with the view that the priests of Baal would have been aware of the properties of naphtha. Julian Morgenstern rejects the idea of sympathetic magic, but supports the interpretation of white naphtha possibly ignited by a glass or mirror to focus the sun's rays, citing other mentions of sacred fire, as in 2 Maccabees 1:18\u201322.\nAscension into the heavens.\nElijah's name typically occurs in Jewish lists of those who have entered heaven alive.\nIn the Gospel of John, Jesus says: \"And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, [\"even\"] the Son of man which is in heaven.\" Traditionally Christianity interprets the \"Son of Man\" as a title of Jesus, but this has never been an article of faith and there are other interpretations. Further interpreting this quote, some Christians believe that Elijah was not assumed into heaven but simply transferred to another assignment either in heaven or with King Jehoram of Judah.\nThe question of whether Elijah was in heaven or elsewhere on earth depends partly on the view of the letter Jehoram received from Elijah in 2 Chronicles 21:12 after Elijah had ascended. Some have suggested that the letter was written before Elijah ascended, but only delivered later. The rabbinical Seder Olam explains that the letter was delivered seven years after his ascension. This is also a possible explanation for some variation in manuscripts of Josephus' \"Antiquities of the Jews\" when dealing with this issue. Others have argued that Elijah was only \"caught away\" such as Philip in Acts 8 John Lightfoot reasoned that it must have been a different Elijah.\nReturn.\nThe Jewish nation awaits the coming of Elijah to precede the coming of the Messiah. For many Christians this prophecy was fulfilled in the gospels, where he appears during the Transfiguration alongside Moses. Commentators have said that Moses' appearance represented the law, while Elijah's appearance represented the prophets. \nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believes that Elijah returned on 3 April 1836 in an appearance to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, fulfilling the prophecy in Malachi.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith believes Elijah returned as the biblical prophet John the Baptist and as the B\u00e1b who founded the B\u00e1b\u00ed Faith in 1844. Druze, like Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith believes, believe that Elijah came back as John the Baptist,\nThe American founded Nation of Islam believes Elijah returned as Elijah Muhammad, black separatist religious leader (who claimed to be a \"messenger\", not a prophet). This is considered less important than their belief that Allah himself showed up in the person of Fard Muhammad, the founder of the group. It differs notably from most beliefs about Elijah, in that his re-appearance is usually the precursor to a greater one's appearance, rather than an afterthought.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9841", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9841", "title": "Expressive aphasia", "text": "Language disorder involving inability to produce language\nMedical condition\nExpressive aphasia, also known as Broca's aphasia, is a type of aphasia characterized by partial loss of the ability to produce language (spoken, manual, or written), although comprehension generally remains intact. A person with expressive aphasia will exhibit effortful speech. Speech generally includes important content words but leaves out function words that have more grammatical significance than physical meaning, such as prepositions and articles. This is known as \"telegraphic speech\". The person's intended message may still be understood, but their sentence will not be grammatically correct. In very severe forms of expressive aphasia, a person may only speak using single word utterances. Typically, comprehension is mildly to moderately impaired in expressive aphasia due to difficulty understanding complex grammar.\nIt is caused by acquired damage to the anterior regions of the brain, such as Broca's area. It is one subset of a larger family of disorders known collectively as aphasia. Expressive aphasia contrasts with receptive aphasia, in which patients are able to speak in grammatical sentences that lack semantic significance and generally also have trouble with comprehension. Expressive aphasia differs from dysarthria, which is typified by a patient's inability to properly move the muscles of the tongue and mouth to produce speech. Expressive aphasia also differs from apraxia of speech, which is a motor disorder characterized by an inability to create and sequence motor plans for speech.\nSigns and symptoms.\nBroca's (expressive) aphasia is a type of non-fluent aphasia in which an individual's speech is halting and effortful. Misarticulations or distortions of consonants and vowels, namely phonetic dissolution, are common. Individuals with expressive aphasia may only produce single words, or words in groups of two or three. Long pauses between words are common and multi-syllabic words may be produced one syllable at a time with pauses between each syllable. The prosody of a person with Broca's aphasia is compromised by shortened length of utterances and the presence of self-repairs and disfluencies. Intonation and stress patterns are also deficient.\nFor example, in the following passage, a patient with Broca's aphasia is trying to explain how he came to the hospital for dental surgery:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yes... ah... Monday... er... Dad and Peter H... (his own name), and Dad... er... hospital... and ah... Wednesday... Wednesday, nine o'clock... and oh... Thursday... ten o'clock, ah doctors... two... an' doctors... and er... teeth... yah.The speech of a person with expressive aphasia contains mostly content words such as nouns, verbs, and some adjectives. However, function words like conjunctions, articles, and prepositions are rarely used except for \"and\" which is prevalent in the speech of most patients with aphasia. The omission of function words makes the person's speech agrammatic. A communication partner of a person with aphasia may say that the person's speech sounds telegraphic due to poor sentence construction and disjointed words. For example, a person with expressive aphasia might say \"Smart... university... smart... good... good...\"\nSelf-monitoring is typically well preserved in patients with Broca's aphasia. They are usually aware of their communication deficits, and are more prone to depression and outbursts from frustration than are patients with other forms of aphasia.[7]\nIn general, word comprehension is preserved, allowing patients to have functional receptive language skills. Individuals with Broca's aphasia understand most of the everyday conversation around them, but higher-level deficits in receptive language can occur. Because comprehension is substantially impaired for more complex sentences, it is better to use simple language when speaking with an individual with expressive aphasia. This is exemplified by the difficulty to understand phrases or sentences with unusual structure. A typical patient with Broca's aphasia will misinterpret \"the man is bitten by the dog\" by switching the subject and object to \"the dog is bitten by the man.\"\nTypically, people with expressive aphasia can understand speech and read better than they can produce speech and write. The person's writing will resemble their speech and will be effortful, lacking cohesion, and containing mostly content words. Letters will likely be formed clumsily and distorted and some may even be omitted. Although listening and reading are generally intact, subtle deficits in both reading and listening comprehension are almost always present during assessment of aphasia.\nBecause Broca's area is anterior to the primary motor cortex, which is responsible for movement of the face, hands, and arms, a lesion affecting Broca's areas may also result in hemiparesis (weakness of both limbs on the same side of the body) or hemiplegia (paralysis of both limbs on the same side of the body). The brain is wired contralaterally, which means the limbs on right side of the body are controlled by the left hemisphere and vice versa. Therefore, when Broca's area or surrounding areas in the left hemisphere are damaged, hemiplegia or hemiparesis often occurs on the right side of the body in individuals with Broca's aphasia.\nSeverity of expressive aphasia varies among patients. Some people may only have mild deficits and detecting problems with their language may be difficult. In the most extreme cases, patients may be able to produce only a single word. Even in such cases, over-learned and rote-learned speech patterns may be retained\u2013 for instance, some patients can count from one to ten, but cannot produce the same numbers in novel conversation.\nManual language and aphasia.\nIn deaf patients who use manual language (such as American Sign Language), damage to the left hemisphere of the brain leads to disruptions in their signing ability. Paraphasic errors similar to spoken language have been observed; whereas in spoken language a phonemic substitution would occur (e.g. \"tagle\" instead of \"table\"), in ASL case studies errors in movement, hand position, and morphology have been noted. Agrammatism, or the lack of grammatical morphemes in sentence production, has also been observed in lifelong users of ASL who have left hemisphere damage. The lack of syntactic accuracy shows that the errors in signing are not due to damage to the motor cortex, but rather area manifestation of the damage to the language-producing area of the brain. Similar symptoms have been seen in a patient with left hemisphere damage whose first language was British Sign Language, further showing that damage to the left hemisphere primarily hinders linguistic ability, not motor ability. In contrast, patients who have damage to non-linguistic areas on the left hemisphere have been shown to be fluent in signing, but are unable to comprehend written language.\nOverlap with receptive aphasia.\nIn addition to difficulty expressing oneself, individuals with expressive aphasia are also noted to commonly have trouble with comprehension in certain linguistic areas. This agrammatism overlaps with receptive aphasia, but can be seen in patients who have expressive aphasia without being diagnosed as having receptive aphasia. The most well-noted of these are object-relative clauses, object Wh- questions, and topicalized structures (placing the topic at the beginning of the sentence). These three concepts all share phrasal movement, which can cause words to lose their thematic roles when they change order in the sentence. This is often not an issue for people without agrammatic aphasias, but many people with aphasia rely heavily on word order to understand roles that words play within the sentence.\nCauses.\nLess common.\nCommon causes.\nThe most common cause of expressive aphasia is stroke. A stroke is caused by hypoperfusion (lack of oxygen) to an area of the brain, which is commonly caused by thrombosis or embolism. Some form of aphasia occurs in 34 to 38% of stroke patients. Expressive aphasia occurs in approximately 12% of new cases of aphasia caused by stroke.\nIn most cases, expressive aphasia is caused by a stroke in Broca's area or the surrounding vicinity. Broca's area is in the lower part of the premotor cortex in the language dominant hemisphere and is responsible for planning motor speech movements. However, cases of expressive aphasia have been seen in patients with strokes in other areas of the brain. Patients with classic symptoms of expressive aphasia in general have more acute brain lesions, whereas patients with larger, widespread lesions exhibit a variety of symptoms that may be classified as global aphasia or left unclassified.\nExpressive aphasia can also be caused by trauma to the brain, tumor, cerebral hemorrhage and by extradural abscess.\nUnderstanding lateralization of brain function is important for understanding which areas of the brain cause expressive aphasia when damaged. In the past, it has been believed that the area for language production differs between left and right-handed individuals. If this were true, damage to the homologous region of Broca's area in the right hemisphere should cause aphasia in a left-handed individual. More recent studies have shown that even left-handed individuals typically have language functions only in the left hemisphere. However, left-handed individuals are more likely to have a dominance of language in the right hemisphere.\nUncommon causes.\nLess common causes of expressive aphasia include primary autoimmune phenomenon and autoimmune phenomenon that are secondary to cancer (as a paraneoplastic syndrome) have been listed as the primary hypothesis for several cases of aphasia, especially when presenting with other psychiatric disturbances and focal neurological deficits. Many case reports exist describing paraneoplastic aphasia, and the reports that are specific tend to describe expressive aphasia. Although most cases attempt to exclude micro-metastasis, it is likely that some cases of paraneoplastic aphasia are actually extremely small metastasis to the vocal motor regions.\nNeurodegenerative disorders may present with aphasia. Alzheimer's disease may present with either fluent aphasia or expressive aphasia. There are case reports of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease presenting with expressive aphasia.\nDiagnosis.\nExpressive aphasia is classified as non-fluent aphasia, as opposed to fluent aphasia. Diagnosis is done on a case-by-case basis, as lesions often affect the surrounding cortex and deficits are highly variable among patients with aphasia.\nA physician is typically the first person to recognize aphasia in a patient who is being treated for damage to the brain. Routine processes for determining the presence and location of lesion in the brain include magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans. The physician will complete a brief assessment of the patient's ability to understand and produce language. For further diagnostic testing, the physician will refer the patient to a speech-language pathologist, who will complete a comprehensive evaluation.\nIn order to diagnose a patient with Broca's aphasia, there are certain commonly used tests and procedures. The Western Aphasia Battery (WAB) classifies individuals based on their scores on the subtests; spontaneous speech, auditory comprehension, repetition, and naming. The Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination (BDAE) can inform users what specific type of aphasia they may have, infer the location of lesion, and assess current language abilities. The Porch Index of Communication Ability (PICA) can predict potential recovery outcomes of the patients with aphasia. Quality of life measurement is also an important assessment tool. Tests such as the Assessment for Living with Aphasia (ALA) and the Satisfaction with Life Scale (SWLS) allow for therapists to target skills that are important and meaningful for the individual.\nIn addition to formal assessments, patient and family interviews are valid and important sources of information. The patient's previous hobbies, interests, personality, and occupation are all factors that will not only impact therapy but may motivate them throughout the recovery process. Patient interviews and observations allow professionals to learn the priorities of the patient and family and determine what the patient hopes to regain in therapy. Observations of the patient may also be beneficial to determine where to begin treatment. The current behaviors and interactions of the patient will provide the therapist with more insight about the client and their individual needs. Other information about the patient can be retrieved from medical records, patient referrals from physicians, and the nursing staff.\nIn non-speaking patients who use manual languages, diagnosis is often based on interviews from the patient's acquaintances, noting the differences in sign production pre- and post-damage to the brain. Many of these patients will also begin to rely on non-linguistic gestures to communicate, rather than signing since their language production is hindered.\nTreatment.\nCurrently, there is no standard treatment for expressive aphasia. Most aphasia treatment is individualized based on a patient's condition and needs as assessed by a speech language pathologist. Patients go through a period of spontaneous recovery following brain injury in which they regain a great deal of language function.\nIn the months following injury or stroke, most patients receive traditional treatment for a few hours per day. Among other exercises, patients practice the repetition of words and phrases. Mechanisms are also taught in traditional treatment to compensate for lost language function such as drawing and using phrases that are easier to pronounce.\nEmphasis is placed on establishing a basis for communication with family and caregivers in everyday life. Treatment is individualized based on the patient's own priorities, along with the family's input.\nA patient may have the option of individual or group treatment. Although less common, group treatment has been shown to have advantageous outcomes. Some types of group treatments include family counseling, maintenance groups, support groups and treatment groups.\nMelodic intonation therapy.\nMelodic intonation therapy was inspired by the observation that individuals with non-fluent aphasia sometimes can sing words or phrases that they normally cannot speak. \"Melodic Intonation Therapy was begun as an attempt to use the intact melodic/prosodic processing skills of the right hemisphere in those with aphasia to help cue retrieval words and expressive language.\" It is believed that this is because singing capabilities are stored in the right hemisphere of the brain, which is likely to remain unaffected after a stroke in the left hemisphere. However, recent evidence demonstrates that the capability of individuals with aphasia to sing entire pieces of text may actually result from rhythmic features and the familiarity with the lyrics.\nThe goal of Melodic Intonation Therapy is to utilize singing to access the language-capable regions in the right hemisphere and use these regions to compensate for lost function in the left hemisphere. The natural musical component of speech was used to engage the patients' ability to produce phrases. A clinical study revealed that singing and rhythmic speech may be similarly effective in the treatment of non-fluent aphasia and apraxia of speech. Moreover, evidence from randomized controlled trials is still needed to confirm that Melodic Intonation Therapy is suitable to improve propositional utterances and speech intelligibility in individuals with (chronic) non-fluent aphasia and apraxia of speech.\nMelodic Intonation Therapy appears to work particularly well in patients who have had a unilateral, left hemisphere stroke, show poor articulation, are non-fluent or have severely restricted speech output, have moderately preserved auditory comprehension, and show good motivation. MIT therapy on average lasts for 1.5 hours per day for five days per week. At the lowest level of therapy, simple words and phrases (such as \"water\" and \"I love you\") are broken down into a series of high- and low-pitch syllables. With increased treatment, longer phrases are taught and less support is provided by the therapist. Patients are taught to say phrases using the natural melodic component of speaking and continuous voicing is emphasized. The patient is also instructed to use the left hand to tap the syllables of the phrase while the phrases are spoken. Tapping is assumed to trigger the rhythmic component of speaking to utilize the right hemisphere.\nFMRI studies have shown that Melodic Intonation Therapy (MIT) uses both sides of the brain to recover lost function, as opposed to traditional therapies that utilize only the left hemisphere. In MIT, individuals with small lesions in the left hemisphere seem to recover by activation of the left hemisphere perilesional cortex. Meanwhile, individuals with larger left-hemisphere lesions show a recruitment of the use of language-capable regions in the right hemisphere. The interpretation of these results is still a matter of debate. For example, it remains unclear whether changes in neural activity in the right hemisphere result from singing or from the intensive use of common phrases, such as \"thank you\", \"how are you?\" or \"I am fine.\" This type of phrases falls into the category of formulaic language and is known to be supported by neural networks of the intact right hemisphere.\nA pilot study reported positive results when comparing the efficacy of a modified form of MIT to no treatment in people with nonfluent aphasia with damage to their left-brain. A randomized controlled trial was conducted and the study reported benefits of utilizing modified MIT treatment early in the recovery phase for people with nonfluent aphasia.\nMelodic Intonation Therapy is used by music therapists, board-certified professionals that use music as a therapeutic tool to effect certain non-musical outcomes in their patients. Speech language pathologists can also use this therapy for individuals who have had a left hemisphere stroke and non-fluent aphasias such as Broca's or even apraxia of speech.\nConstraint-induced therapy.\nConstraint-induced aphasia therapy (CIAT) is based on similar principles as constraint-induced movement therapy developed by Dr. Edward Taub at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Constraint-induced movement therapy is based on the idea that a person with an impairment (physical or communicative) develops a \"learned nonuse\" by compensating for the lost function with other means such as using an unaffected limb by a paralyzed individual or drawing by a patient with aphasia. In constraint-induced movement therapy, the alternative limb is constrained with a glove or sling and the patient is forced to use the affected limb. In constraint-induced aphasia therapy the interaction is guided by communicative need in a language game context, picture cards, barriers making it impossible to see other players' cards, and other materials, so that patients are encouraged (\"constrained\") to use the remaining verbal abilities to succeed in the communication game.\nTwo important principles of constraint-induced aphasia therapy are that treatment is very intense, with sessions lasting for up to 6 hours over the course of 10 days and that language is used in a communication context in which it is closely linked to (nonverbal) actions. These principles are motivated by neuroscience insights about learning at the level of nerve cells (synaptic plasticity) and the coupling between cortical systems for language and action in the human brain. Constraint-induced therapy contrasts sharply with traditional therapy by the strong belief that mechanisms to compensate for lost language function, such as gesturing or writing, should not be used unless absolutely necessary, even in everyday life.\nIt is believed that CIAT works by the mechanism of increased neuroplasticity. By constraining an individual to use only speech, it is believed that the brain is more likely to reestablish old neural pathways and recruit new neural pathways to compensate for lost function.\nThe strongest results of CIAT have been seen in patients with chronic aphasia (lasting over 6 months). Studies of CIAT have confirmed that further improvement is possible even after a patient has reached a \"plateau\" period of recovery. It has also been proven that the benefits of CIAT are retained long term. However, improvements only seem to be made while a patient is undergoing intense therapy. Recent work has investigated combining constraint-induced aphasia therapy with drug treatment, which led to an amplification of therapy benefits.\nMedication.\nIn addition to active speech therapy, pharmaceuticals have also been considered as a useful treatment for expressive aphasia. This area of study is relatively new and much research continues to be conducted.\nThe following drugs have been suggested for use in treating aphasia and their efficacy has been studied in control studies.\nThe most effect has been shown by piracetam and amphetamine, which may increase cerebral plasticity and result in an increased capability to improve language function. It has been seen that piracetam is most effective when treatment is begun immediately following stroke. When used in chronic cases it has been much less efficient.\nBromocriptine has been shown by some studies to increase verbal fluency and word retrieval with therapy than with just therapy alone. Furthermore, its use seems to be restricted to non-fluent aphasia.\nDonepezil has shown a potential for helping chronic aphasia.\nNo study has established irrefutable evidence that any drug is an effective treatment for aphasia therapy. Furthermore, no study has shown any drug to be specific for language recovery. Comparison between the recovery of language function and other motor function using any drug has shown that improvement is due to a global increase plasticity of neural networks.\nTranscranial magnetic stimulation.\nIn transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), magnetic fields are used to create electrical currents in specified cortical regions. The procedure is a painless and noninvasive method of stimulating the cortex. TMS works by suppressing the inhibition process in certain areas of the brain. By suppressing the inhibition of neurons by external factors, the targeted area of the brain may be reactivated and thereby recruited to compensate for lost function. Research has shown that patients can demonstrate increased object naming ability with regular transcranial magnetic stimulation than patients not receiving TMS. Furthermore, research suggests this improvement is sustained upon the completion of TMS therapy. However, some patients fail to show any significant improvement from TMS which indicates the need for further research of this treatment.\nTreatment of underlying forms.\nDescribed as the linguistic approach to the treatment of expressive aphasia, treatment begins by emphasizing and educating patients on the thematic roles of words within sentences. Sentences that are usually problematic will be reworded into active-voiced, declarative phrasings of their non-canonical counterparts. The simpler sentence phrasings are then transformed into variations that are more difficult to interpret. For example, many individuals who have expressive aphasia struggle with Wh- sentences. \"What\" and \"who\" questions are problematic sentences that this treatment method attempts to improve, and they are also two interrogative particles that are strongly related to each other because they reorder arguments from the declarative counterparts. For instance, therapists have used sentences like, \"Who is the boy helping?\" and \"What is the boy fixing?\" because both verbs are transitive- they require two arguments in the form of a subject and a direct object, but not necessarily an indirect object. In addition, certain question particles are linked together based on how the reworded sentence is formed. Training \"who\" sentences increased the generalizations of non-trained \"who\" sentences as well as untrained \"what\" sentences, and vice versa. Likewise, \"where\" and \"when\" question types are very closely linked. \"What\" and \"who\" questions alter placement of arguments, and \"where\" and \"when\" sentences move adjunct phrases. Training is in the style of: \"The man parked the car in the driveway. What did the man park in the driveway?\" Sentence training goes on in this manner for more domains, such as clefts and sentence voice.\nResults: Patients' use of sentence types used in the TUF treatment will improve, subjects will generalize sentences of similar category to those used for treatment in TUF, and results are applied to real-world conversations with others. Generalization of sentence types used can be improved when the treatment progresses in the order of more complex sentences to more elementary sentences. Treatment has been shown to affect on-line (real-time) processing of trained sentences and these results can be tracked using fMRI mappings. Training of Wh- sentences has led improvements in three main areas of discourse for aphasics: increased average length of utterances, higher proportions of grammatical sentences, and larger ratios of numbers of verbs to nouns produced. Patients also showed improvements in verb argument structure productions and assigned thematic roles to words in utterances with more accuracy. In terms of on-line sentence processing, patients having undergone this treatment discriminate between anomalous and non-anomalous sentences with more accuracy than control groups and are closer to levels of normalcy than patients not having participated in this treatment.\nMechanisms of recovery.\nMechanisms for recovery differ from patient to patient. Some mechanisms for recovery occur spontaneously after damage to the brain, whereas others are caused by the effects of language therapy. FMRI studies have shown that recovery can be partially attributed to the activation of tissue around the damaged area and the recruitment of new neurons in these areas to compensate for the lost function. Recovery may also be caused in very acute lesions by a return of blood flow and function to damaged tissue that has not died around an injured area. It has been stated by some researchers that the recruitment and recovery of neurons in the left hemisphere opposed to the recruitment of similar neurons in the right hemisphere is superior for long-term recovery and continued rehabilitation. It is thought that, because the right hemisphere is not intended for full language function, using the right hemisphere as a mechanism of recovery is effectively a \"dead-end\" and can lead only to partial recovery.\nThere is evidence to support that, among all types of therapies, one of the most important factors and best predictors for a successful outcome is the intensity of the therapy. By comparing the length and intensity of various methods of therapies, it was proven that intensity is a better predictor of recovery than the method of therapy used.\nPrognosis.\nIn most individuals with expressive aphasia, the majority of recovery is seen within the first year following a stroke or injury. The majority of this improvement is seen in the first four weeks in therapy following a stroke and slows thereafter. However, this timeline will vary depending upon the type of stroke experienced by the patient. Patients who experienced an ischemic stroke may recover in the days and weeks following the stroke, and then experience a plateau and gradual slowing of recovery. On the contrary, patients who experienced a hemorrhagic stroke experience a slower recovery in the first 4\u20138 weeks, followed by a faster recovery which eventually stabilizes.\nNumerous factors impact the recovery process and outcomes. Site and extent of lesion greatly impacts recovery. Other factors that may affect prognosis are age, education, gender, and motivation. Occupation, handedness, personality, and emotional state may also be associated with recovery outcomes.\nStudies have also found that prognosis of expressive aphasia correlates strongly with the initial severity of impairment. However, it has been seen that continued recovery is possible years after a stroke with effective treatment. Timing and intensity of treatment is another factor that impacts outcomes. Research suggests that even in later stages of recovery, intervention is effective at improving function, as well as, preventing loss of function.\nUnlike receptive aphasia, patients with expressive aphasia are aware of their errors in language production. This may further motivate a person with expressive aphasia to progress in treatment, which would affect treatment outcomes. On the other hand, awareness of impairment may lead to higher levels of frustration, depression, anxiety, or social withdrawal, which have been proven to negatively affect a person's chance of recovery.\nHistory.\nExpressive aphasia was first identified by the French neurologist Paul Broca. By examining the brains of deceased individuals having acquired expressive aphasia in life, he concluded that language ability is localized in the ventroposterior region of the frontal lobe. One of the most important aspects of Paul Broca's discovery was the observation that the loss of proper speech in expressive aphasia is due to the brain's loss of ability to produce language, as opposed to the mouth's loss of ability to produce words.\nThe discoveries of Paul Broca were made during the same period of time as the German Neurologist Carl Wernicke, who was also studying brains of aphasiacs post-mortem and identified the region now known as Wernicke's area. Discoveries of both men contributed to the concept of localization, which states that specific brain functions are all localized to a specific area of the brain. While both men made significant contributions to the field of aphasia, it was Carl Wernicke who realized the difference between patients with aphasia that could not produce language and those that could not comprehend language (the essential difference between expressive and receptive aphasia).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9843", "revid": "46077141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9843", "title": "Ephesus", "text": "Ancient Greek city in Anatolia \nEphesus (; Greek: , \u00a0; ; may ultimately derive from ) was a city in Ancient Greece on the coast of Ionia, southwest of present-day Sel\u00e7uk in \u0130zmir Province, Turkey. It was built in the 10th century BC on the site of Apasa, the former Arzawan capital, by Attic and Ionian Greek colonists. During the Classical Greek era, it was one of twelve cities that were members of the Ionian League. The city came under the control of the Roman Republic in 129 BC.\nThe city was famous in its day for the nearby Temple of Artemis (completed around 550\u00a0BC), which has been designated one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Its many monumental buildings included the Library of Celsus and a theatre capable of holding 24,000 spectators.\nEphesus was recipient city of one of the Pauline epistles; one of the seven churches of Asia addressed in the Book of Revelation; the Gospel of John may have been written there; and it was the site of several 5th-century Christian Councils (see Council of Ephesus). The city was destroyed by the Goths in 263. Although it was afterwards rebuilt, its importance as a commercial centre declined as the harbour was slowly silted up by the K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fckmenderes River. In 614, it was partially destroyed by an earthquake.\nToday, the ruins of Ephesus are a favourite international and local tourist attraction, being accessible from Adnan Menderes Airport and from the resort town Ku\u015fadas\u0131. In 2015, the ruins were designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nHistory.\nNeolithic age.\nHumans had begun inhabiting the area surrounding Ephesus by the Neolithic Age (about 6000\u00a0BC), as shown by evidence from excavations at the nearby \"h\u00f6y\u00fck\" (artificial mounds known as tells) of and Cukurici.\nBronze Age.\nExcavations in recent years have unearthed settlements from the early Bronze Age at Ayasuluk Hill. According to Hittite sources, the capital of the kingdom of Arzawa (another independent state in Western and Southern Anatolia/Asia Minor) was Apasa (or \"Abasa\"), and some scholars suggest that this is the same place the Greeks later called Ephesus. In 1954, a burial ground from the Mycenaean era (1500\u20131400\u00a0BC), which contained ceramic pots, was discovered close to the ruins of the basilica of St. John. This was the period of the Mycenaean expansion, when the \"Ahhiyawa\" began settling in Asia Minor, a process that continued into the 13th century BC. The names \"Apasa\" and \"Ephesus\" appear to be cognate, and recently found inscriptions seem to pinpoint the places in the Hittite record.\nPeriod of Greek migrations.\nEphesus was founded as an Attic-Ionian colony in the 10th century BC on a hill (now known as the Ayasuluk Hill), three kilometers () from the centre of ancient Ephesus (as attested by excavations at the Seljuk castle during the 1990s). The mythical founder of the city was a prince of Athens named Androklos, who had to leave his country after the death of his father, King Kodros. According to the legend, he founded Ephesus on the place where the oracle of Delphi became reality (\"A fish and a boar will show you the way\"). Androklos drove away most of the native Carian and Lelegian inhabitants of the city and united his people with the remainder. He was a successful warrior, and as a king he was able to join the twelve cities of Ionia together into the Ionian League. During his reign the city began to prosper. He died in a battle against the Carians when he came to the aid of Priene, another city of the Ionian League. Androklos and his dog are depicted on the Hadrian temple frieze, dating from the 2nd century. Later, Greek historians such as Pausanias, Strabo and Herodotos and the poet Kallinos reassigned the city's mythological foundation to Ephos, queen of the Amazons.\nThe Greek goddess Artemis and the great Anatolian goddess Kybele were identified together as \"Artemis of Ephesus\". The many-breasted \"Lady of Ephesus\", identified with Artemis, was venerated in the Temple of Artemis, one of the Seven Wonders of the World and the largest building of the ancient world according to Pausanias (4.31.8). Pausanias mentions that the temple was built by Ephesus, son of the river god Caystrus, before the arrival of the Ionians. Of this structure, scarcely a trace remains.\nAncient sources seem to indicate that an older name of the place was Alope ().\nArchaic period.\nAbout 650\u00a0BC, Ephesus was attacked by the Cimmerians who razed the city, including the temple of Artemis. After the Cimmerians had been driven away, the city was ruled by a series of tyrants. Following a revolt by the people, Ephesus was ruled by a council. The city prospered again under a new rule, producing a number of important historical figures such as the elegiac poet Callinus and the iambic poet Hipponax, the philosopher Heraclitus, the great painter Parrhasius and later the grammarian Zenodotos and physicians Soranus and Rufus.\nAbout 560\u00a0BC, Ephesus was conquered by the Lydians under king Croesus, who, though a harsh ruler, treated the inhabitants with respect and even became the main contributor to the reconstruction of the temple of Artemis. His signature has been found on the base of one of the columns of the temple (now on display in the British Museum). Croesus made the populations of the different settlements around Ephesus regroup (\"synoikismos\") in the vicinity of the Temple of Artemis, enlarging the city.\nLater in the same century, the Lydians under Croesus invaded Persia. The Ionians refused a peace offer from Cyrus the Great, siding with the Lydians instead. After the Persians defeated Croesus, the Ionians offered to make peace, but Cyrus insisted that they surrender and become part of the empire. They were defeated by the Persian army commander Harpagos in 547\u00a0BC. The Persians then incorporated the Greek cities of Asia Minor into the Achaemenid Empire. Those cities were then ruled by satraps.\nEphesus has intrigued archaeologists because for the Archaic Period there is no definite location for the settlement. There are numerous sites to suggest the movement of a settlement between the Bronze Age and the Roman period, but the silting up of the natural harbours as well as the movement of the Kayster River meant that the location never remained the same.\nClassical period.\nEphesus continued to prosper, but when taxes were raised under Cambyses II and Darius, the Ephesians participated in the Ionian Revolt against Persian rule in the Battle of Ephesus (498\u00a0BC), an event which instigated the Greco-Persian wars. In 479\u00a0BC, the Ionians, together with Athens, were able to oust the Persians from the shores of Asia Minor. In 478\u00a0BC, the Ionian cities with Athens entered into the Delian League against the Persians. Ephesus did not contribute ships but gave financial support.\nDuring the Peloponnesian War, Ephesus was first allied to Athens but in a later phase, called the Decelean War, or the Ionian War, sided with Sparta, which also had received the support of the Persians. As a result, rule over the cities of Ionia was ceded again to Persia.\nThese wars did not greatly affect daily life in Ephesus. The Ephesians were surprisingly modern in their social relations: they allowed strangers to integrate and education was valued. In later times, Pliny the Elder mentioned having seen at Ephesus a representation of the goddess Diana by Timarete, the daughter of a painter.\nIn 356\u00a0BC the temple of Artemis was burnt down, according to legend, by a lunatic called Herostratus. The inhabitants of Ephesus at once set about restoring the temple and even planned a larger and grander one than the original.\nHellenistic period.\nWhen Alexander the Great defeated the Persian forces at the Battle of Granicus in 334\u00a0BC, the Greek cities of Asia Minor were liberated. The pro-Persian tyrant Syrpax and his family were stoned to death, and Alexander was greeted warmly when he entered Ephesus in triumph. When Alexander saw that the temple of Artemis was not yet finished, he proposed to finance it and have his name inscribed on the front. But the inhabitants of Ephesus demurred, claiming that it was not fitting for one god to build a temple to another. After Alexander's death in 323\u00a0BC, Ephesus in 290\u00a0BC came under the rule of one of Alexander's generals, Lysimachus.\nAs the river Cayster (Grk. name \u039a\u03ac\u03cb\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2) silted up the old harbour, the resulting marshes caused malaria and many deaths among the inhabitants. Lysimachus forced the people to move from the ancient settlement around the temple of Artemis to the present site two kilometres () away, when as a last resort the king flooded the old city by blocking the sewers. The new settlement was officially called \"Arsinoea\" ( or \u1f08\u03c1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bd\u03bf\u0390\u03b1) or Arsinoe (\u1f08\u03c1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bd\u03cc\u03b7), after the king's second wife, Arsinoe II of Egypt. After Lysimachus had destroyed the nearby cities of Lebedos and Colophon in 292\u00a0BC, he relocated their inhabitants to the new city.\nEphesus revolted after the treacherous death of Agathocles, giving the Hellenistic king of Syria and Mesopotamia Seleucus I Nicator an opportunity for removing and killing Lysimachus, his last rival, at the Battle of Corupedium in 281\u00a0BC. After the death of Lysimachus the town again was named Ephesus.\nThus Ephesus became part of the Seleucid Empire. After the murder of king Antiochus II Theos and his Egyptian wife, pharaoh Ptolemy III invaded the Seleucid Empire and the Egyptian fleet swept the coast of Asia Minor. Ephesus came under Egyptian rule between 263 and 197\u00a0BC.\nThe Seleucid king Antiochus III the Great tried to regain the Greek cities of Asia Minor and recaptured Ephesus in 196\u00a0BC but he then came into conflict with Rome. After a series of battles, he was defeated by Scipio Asiaticus at the Battle of Magnesia in 190\u00a0BC. As a result of the subsequent Treaty of Apamea, Ephesus came under the rule of Eumenes II, the Attalid king of Pergamon, (ruled 197\u2013159\u00a0BC). When his grandson Attalus III died in 133\u00a0BC without male children of his own, he left his kingdom to the Roman Republic, on condition that the city of Pergamon be kept free and autonomous.\nClassical Roman period (129 BC\u2013395 AD).\nEphesus, as part of the kingdom of Pergamon, became a subject of the Roman Republic in 129 BC after the revolt of Eumenes III was suppressed.\nThe city felt Roman influence at once; taxes rose considerably, and the treasures of the city were systematically plundered. Hence in 88\u00a0BC Ephesus welcomed Archelaus, a general of Mithridates, king of Pontus, when he conquered Asia (the Roman name for western Asia Minor). From Ephesus, Mithridates ordered every Roman citizen in the province to be killed which led to the Asiatic Vespers, the slaughter of 80,000 Roman citizens in Asia, or any person who spoke with a Latin accent. Many had lived in Ephesus, and statues and monument of Roman citizens in Ephesus were also destroyed. But when they saw how badly the people of Chios had been treated by Zenobius, a general of Mithridates, they refused entry to his army. Zenobius was invited into the city to visit Philopoemen, the father of Monime, the favourite wife of Mithridates, and the overseer of Ephesus. As the people expected nothing good of him, they threw him into prison and murdered him. Mithridates took revenge and inflicted terrible punishments. However, the Greek cities were given freedom and several substantial rights. Ephesus became, for a short time, self-governing. When Mithridates was defeated in the First Mithridatic War by the Roman consul Lucius Cornelius Sulla, Ephesus came back under Roman rule in 86\u00a0BC. Sulla imposed a huge indemnity, along with five years of back taxes, which left Asian cities heavily in debt for a long time to come.\nKing Ptolemy XII Auletes of Egypt retired to Ephesus in 57 BC, passing his time in the sanctuary of the temple of Artemis when the Roman Senate failed to restore him to his throne.\nMark Antony was welcomed by Ephesus for periods when he was proconsul and in 33 BC with Cleopatra when he gathered his fleet of 800 ships before the battle of Actium with Octavius.\nWhen Augustus became emperor in 27\u00a0BC, the most important change was when he made Ephesus the capital of proconsular Asia (which covered western Asia Minor) instead of Pergamum. Ephesus then entered an era of prosperity, becoming both the seat of the governor and a major centre of commerce. According to Strabo, it was second in importance and size only to Rome.\nThe city and temple were destroyed by the Goths in 263. This marked the decline of the city's splendour. However emperor Constantine the Great rebuilt much of the city and erected new public baths.\nThe Roman population.\nUntil recently, the population of Ephesus in Roman times was estimated to number up to 225,000 people by Broughton. More recent scholarship regards these estimates as unrealistic. Such a large estimate would require population densities seen in only a few ancient cities, or extensive settlement outside the city walls. This would have been impossible at Ephesus because of the mountain ranges, coastline and quarries which surrounded the city.\nThe wall of Lysimachus has been estimated to enclose an area of . Not all of this area was inhabited due to public buildings and spaces in the city center and the steep slope of the B\u00fclb\u00fcl Da\u011f\u0131 mountain, which was enclosed by the wall. Ludwig Burchner estimated this area with the walls at 1000.5 acres. Jerome Murphy-O'Connor uses an estimate of 345 hectares for the inhabited land or 835 acres (Murphey cites Ludwig Burchner). He cites Josiah Russell using 832 acres and Old Jerusalem in 1918 as the yardstick estimated the population at 51,068 at 148.5 persons per hectare. Using 510 persons per hectare, he arrives at a population between 138,000 and 172,500. J. W. Hanson estimated the inhabited space to be smaller, at . He argues that population densities of 150 or 250 people per hectare are more realistic, which gives a range of 33,600 to 56,000 inhabitants. Even with these much lower population estimates, Ephesus was one of the largest cities of Roman Asia Minor, ranking it as the largest city after Sardis and Alexandria Troas. Hanson and Ortman (2017) estimate an inhabited area to be 263 hectares and their demographic model yields an estimate of 71,587 inhabitants, with a population density of 276 inhabitants per hectare. By contrast, Rome within the walls encompassed 1,500 hectares and as over 400 built-up hectares were left outside the Aurelian Wall, whose construction was begun in 274 CE and finished in 279 CE, the total inhabited area plus public spaces inside the walls consisted of ca. 1,900 hectares. Imperial Rome had a population estimated to be between 750,000 and one million (Hanson and Ortman's (2017) model yields an estimate of 923,406 inhabitants), which imply in a population density of 395 to 526 inhabitants per hectare, including public spaces.\nByzantine Roman period (395\u20131308).\nEphesus remained the most important city of the Byzantine Empire in Asia after Constantinople in the 5th and 6th centuries. Emperor Flavius Arcadius raised the level of the street between the theatre and the harbour. The basilica of St. John was built during the reign of emperor Justinian I in the 6th century.\nExcavations in 2022 indicate that large parts of the city were destroyed in 614/615 by a military conflict, most likely during the Sasanian War, which initiated a drastic decline in the city's population and standard of living.\nThe importance of the city as a commercial centre further declined as the harbour, today 5\u00a0kilometres inland, was slowly silted up by the river (today, K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Menderes) despite repeated dredging during the city's history. The loss of its harbour caused Ephesus to lose its access to the Aegean Sea, which was important for trade. People started leaving the lowland of the city for the surrounding hills. The ruins of the temples were used as building blocks for new homes. Marble sculptures were ground to powder to make lime for plaster.\nSackings by the Arabs first in the year 654\u2013655 by caliph Muawiyah I, and later in 700 and 716 hastened the decline further.\nWhen the Seljuk Turks conquered Ephesus in 1090, it was a small village. The Byzantines resumed control in 1097 and changed the name of the town to Hagios Theologos. They kept control of the region until 1308. Crusaders passing through were surprised that there was only a small village, called Ayasalouk, where they had expected a bustling city with a large seaport. Even the temple of Artemis was completely forgotten by the local population. The Crusaders of the Second Crusade fought the Seljuks just outside the town in December 1147.\nPre-Ottoman period (1304\u20131390).\nThe town surrendered, on 24 October 1304, to Sasa Bey, a Turkish warlord of the Mente\u015fo\u011fullar\u0131 principality. Nevertheless, contrary to the terms of the surrender the Turks pillaged the church of Saint John and deported most of the local population to Thyrea, Greece when a revolt seemed probable. During these events many of the remaining inhabitants were massacred.\nShortly afterwards, Ephesus was ceded to the Aydinid principality that stationed a powerful navy in the harbour of Ayasulu\u011f (the present-day Sel\u00e7uk, next to Ephesus). Ayasoluk became an important harbour, from which piratical raids to the surrounding Christian regions were organised, both official by the state and private.\nThe town knew again a short period of prosperity during the 14th century under these new Seljuk rulers. They added important architectural works such as the \u0130sa Bey Mosque, caravansaries and Turkish bathhouses (hamam).\nOttoman period.\nEphesians were incorporated as vassals into the Ottoman Empire for the first time in 1390. The Central Asian warlord Tamerlane defeated the Ottomans in Anatolia in 1402, and the Ottoman sultan Bayezid I died in captivity. The region was restored to the Anatolian beyliks. After a period of unrest, the region was again incorporated into the Ottoman Empire in 1425.\nEphesus was completely abandoned by the 15th century. Nearby Ayasulu\u011f (\"Ayasoluk\" being a corrupted form of the original Greek name) was turkified to Sel\u00e7uk in 1914.\nEphesus and Christianity.\nEphesus was an important centre for Early Christianity from the AD 50s. From AD 52\u201354, the apostle Paul lived in Ephesus, working with the congregation and apparently organizing missionary activity into the hinterlands. Initially, according to the Acts of the Apostles, Paul attended the Jewish synagogue in Ephesus, but after three months he became frustrated with the stubbornness of some of the Jews, and moved his base to the school of Tyrannus. The Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary reminds readers that the unbelief of \"some\" () implies that \"others, probably a large number, believed\" and therefore there must have been a community of Jewish Christians in Ephesus. Paul introduced about twelve men to the 'baptism with the Holy Spirit' who had previously only experienced the baptism of John the Baptist. Later a silversmith named Demetrios stirred up a mob against Paul, saying that he was endangering the livelihood of those making silver Artemis shrines. Demetrios in connection with the temple of Artemis mentions some object (perhaps an image or a stone) \"fallen from Zeus\". Between 53 and 57\u00a0AD Paul wrote the letter 1 Corinthians from Ephesus (possibly from the 'Paul tower' near the harbour, where he was imprisoned for a short time). Later, Paul wrote the Epistle to the Ephesians while he was in prison in Rome (around 62\u00a0AD).\nRoman Asia was associated with John, one of the chief apostles, and the Gospel of John might have been written in Ephesus, \"c\" 90\u2013100. Ephesus was one of the seven cities addressed in the Book of Revelation, indicating that the church at Ephesus was strong.\nAccording to Eusebius of Caesarea, Saint Timothy was the first bishop of Ephesus.\nPolycrates of Ephesus () was a bishop at the Church of Ephesus in the 2nd century. He is best known for his letter addressed to the Pope Victor I, Bishop of Rome, defending the Quartodeciman position in the Easter controversy.\nIn the early 2nd century, the church at Ephesus was still important enough to be addressed by a letter written by Bishop Ignatius of Antioch to the Ephesians which begins with \"Ignatius, who is also called Theophorus, to the Church which is at Ephesus, in Asia, deservedly most happy, being blessed in the greatness and fullness of God the Father, and predestinated before the beginning of time, that it should be always for an enduring and unchangeable glory\" (\"Letter to the Ephesians\"). The church at Ephesus had given their support for Ignatius, who was taken to Rome for execution.\nA legend, which was first mentioned by Epiphanius of Salamis in the 4th century, purported that Mary, the mother of Jesus, may have spent the last years of her life in Ephesus. The Ephesians derived the argument from John's presence in the city, and Jesus\u2019 instructions to John to take care of his mother, Mary, after his death. Epiphanius, however, was keen to point out that, while the Bible says John was leaving for Asia, it does not say specifically that Mary went with him. He later stated that she was buried in Jerusalem. Since the 19th century, The House of the Virgin Mary, about from Sel\u00e7uk, has been considered to have been the last home of Mary, mother of Jesus before her assumption into heaven in the Roman Catholic tradition, based on the visions of Augustinian sister the Blessed Anne Catherine Emmerich (1774\u20131824). It is a popular place of Catholic pilgrimage which has been visited by three recent popes.\nThe Church of Mary near the harbour of Ephesus was the setting for the Third Ecumenical Council in 431, which resulted in the condemnation of Nestorius. A Second Council of Ephesus was held in 449, but its controversial acts were never approved by the Catholics. It came to be called the Robber Council of Ephesus or Robber Synod of Latrocinium by its opponents.\nSeven Sleepers.\nEphesus is believed to be the city of the Seven Sleepers, who were persecuted by the Roman emperor Decius because of their Christianity, and they slept in a cave for three centuries, outlasting their persecution.\nThey are considered saints by Catholics and Orthodox Christians and whose story is also mentioned in the Qur'an,\nMain sites.\nEphesus is one of the largest Roman archaeological sites in the eastern Mediterranean. The visible ruins still give some idea of the city's original splendour, and the names associated with the ruins are evocative of its former life. The theatre dominates the view down Harbour Street, which leads to the silted-up harbour.\nThe Temple of Artemis, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, once stood 418' by 239' with over 100 marble pillars each 56' high. The temple earned the city the title \"Servant of the Goddess\". Pliny tells us that the magnificent structure took 120 years to build but is now represented only by one inconspicuous column, revealed during an archaeological excavation by the British Museum in the 1870s. Some fragments of the frieze (which are insufficient to suggest the form of the original) and other small finds were removed \u2013 some to London and some to the \u0130stanbul Archaeology Museums.\nThe Library of Celsus, the fa\u00e7ade of which has been carefully reconstructed from original pieces, was originally built c. 125 in memory of Tiberius Julius Celsus Polemaeanus, an Ancient Greek who served as governor of Roman Asia (105\u2013107) in the Roman Empire. Celsus paid for the construction of the library with his own personal wealth and is buried in a sarcophagus beneath it. The library was mostly built by his son Gaius Julius Aquila and once held nearly 12,000 scrolls. Designed with an exaggerated entrance \u2014 so as to enhance its perceived size, speculate many historians \u2014 the building faces east so that the reading rooms could make best use of the morning light.\nThe interior of the library measured roughly 180 square metres (2,000 square feet) and may have contained as many as 12,000 scrolls. By the year 400 C.E. the library was no longer in use after being damaged in 262 C.E. The facade was reconstructed during 1970 to 1978 using fragments found on site or copies of fragments that were previously removed to museums.\nAt an estimated 25,000 seating capacity, the theatre is believed to be the largest in the ancient world. This open-air theatre was used initially for drama, but during later Roman times gladiatorial combats were also held on its stage; the first archaeological evidence of a gladiator graveyard was found in May 2007.\nThere were two agoras, one for commercial and one for state business.\nEphesus also had several major bath complexes, built at various times while the city was under Roman rule.\nThe city had one of the most advanced aqueduct systems in the ancient world, with at least six aqueducts of various sizes supplying different areas of the city. They fed a number of water mills, one of which has been identified as a sawmill for marble.\nThe Odeon was a small roofed theatre constructed by Publius Vedius Antoninus and his wife around 150\u00a0AD. It was a small salon for plays and concerts, seating about 1,500 people. There were 22 stairs in the theatre. The upper part of the theatre was decorated with red granite pillars in the Corinthian style. The entrances were at both sides of the stage and reached by a few steps.\nThe Temple of Hadrian dates from the 2nd century but underwent repairs in the 4th century and has been reerected from the surviving architectural fragments. The reliefs in the upper sections are casts, the originals now being exhibited in the Ephesus Archaeological Museum. A number of figures are depicted in the reliefs, including the emperor Theodosius I with his wife and eldest son. The temple was depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 20\u00a0million lira banknote of 2001\u20132005 and of the 20 new lira banknote of 2005\u20132009.\nThe Temple of the Sebastoi (sometimes called the Temple of Domitian), dedicated to the Flavian dynasty, was one of the largest temples in the city. It was erected on a pseudodipteral plan with 8 \u00d7 13 columns. The temple and its statue are some of the few remains connected with Domitian.\nThe Tomb/Fountain of Pollio was erected in 97\u00a0AD in honour of C. Sextilius Pollio, who constructed the Marnas aqueduct, by Offilius Proculus. It has a concave fa\u00e7ade.\nA part of the site, Basilica of St. John, was built in the 6th century, under emperor Justinian I, over the supposed site of the apostle's tomb. It is now surrounded by Sel\u00e7uk.\nArchaeology.\nThe history of archaeological research in Ephesus stretches back to 1863, when British architect John Turtle Wood, sponsored by the British Museum, began to search for the Artemision. In 1869 he discovered the pavement of the temple, but since further expected discoveries were not made the excavations stopped in 1874. In 1895 German archaeologist Otto Benndorf, financed by a 10,000 guilder donation made by Austrian Karl Mautner Ritter von Markhof, resumed excavations. In 1898 Benndorf founded the Austrian Archaeological Institute, which plays a leading role in Ephesus today.\nFinds from the site are exhibited notably in the Ephesos Museum in Vienna, the Ephesus Archaeological Museum in Sel\u00e7uk and in the British Museum.\nIn October 2016, Turkey halted the works of the archeologists, which had been ongoing for more than 100 years, due to tensions between Austria and Turkey. In May 2018, Turkey allowed Austrian archeologists to resume their excavations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9845", "revid": "374440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9845", "title": "JavaScript", "text": "High-level programming language\nJavaScript (), often abbreviated as JS, is a programming language that is one of the core technologies of the World Wide Web, alongside HTML and CSS. As of 2022, 98% of websites use JavaScript on the client side for webpage behavior, often incorporating third-party libraries. All major web browsers have a dedicated JavaScript engine to execute the code on users' devices.\nJavaScript is a high-level, often just-in-time compiled language that conforms to the ECMAScript standard. It has dynamic typing, prototype-based object-orientation, and first-class functions. It is multi-paradigm, supporting event-driven, functional, and imperative programming styles. It has application programming interfaces (APIs) for working with text, dates, regular expressions, standard data structures, and the Document Object Model (DOM).\nThe ECMAScript standard does not include any input/output (I/O), such as networking, storage, or graphics facilities. In practice, the web browser or other runtime system provides JavaScript APIs for I/O.\nJavaScript engines were originally used only in web browsers, but are now core components of some servers and a variety of applications. The most popular runtime system for this usage is Node.js.\nAlthough Java and JavaScript are similar in name, syntax, and respective standard libraries, the two languages are distinct and differ greatly in design.\nHistory.\nCreation at Netscape.\nThe first popular web browser with a graphical user interface, Mosaic, was released in 1993. Accessible to non-technical people, it played a prominent role in the rapid growth of the nascent World Wide Web. The lead developers of Mosaic then founded the Netscape corporation, which released a more polished browser, Netscape Navigator, in 1994. This quickly became the most-used.\nDuring these formative years of the Web, web pages could only be static, lacking the capability for dynamic behavior after the page was loaded in the browser. There was a desire in the flourishing web development scene to remove this limitation, so in 1995, Netscape decided to add a scripting language to Navigator. They pursued two routes to achieve this: collaborating with Sun Microsystems to embed the Java programming language, while also hiring Brendan Eich to embed the Scheme language.\nNetscape management soon decided that the best option was for Eich to devise a new language, with syntax similar to Java and less like Scheme or other extant scripting languages. Although the new language and its interpreter implementation were called LiveScript when first shipped as part of a Navigator beta in September 1995, the name was changed to JavaScript for the official release in December.\nThe choice of the JavaScript name has caused confusion, implying that it is directly related to Java. At the time, the dot-com boom had begun and Java was the hot new language, so Eich considered the JavaScript name a marketing ploy by Netscape.\nAdoption by Microsoft.\nMicrosoft debuted Internet Explorer in 1995, leading to a browser war with Netscape. On the JavaScript front, Microsoft reverse-engineered the Navigator interpreter to create its own, called JScript.\nJScript was first released in 1996, alongside initial support for CSS and extensions to HTML. Each of these implementations was noticeably different from their counterparts in Navigator. These differences made it difficult for developers to make their websites work well in both browsers, leading to widespread use of \"best viewed in Netscape\" and \"best viewed in Internet Explorer\" logos for several years.\nThe rise of JScript.\nIn November 1996, Netscape submitted JavaScript to Ecma International, as the starting point for a standard specification that all browser vendors could conform to. This led to the official release of the first ECMAScript language specification in June 1997.\nThe standards process continued for a few years, with the release of ECMAScript 2 in June 1998 and ECMAScript 3 in December 1999. Work on ECMAScript 4 began in 2000.\nMeanwhile, Microsoft gained an increasingly dominant position in the browser market. By the early 2000s, Internet Explorer's market share reached 95%. This meant that JScript became the de facto standard for client-side scripting on the Web.\nMicrosoft initially participated in the standards process and implemented some proposals in its JScript language, but eventually it stopped collaborating on Ecma work. Thus ECMAScript 4 was mothballed.\nGrowth and standardization.\nDuring the period of Internet Explorer dominance in the early 2000s, client-side scripting was stagnant. This started to change in 2004, when the successor of Netscape, Mozilla, released the Firefox browser. Firefox was well received by many, taking significant market share from Internet Explorer.\nIn 2005, Mozilla joined ECMA International, and work started on the ECMAScript for XML (E4X) standard. This led to Mozilla working jointly with Macromedia (later acquired by Adobe Systems), who were implementing E4X in their ActionScript 3 language, which was based on an ECMAScript 4 draft. The goal became standardizing ActionScript 3 as the new ECMAScript 4. To this end, Adobe Systems released the Tamarin implementation as an open source project. However, Tamarin and ActionScript 3 were too different from established client-side scripting, and without cooperation from Microsoft, ECMAScript 4 never reached fruition.\nMeanwhile, very important developments were occurring in open-source communities not affiliated with ECMA work. In 2005, Jesse James Garrett released a white paper in which he coined the term Ajax and described a set of technologies, of which JavaScript was the backbone, to create web applications where data can be loaded in the background, avoiding the need for full page reloads. This sparked a renaissance period of JavaScript, spearheaded by open-source libraries and the communities that formed around them. Many new libraries were created, including jQuery, Prototype, Dojo Toolkit, and MooTools.\nGoogle debuted its Chrome browser in 2008, with the V8 JavaScript engine that was faster than its competition. The key innovation was just-in-time compilation (JIT), so other browser vendors needed to overhaul their engines for JIT.\nIn July 2008, these disparate parties came together for a conference in Oslo. This led to the eventual agreement in early 2009 to combine all relevant work and drive the language forward. The result was the ECMAScript 5 standard, released in December 2009.\nReaching maturity.\nAmbitious work on the language continued for several years, culminating in an extensive collection of additions and refinements being formalized with the publication of ECMAScript 6 in 2015.\nThe creation of Node.js in 2009 by Ryan Dahl sparked a significant increase in the usage of JavaScript outside of web browsers. Node combines the V8 engine, an event loop, and I/O APIs, thereby providing a stand-alone JavaScript runtime system. As of 2018, Node had been used by millions of developers, and npm had the most modules of any package manager in the world.\nThe ECMAScript draft specification is currently maintained openly on GitHub, and editions are produced via regular annual snapshots. Potential revisions to the language are vetted through a comprehensive proposal process. Now, instead of edition numbers, developers check the status of upcoming features individually.\nThe current JavaScript ecosystem has many libraries and frameworks, established programming practices, and substantial usage of JavaScript outside of web browsers. Plus, with the rise of single-page applications and other JavaScript-heavy websites, several transpilers have been created to aid the development process.\nTrademark.\n\"JavaScript\" is a trademark of Oracle Corporation in the United States. The trademark was originally issued to Sun Microsystems on 6 May 1997, and was transferred to Oracle when they acquired Sun in 2009.\nWebsite client-side usage.\nJavaScript is the dominant client-side scripting language of the Web, with 98% of all websites (mid\u20132022) using it for this purpose. Scripts are embedded in or included from HTML documents and interact with the DOM. All major web browsers have a built-in JavaScript engine that executes the code on the user's device.\nWeb libraries and frameworks.\nOver 80% of websites use a third-party JavaScript library or web framework for their client-side scripting.\njQuery is by far the most popular client-side library, used by over 75% of websites. Facebook created the React library for its website and later released it as open source; other sites, including Twitter, now use it. Likewise, the Angular framework created by Google for its websites, including YouTube and Gmail, is now an open source project used by others.\nIn contrast, the term \"Vanilla JS\" has been coined for websites not using any libraries or frameworks, instead relying entirely on standard JavaScript functionality.\nOther usage.\nThe use of JavaScript has expanded beyond its web browser roots. JavaScript engines are now embedded in a variety of other software systems, both for server-side website deployments and non-browser applications.\nInitial attempts at promoting server-side JavaScript usage were Netscape Enterprise Server and Microsoft's Internet Information Services, but they were small niches. Server-side usage eventually started to grow in the late 2000s, with the creation of Node.js and other approaches.\nElectron, Cordova, React Native, and other application frameworks have been used to create many applications with behavior implemented in JavaScript. Other non-browser applications include Adobe Acrobat support for scripting PDF documents and GNOME Shell extensions written in JavaScript.\nJavaScript has recently begun to appear in some embedded systems, usually by leveraging Node.js.\nFeatures.\nThe following features are common to all conforming ECMAScript implementations unless explicitly specified otherwise.\nImperative and structured.\nJavaScript supports much of the structured programming syntax from C (e.g., codice_1 statements, codice_2 loops, codice_3 statements, codice_4 loops, etc.). One partial exception is scoping: originally JavaScript only had function scoping with codice_5; block scoping was added in ECMAScript 2015 with the keywords codice_6 and codice_7. Like C, JavaScript makes a distinction between expressions and statements. One syntactic difference from C is automatic semicolon insertion, which allow semicolons (which terminate statements) to be omitted.\nWeakly typed.\nJavaScript is weakly typed, which means certain types are implicitly cast depending on the operation used.\nValues are cast to strings like the following:\nValues are cast to numbers by casting to strings and then casting the strings to numbers. These processes can be modified by defining codice_15 and codice_16 functions on the prototype for string and number casting respectively.\nJavaScript has received criticism for the way it implements these conversions as the complexity of the rules can be mistaken for inconsistency. For example, when adding a number to a string, the number will be cast to a string before performing concatenation, but when subtracting a number from a string, the string is cast to a number before performing subtraction.\nOften also mentioned is codice_17 resulting in codice_18 (number). This is misleading: the codice_19 is interpreted as an empty code block instead of an empty object, and the empty array is cast to a number by the remaining unary codice_8 operator. If you wrap the expression in parentheses codice_21 the curly brackets are interpreted as an empty object and the result of the expression is codice_22 as expected.\nObject-orientation (prototype-based).\nPrototypal inheritance in JavaScript is described by Douglas Crockford as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You make prototype objects, and then ... make new instances. Objects are mutable in JavaScript, so we can augment the new instances, giving them new fields and methods. These can then act as prototypes for even newer objects. We don't need classes to make lots of similar objects... Objects inherit from objects. What could be more object oriented than that?\nIn JavaScript, an object is an associative array, augmented with a prototype (see below); each key provides the name for an object property, and there are two syntactical ways to specify such a name: dot notation (codice_24) and bracket notation (codice_25). A property may be added, rebound, or deleted at run-time. Most properties of an object (and any property that belongs to an object's prototype inheritance chain) can be enumerated using a codice_26 loop.\nFunctional.\nJavaScript functions are first-class; a function is considered to be an object. As such, a function may have properties and methods, such as codice_36 and codice_37. A \"nested\" function is a function defined within another function. It is created each time the outer function is invoked. In addition, each nested function forms a lexical closure: the lexical scope of the outer function (including any constant, local variable, or argument value) becomes part of the internal state of each inner function object, even after execution of the outer function concludes. JavaScript also supports anonymous functions.\nDelegative.\nJavaScript supports implicit and explicit delegation.\nMiscellaneous.\nJavaScript is a zero-index language.\nVendor-specific extensions.\nHistorically, some JavaScript engines supported these non-standard features:\nSyntax.\nSimple examples.\nVariables in JavaScript can be defined using either the codice_5, codice_6 or codice_7 keywords. Variables defined without keywords will be defined at the global scope.\n// Declares a function-scoped variable named `x`, and implicitly assigns the\n// special value `undefined` to it. Variables without value are automatically\n// set to undefined.\n// var is generally considered bad practice and let and const are usually preferred.\nvar x;\n// Variables can be manually set to `undefined` like so\nlet x2 = undefined;\n// Declares a block-scoped variable named `y`, and implicitly sets it to\n// `undefined`. The `let` keyword was introduced in ECMAScript 2015.\nlet y;\n// Declares a block-scoped, un-reassignable variable named `z`, and sets it to\n// a string literal. The `const` keyword was also introduced in ECMAScript 2015,\n// and must be explicitly assigned to.\n// The keyword `const` means constant, hence the variable cannot be reassigned\n// as the value is `constant`.\nconst z = \"this value cannot be reassigned!\";\n// Declares a global-scoped variable and assigns 3. This is generally considered\n// bad practice, and will not work if strict mode is on.\nt = 3;\n// Declares a variable named `myNumber`, and assigns a number literal (the value\n// `2`) to it.\nlet myNumber = 2;\n// Reassigns `myNumber`, setting it to a string literal (the value `\"foo\"`).\n// JavaScript is a dynamically-typed language, so this is legal.\nmyNumber = \"foo\";\nNote the comments in the example above, all of which were preceded with two forward slashes.\nThere is no built-in Input/output functionality in JavaScript, instead it is provided by the run-time environment. The ECMAScript specification in edition 5.1 mentions that \"there are no provisions in this specification for input of external data or output of computed results\".\nHowever, most runtime environments have a codice_50 object that can be used to print output. Here is a minimalist Hello World program in JavaScript in a runtime environment with a console object:\nconsole.log(\"Hello, World!\");\nIn HTML documents, a program like this is required for an output:\n// Text nodes can be made using the \"write\" method.\n// This is frowned upon, as it can overwrite the document if the document is fully loaded.\ndocument.write('foo');\n// Elements can be made too. First, they have to be created in the DOM.\nconst myElem = document.createElement('span');\n// Attributes like classes and the id can be set as well\nmyElem.classList.add('foo');\nmyElem.id = 'bar';\n// After setting this, the tag will look like this: `&lt;span class=\"foo\" id=\"bar\" data-attr=\"baz\"&gt;&lt;/span&gt;`\nmyElem.setAttribute('data-attr', 'baz'); // Which could also be written as `myElem.dataset.attr = 'baz'`\n// Finally append it as a child element to the &lt;body&gt; in the HTML\ndocument.body.appendChild(myElem);\n// Elements can be imperatively grabbed with querySelector for one element, or querySelectorAll for multiple elements that can be looped with forEach\ndocument.querySelector('.class'); // Selects the first element with the \"class\" class\ndocument.querySelector('#id'); // Selects the first element with an `id` of \"id\"\ndocument.querySelector('[data-other]'); // Selects the first element with the \"data-other\" attribute\ndocument.querySelectorAll('.multiple'); // Returns an Array of all elements with the \"multiple\" class\nA simple recursive function to calculate the factorial of a natural number:\nfunction factorial(n) {\n // Checking the argument for legitimacy. Factorial is defined for positive integers.\n if (isNaN(n)) {\n console.error(\"Non-numerical argument not allowed.\");\n return NaN; // The special value: Not a Number\n if (n === 0)\n return 1; // 0! = 1\n if (n &lt; 0)\n return undefined; // Factorial of negative numbers is not defined.\n if (n % 1) {\n console.warn(`${n} will be rounded to the closest integer. For non-integers consider using gamma function instead.`);\n n = Math.round(n);\n // The above checks need not be repeated in the recursion, hence defining the actual recursive part separately below.\n // The following line is a function expression to recursively compute the factorial. It uses the arrow syntax introduced in ES6.\n const recursivelyCompute = a =&gt; a &gt; 1 ? a * recursivelyCompute(a - 1) : 1; // Note the use of the ternary operator `?`.\n return recursivelyCompute(n);\nfactorial(3); // Returns 6\nAn anonymous function (or lambda):\nconst counter = function() {\n let count = 0;\n return function() {\n return ++count;\n};\nconst x = counter();\nx(); // Returns 1\nx(); // Returns 2\nx(); // Returns 3\nThis example shows that, in JavaScript, function closures capture their non-local variables by reference.\nArrow functions were first introduced in 6th Edition - ECMAScript 2015. They shorten the syntax for writing functions in JavaScript. Arrow functions are anonymous, so a variable is needed to refer to them in order to invoke them after their creation, unless surrounded by parenthesis and executed immediately.\nExample of arrow function:\n// Arrow functions let us omit the `function` keyword.\n// Here `long_example` points to an anonymous function value.\nconst long_example = (input1, input2) =&gt; {\n console.log(\"Hello, World!\");\n const output = input1 + input2;\n return output;\n// If there are no braces, the arrow function simply returns the expression\n// So here it's (input1 + input2)\nconst short_example = (input1, input2) =&gt; input1 + input2;\nlong_example(2, 3); // Prints \"Hello, World!\" and returns 5\nshort_example(2, 5); // Returns 7\n// If an arrow function has only one parameter, the parentheses can be removed.\nconst no_parentheses = input =&gt; input + 2;\nno_parentheses(3); // Returns 5\n// An arrow function, like other function definitions, can be executed in the same statement as they are created.\n// This is useful when writing libraries to avoid filling the global scope, and for closures.\nlet three = ((a, b) =&gt; a + b) (1, 2);\nconst generate_multiplier_function = a =&gt; (b =&gt; isNaN(b) || !b ? a : a*=b);\nconst five_multiples = generate_multiplier_function(5); // The supplied argument \"seeds\" the expression and is retained by a.\nfive_multiples(1); // Returns 5\nfive_multiples(3); // Returns 15\nfive_multiples(4); // Returns 60\nIn JavaScript, objects can be created as instances of a class.\nObject class example:\nclass Ball {\n constructor(radius) {\n this.radius = radius;\n this.area = Math.PI * ( radius ** 2 );\n // Classes (and thus objects) can contain functions known as methods\n show() {\n console.log(this.radius);\n};\nconst myBall = new Ball(5); // Creates a new instance of the ball object with radius 5\nmyBall.radius++; // Object properties can usually be modified from the outside\nmyBall.show(); // Using the inherited \"show\" function logs \"6\"\nIn JavaScript, objects can be instantiated directly from a function.\nObject functional example:\nfunction Ball(radius) {\n const area = Math.PI * ( radius ** 2 );\n const obj = { radius, area };\n // Objects are mutable, and functions can be added as properties.\n obj.show = () =&gt; console.log(obj.radius);\n return obj;\nconst myBall = Ball(5); // Creates a new ball object with radius 5. No \"new\" keyword needed.\nmyBall.radius++; // The instance property can be modified.\nmyBall.show(); // Using the \"show\" function logs \"6\" - the new instance value.\nVariadic function demonstration (codice_43 is a special variable):\nfunction sum() {\n let x = 0;\n for (let i = 0; i &lt; arguments.length; ++i)\n x += arguments[i];\n return x;\nsum(1, 2); // Returns 3\nsum(1, 2, 3); // Returns 6\n// As of ES6, using the rest operator.\nfunction sum(...args) {\n return args.reduce((a, b) =&gt; a + b);\nsum(1, 2); // Returns 3\nsum(1, 2, 3); // Returns 6\nImmediately-invoked function expressions are often used to create closures. Closures allow gathering properties and methods in a namespace and making some of them private:\nlet counter = (function() {\n let i = 0; // Private property\n return { // Public methods\n get: function() {\n alert(i);\n set: function(value) {\n i = value;\n increment: function() {\n alert(++i);\n };\n})(); // Module\ncounter.get(); // Returns 0\ncounter.set(6);\ncounter.increment(); // Returns 7\ncounter.increment(); // Returns 8\nGenerator objects (in the form of generator functions) provide a function which can be called, exited, and re-entered while maintaining internal context (statefulness).\nfunction* rawCounter() {\n yield 1;\n yield 2;\nfunction* dynamicCounter() {\n let count = 0;\n while (true) {\n // It is not recommended to utilize while true loops in most cases.\n yield ++count;\n// Instances\nconst counter1 = rawCounter();\nconst counter2 = dynamicCounter();\n// Implementation\n// ...infinitely\nJavaScript can export and import from modules:\nExport example:\n/* mymodule.js */\n// This function remains private, as it is not exported\nlet sum = (a, b) =&gt; {\n return a + b;\n// Export variables\nexport let name = 'Alice';\nexport let age = 23;\n// Export named functions\nexport function add(num1, num2) {\n return num1 + num2;\n// Export class\nexport class Multiplication {\n constructor(num1, num2) {\n this.num1 = num1;\n this.num2 = num2;\n add() {\n return sum(this.num1, this.num2);\nImport example:\n// Import one property\nimport { add } from './mymodule.js';\nconsole.log(add(1, 2));\n//&gt; 3\n// Import multiple properties\nimport { name, age } from './mymodule.js';\nconsole.log(name, age);\n//&gt; \"Alice\", 23\n// Import all properties from a module\nimport * from './module.js'\nconsole.log(name, age);\n//&gt; \"Alice\", 23\nconsole.log(add(1,2));\n//&gt; 3\nMore advanced example.\nThis sample code displays various JavaScript features.\n/* Finds the lowest common multiple (LCM) of two numbers */\nfunction LCMCalculator(x, y) { // constructor function\n if (isNaN(x*y)) throw new TypeError(\"Non-numeric arguments not allowed.\");\n const checkInt = function(x) { // inner function\n if (x % 1 !== 0)\n throw new TypeError(x + \"is not an integer\");\n return x;\n this.a = checkInt(x)\n // semicolons ^^^^ are optional, a newline is enough\n this.b = checkInt(y);\n// The prototype of object instances created by a constructor is\n// that constructor's \"prototype\" property.\nLCMCalculator.prototype = { // object literal\n constructor: LCMCalculator, // when reassigning a prototype, set the constructor property appropriately\n gcd: function() { // method that calculates the greatest common divisor\n // Euclidean algorithm:\n let a = Math.abs(this.a), b = Math.abs(this.b), t;\n if (a &lt; b) {\n // swap variables\n // t = b; b = a; a = t;\n [a, b] = [b, a]; // swap using destructuring assignment (ES6)\n while (b !== 0) {\n t = b;\n b = a % b;\n a = t;\n // Only need to calculate GCD once, so \"redefine\" this method.\n // (Actually not redefinition\u2014it's defined on the instance itself,\n // so that this.gcd refers to this \"redefinition\" instead of LCMCalculator.prototype.gcd.\n // Note that this leads to a wrong result if the LCMCalculator object members \"a\" and/or \"b\" are altered afterwards.)\n // Also, 'gcd' === \"gcd\", this['gcd'] === this.gcd\n this['gcd'] = function() {\n return a;\n return a;\n // Object property names can be specified by strings delimited by double (\") or single (') quotes.\n \"lcm\": function() {\n // Variable names do not collide with object properties, e.g., |lcm| is not |this.lcm|.\n // not using |this.a*this.b| to avoid FP precision issues\n let lcm = this.a / this.gcd() * this.b;\n // Only need to calculate lcm once, so \"redefine\" this method.\n this.lcm = function() {\n return lcm;\n return lcm;\n // Methods can also be declared using ES6 syntax\n toString() {\n // Using both ES6 template literals and the (+) operator to concatenate values\n return `LCMCalculator: a = ${this.a}, b = ` + this.b;\n};\n// Define generic output function; this implementation only works for Web browsers\nfunction output(x) {\n document.body.appendChild(document.createTextNode(x));\n document.body.appendChild(document.createElement('br'));\n// Note: Array's map() and forEach() are defined in JavaScript 1.6.\n// They are used here to demonstrate JavaScript's inherent functional nature.\n [25, 55],\n [21, 56],\n [22, 58],\n [28, 56]\n].map(function(pair) { // array literal + mapping function\n return new LCMCalculator(pair[0], pair[1]);\n}).sort((a, b) =&gt; a.lcm() - b.lcm()) // sort with this comparative function; =&gt; is a shorthand form of a function, called \"arrow function\"\n .forEach(printResult);\nfunction printResult(obj) {\n output(obj + \", gcd = \" + obj.gcd() + \", lcm = \" + obj.lcm());\nThe following output should be displayed in the browser window.\nLCMCalculator: a = 28, b = 56, gcd = 28, lcm = 56\nLCMCalculator: a = 21, b = 56, gcd = 7, lcm = 168\nLCMCalculator: a = 25, b = 55, gcd = 5, lcm = 275\nLCMCalculator: a = 22, b = 58, gcd = 2, lcm = 638\nSecurity.\nJavaScript and the DOM provide the potential for malicious authors to deliver scripts to run on a client computer via the Web. Browser authors minimize this risk using two restrictions. First, scripts run in a sandbox in which they can only perform Web-related actions, not general-purpose programming tasks like creating files. Second, scripts are constrained by the same-origin policy: scripts from one Website do not have access to information such as usernames, passwords, or cookies sent to another site. Most JavaScript-related security bugs are breaches of either the same origin policy or the sandbox.\nThere are subsets of general JavaScript\u2014ADsafe, Secure ECMAScript (SES)\u2014that provide greater levels of security, especially on code created by third parties (such as advertisements). Closure Toolkit is another project for safe embedding and isolation of third-party JavaScript and HTML.\nContent Security Policy is the main intended method of ensuring that only trusted code is executed on a Web page.\nCross-site vulnerabilities.\nA common JavaScript-related security problem is cross-site scripting (XSS), a violation of the same-origin policy. XSS vulnerabilities occur when an attacker can cause a target Website, such as an online banking website, to include a malicious script in the webpage presented to a victim. The script in this example can then access the banking application with the privileges of the victim, potentially disclosing secret information or transferring money without the victim's authorization. A solution to XSS vulnerabilities is to use \"HTML escaping\" whenever displaying untrusted data.\nSome browsers include partial protection against \"reflected\" XSS attacks, in which the attacker provides a URL including malicious script. However, even users of those browsers are vulnerable to other XSS attacks, such as those where the malicious code is stored in a database. Only correct design of Web applications on the server-side can fully prevent XSS.\nXSS vulnerabilities can also occur because of implementation mistakes by browser authors.\nAnother cross-site vulnerability is cross-site request forgery (CSRF). In CSRF, code on an attacker's site tricks the victim's browser into taking actions the user did not intend at a target site (like transferring money at a bank). When target sites rely solely on cookies for request authentication, requests originating from code on the attacker's site can carry the same valid login credentials of the initiating user. In general, the solution to CSRF is to require an authentication value in a hidden form field, and not only in the cookies, to authenticate any request that might have lasting effects. Checking the HTTP Referrer header can also help.\n\"JavaScript hijacking\" is a type of CSRF attack in which a codice_42 tag on an attacker's site exploits a page on the victim's site that returns private information such as JSON or JavaScript. Possible solutions include:\nMisplaced trust in the client.\nDevelopers of client-server applications must recognize that untrusted clients may be under the control of attackers. The application author cannot assume that their JavaScript code will run as intended (or at all) because any secret embedded in the code could be extracted by a determined adversary. Some implications are:\nMisplaced trust in developers.\nPackage management systems such as npm and Bower are popular with JavaScript developers. Such systems allow a developer to easily manage their program's dependencies upon other developers' program libraries. Developers trust that the maintainers of the libraries will keep them secure and up to date, but that is not always the case. A vulnerability has emerged because of this blind trust. Relied-upon libraries can have new releases that cause bugs or vulnerabilities to appear in all programs that rely upon the libraries. Inversely, a library can go unpatched with known vulnerabilities out in the wild. In a study done looking over a sample of 133,000 websites, researchers found 37% of the websites included a library with at least one known vulnerability. \"The median lag between the oldest library version used on each website and the newest available version of that library is 1,177 days in ALEXA, and development of some libraries still in active use ceased years ago.\" Another possibility is that the maintainer of a library may remove the library entirely. This occurred in March 2016 when Azer Ko\u00e7ulu removed his repository from npm. This caused tens of thousands of programs and websites depending upon his libraries to break.\nBrowser and plugin coding errors.\nJavaScript provides an interface to a wide range of browser capabilities, some of which may have flaws such as buffer overflows. These flaws can allow attackers to write scripts that would run any code they wish on the user's system. This code is not by any means limited to another JavaScript application. For example, a buffer overrun exploit can allow an attacker to gain access to the operating system's API with superuser privileges.\nThese flaws have affected major browsers including Firefox, Internet Explorer, and Safari.\nPlugins, such as video players, Adobe Flash, and the wide range of ActiveX controls enabled by default in Microsoft Internet Explorer, may also have flaws exploitable via JavaScript (such flaws have been exploited in the past).\nIn Windows Vista, Microsoft has attempted to contain the risks of bugs such as buffer overflows by running the Internet Explorer process with limited privileges. Google Chrome similarly confines its page renderers to their own \"sandbox\".\nSandbox implementation errors.\nWeb browsers are capable of running JavaScript outside the sandbox, with the privileges necessary to, for example, create or delete files. Such privileges are not intended to be granted to code from the Web.\nIncorrectly granting privileges to JavaScript from the Web has played a role in vulnerabilities in both Internet Explorer and Firefox. In Windows XP Service Pack 2, Microsoft demoted JScript's privileges in Internet Explorer.\nMicrosoft Windows allows JavaScript source files on a computer's hard drive to be launched as general-purpose, non-sandboxed programs (see: Windows Script Host). This makes JavaScript (like VBScript) a theoretically viable vector for a Trojan horse, although JavaScript Trojan horses are uncommon in practice.\nHardware vulnerabilities.\nIn 2015, a JavaScript-based proof-of-concept implementation of a rowhammer attack was described in a paper by security researchers.\nIn 2017, a JavaScript-based attack via browser was demonstrated that could bypass ASLR. It is called \"ASLR\u2295Cache\" or AnC.\nIn 2018, the paper that announced the Spectre attacks against Speculative Execution in Intel and other processors included a JavaScript implementation.\nDevelopment tools.\nImportant tools have evolved with the language.\nRelated technologies.\nJava.\nA common misconception is that JavaScript is the same as Java. Both indeed have a C-like syntax (the C language being their most immediate common ancestor language). They are also typically sandboxed (when used inside a browser), and JavaScript was designed with Java's syntax and standard library in mind. In particular, all Java keywords were reserved in original JavaScript, JavaScript's standard library follows Java's naming conventions, and JavaScript's and objects are based on classes from Java 1.0.\nJava and JavaScript both first appeared in 1995, but Java was developed by James Gosling of Sun Microsystems and JavaScript by Brendan Eich of Netscape Communications.\nThe differences between the two languages are more prominent than their similarities. Java has static typing, while JavaScript's typing is dynamic. Java is loaded from compiled bytecode, while JavaScript is loaded as human-readable source code. Java's objects are class-based, while JavaScript's are prototype-based. Finally, Java did not support functional programming until Java 8, while JavaScript has done so from the beginning, being influenced by Scheme.\nJSON.\nJSON, or JavaScript Object Notation, is a general-purpose data interchange format that is defined as a subset of JavaScript's object literal syntax.\nTypeScript.\nTypeScript (TS) is a strictly-typed variant of JavaScript. TS differs by introducing type annotations to variables and functions, and introducing a type language to describe the types within JS. Otherwise TS shares much the same featureset as JS, to allow it to be easily transpiled to JS for running client-side, and to interoperate with other JS code.\nWebAssembly.\nSince 2017, web browsers have supported WebAssembly, a binary format that enables a JavaScript engine to execute performance-critical portions of web page scripts close to native speed. WebAssembly code runs in the same sandbox as regular JavaScript code.\nasm.js is a subset of JavaScript that served as the forerunner of WebAssembly.\nTranspilers.\nJavaScript is the dominant client-side language of the Web, and many websites are script-heavy. Thus transpilers have been created to convert code written in other languages, which can aid the development process.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9846", "revid": "27158663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9846", "title": "Elbing (disambiguation)", "text": "Elbing is the German name of Elbl\u0105g, a city in northern Poland which until 1945 was a German city in the province of East Prussia.\nElbing may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9847", "revid": "176858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9847", "title": "Elbing/Elblag", "text": ""}
{"id": "9848", "revid": "385115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9848", "title": "Elbing/Truso", "text": ""}
{"id": "9854", "revid": "7646666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9854", "title": "Estonia disaster", "text": ""}
{"id": "9855", "revid": "1157637944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9855", "title": "Exile", "text": "Event by which a person is forced away from home\nExile is primarily penal expulsion from one's native country, and secondarily expatriation or prolonged absence from one's homeland under either the compulsion of circumstance or the rigors of some high purpose. Usually persons and peoples suffer exile, but sometimes social entities like institutions (e.g. the papacy or a government) are forced from their homeland.\nIn Roman law, \"exsilium\" denoted both voluntary exile and banishment as a capital punishment alternative to death. Deportation was forced exile, and entailed the lifelong loss of citizenship and property. Relegation was a milder form of deportation, which preserved the subject's citizenship and property.\nThe term diaspora describes group exile, both voluntary and forced. \"Government in exile\" describes a government of a country that has relocated and argues its legitimacy from outside that country. Voluntary exile is often depicted as a form of protest by the person who claims it, to avoid persecution and prosecution (such as tax or criminal allegations), an act of shame or repentance, or isolating oneself to be able to devote time to a particular pursuit.\nArticle 9 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that \"No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.\"\nFor individuals.\nExiled heads of state.\nIn some cases the deposed head of state is allowed to go into exile following a coup or other change of government, allowing a more peaceful transition to take place or to escape justice.\nAvoiding tax or legal matters.\nA wealthy citizen who moves to a jurisdiction with lower taxes is termed a \"tax exile\". Creative people such as authors and musicians who achieve sudden wealth sometimes choose this. Examples include the British-Canadian writer Arthur Hailey, who moved to the Bahamas to avoid taxes following the runaway success of his novels \"Hotel\" and \"Airport\", and the English rock band the Rolling Stones who, in the spring of 1971, owed more in taxes than they could pay and left Britain before the government could seize their assets. Members of the band all moved to France for a period of time where they recorded music for the album that came to be called \"Exile on Main Street\", the Main Street of the title referring to the French Riviera. In 2012, Eduardo Saverin, one of the founders of Facebook, made headlines by renouncing his U.S. citizenship before his company's IPO. The dual Brazilian/U.S. citizen's decision to move to Singapore and renounce his citizenship spurred a bill in the U.S. Senate, the Ex-PATRIOT Act, which would have forced such wealthy \"tax exiles\" to pay a special tax in order to re-enter the United States.\nIn some cases a person voluntarily lives in exile to avoid legal issues, such as litigation or criminal prosecution. An example of this is Asil Nadir, who fled to the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus for 17 years rather than face prosecution in connection with the failed \u00a31.7 bn company Polly Peck in the United Kingdom.\nAvoiding violence or persecution, or in the aftermath of war.\nExamples include:\nEuphemism for convict.\nExile, government man and assigned servant were all euphemisms used in the 19th century for convicts under sentence who had been transported from Britain to Australia.\nFor groups, nations and governments.\nComfortable exile.\nComfortable exile is an alternative theory recently developed by anthropologist Binesh Balan in 2018. According to him, comfortable exile is a \"social exile of people who have been excluded from the mainstream society. Such people are considered 'aliens' or internal 'others' on the grounds of their religious, racial, ethnic, linguistic or caste-based identity and therefore they migrate to a comfortable space elsewhere after having risked their lives to restore representation, identity and civil rights in their own country and often capture a comfortable identity to being part of a dominant religion, society or culture.\"\nNation in exile.\nWhen a large group, or occasionally a whole people or nation is exiled, it can be said that this nation is in exile, or \"diaspora\". Nations that have been in exile for substantial periods include the Jews, who were deported by Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar II in 586 BC and again following the destruction of the second Temple in Jerusalem in AD 70. Many Jewish prayers include a yearning to return to Jerusalem and the Jewish homeland.\nAfter the partitions of Poland in the late 18th century, and following the uprisings (like Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising, November Uprising and January Uprising) against the partitioning powers (Russia, Prussia and Austria), many Poles have chosen\u00a0\u2013 or been forced\u00a0\u2013 to go into exile, forming large diasporas (known as Polonia), especially in France and the United States. The entire population of Crimean Tatars (numbering 200,000 in all) that remained in their homeland of Crimea was exiled on 18 May 1944 to Central Asia as a form of ethnic cleansing and collective punishment on false accusations.\nSince the Cuban Revolution, over a million Cubans have left Cuba. Most of these self-identified as exiles as their motivation for leaving the island is political in nature. At the time of the Cuban Revolution, Cuba only had a population of 6.5\u00a0million, and was not a country that had a history of significant emigration, it being the sixth largest recipient of immigrants in the world as of 1958. Most of the exiles' children also consider themselves to be Cuban exiles. Under Cuban law, children of Cubans born abroad are considered Cuban citizens.\nGovernment in exile.\nDuring a foreign occupation or after a coup d'\u00e9tat, a \"government in exile\" of a such afflicted country may be established abroad. One of the most well-known instances of this is the Polish government-in-exile, a government in exile that commanded Polish armed forces operating outside Poland after German occupation during World War II. Other examples include the Free French Forces government of Charles de Gaulle of the same time, and the Central Tibetan Administration, commonly known as the Tibetan government-in-exile, and headed by the 14th Dalai Lama.\nFor inanimate objects.\nIvan the Terrible once exiled to Siberia an inanimate object: a bell. \"When the inhabitants of the town of Uglich rang their bell to rally a demonstration against Ivan the Terrible, the cruel Czar executed two hundred (nobles), and exiled the Uglich bell to Siberia, where it remained for two hundred years.\"\nIn popular culture.\nDrama.\nExile is an early motif in ancient Greek tragedy. In the ancient Greek world, this was seen as a fate worse than death. The motif reaches its peak on the play \"Medea\", written by Euripides in the fifth century BC, and rooted in the very old oral traditions of Greek mythology. Euripides' \"Medea\" has remained the most frequently performed Greek tragedy through the 20th century.\nArt.\nAfter Medea was abandoned by Jason and had become a murderess out of revenge, she fled to Athens and married king Aigeus there, and became the stepmother of the hero Theseus. Due to a conflict with him, she must leave the Polis and go away into exile. John William Waterhouse (1849\u20131917), the English Pre-Raphaelite painter's famous picture \"Jason and Medea\" shows a key moment before, when Medea tries to poison Theseus.\nLiterature.\nIn ancient Rome, the Roman Senate had the power to declare the exile to individuals, families or even entire regions. One of the Roman victims was the poet Ovid, who lived during the reign of Augustus. He was forced to leave Rome and move away to the city of Tomis on the Black Sea, now Constanta. There he wrote his famous work \"Tristia\" (Sorrows) about his bitter feelings in exile.\nAnother, at least in a temporary exile, was Dante.\nThe German-language writer Franz Kafka described the exile of Karl Rossmann in the posthumously published novel \"Amerika\".\nDuring the period of National Socialism in the first few years after 1933, many Jews, as well as a significant number of German artists and intellectuals fled into exile; for instance, the authors Klaus Mann and Anna Seghers. So Germany's own exile literature emerged and received worldwide credit. Klaus Mann finished his novel \"Der Vulkan\" (\"The Volcano. A Novel Among Emigrants\") in 1939 describing the German exile scene, \"to bring the rich, scattered and murky experience of exile into epic form\", as he wrote in his literary balance sheet. At the same place and in the same year, Anna Seghers published her famous novel \"Das siebte Kreuz\" (\"The Seventh Cross\", published in the United States in 1942).\nImportant exile literatures in recent years include that of the Caribbean, many of whose artists emigrated to Europe or the United States for political or economic reasons. These writers include Nobel Prize winners V. S. Naipaul and Derek Walcott as well as the novelists Edwidge Danticat and Sam Selvon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "9857", "revid": "46116067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9857", "title": "Elbl\u0105g", "text": "City in Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship, Poland\nElbl\u0105g (] (); , Old Prussian: \"Elbings\") is a city in the Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship, Poland, located in the eastern edge of the \u017bu\u0142awy region with 117,390 inhabitants, as of December 2021. It is the capital of Elbl\u0105g County.\nElbl\u0105g is one of the oldest cities in the province. Its history dates back to 1237, when the Teutonic Order constructed their fortified stronghold on the banks of a nearby river. The castle subsequently served as the official seat of the Teutonic Order Masters.\nElbl\u0105g became part of the Hanseatic League, which contributed much to the city's wealth. Through the Hansa agreement, the city was linked to other major ports like Danzig (nowadays Gda\u0144sk), L\u00fcbeck and Amsterdam. Elbl\u0105g came under the sovereignty of the Kingdom of Poland in 1454 and after the defeat of the Teutonic Knights in the Thirteen Years\u2019 War was recognized as part of Poland in the Second Peace of Thorn in 1466. It then flourished and turned into a significant trading point, but its growth was eventually hindered by the Second Northern War and the Swedish Deluge.\nThe city was transferred to Prussia after the first partition of Poland in 1772. Its trading role greatly weakened, until the era of industrialization, which occurred in the 19th century. It was then that the famous Elbl\u0105g Canal was commissioned.\nAfter World War II the city again became part of Poland. The war casualties were catastrophic \u2013 especially the severe destruction of the Old Town district, one of the grandest in Prussia, as well as the expulsion of the local population. \nToday, Elbl\u0105g has over 120,000 inhabitants and is a \"vibrant city with an attractive tourist base\". It serves as an academic and financial center and among its numerous historic monuments is the Market Gate from 1309 and St. Nicholas Cathedral. Elbl\u0105g is also known for its archaeological sites, museums and the largest brewery in the country.\nThe Elbing Canal, built in 1825\u201344, is a tourist site of today's Elbl\u0105g. The canal is believed to be one of the most important monuments related to the history of engineering, and has been named one of the Seven Wonders of Poland. The canal was also named one of Poland's official national Historic Monuments (\"Pomnik historii\") in 2011. Its listing is maintained by the National Heritage Board of Poland.\nEtymology.\n\"Elbl\u0105g\" derives from the earlier German-language \"Elbing\", which is the name by which the Teutonic Knights knew both the river here and the citadel they established on its banks in 1237. The purpose of the citadel was to prevent the Old Prussian settlement of Truso from being reoccupied, the German crusaders being at war with the pagan Prussians. The citadel was named after the river, itself of uncertain etymology. One traditional etymology connects it to the name of the Helveconae, a Germanic tribe mentioned in Ancient Greek and Latin sources, but the etymology or language of the tribal name remains unknown. The oldest known mention of the river or town Elbl\u0105g is in the form \"Ylfing\" in the report of a sailor Wulfstan from the end of the 9th century, in \"\" which was written in Anglo-Saxon in King Alfred's reign.\nModern city.\nThe city was almost completely destroyed at the end of World War II. Parts of the inner city were gradually rebuilt under the new Polish administration, and around 2000 rebuilding was begun in a style emulating the previous architecture, in many cases over the same foundations and utilizing old bricks and portions of the same walls. The western suburbs of the old city have not been reconstructed.\nThe modern city adjoins about half the length of the river between Lake Dru\u017cno and Elbl\u0105g Bay (\"Zatoka Elbl\u0105ska\", an arm of the Vistula Lagoon), and spreads out on both banks, though mainly on the eastern side. To the east is the Elbl\u0105g Upland (\"Wysoczyzna Elbl\u0105ska\"), a dome pushed up by glacial compression, 390\u00a0km2 in diameter and high at its greatest elevation.\nViews to the west show flat fields extending to the horizon; this part of the Vistula Delta (\"\u017bu\u0142awy Wi\u015blane\") is used mainly for agricultural purposes. To the south are the marshes and swamps of Dru\u017cno. The Elbl\u0105g River has been left in a more natural state through the city, but elsewhere it is a controlled channel with branches. One of them, the Jagiellonski Channel (\"Kana\u0142 Jagiello\u0144ski\"), leads to the Nogat River, along which navigation to Gda\u0144sk is common. The Elbl\u0105g Canal (\"Kana\u0142 Elbl\u0105ski\") connecting Lake Dru\u017cno with Drw\u0119ca River and Lake Jeziorak is a tourist site.\nElbl\u0105g is not a deep-water port. The draft of vessels using its waterways must be no greater than by law. The turning area at Elbl\u0105g is diameter and a pilot is required for large vessels. Deep water vessels cannot manoeuvre; in that sense, Elbl\u0105g has become a subsidiary port of Gda\u0144sk. Traffic of smaller vessels at Elbl\u0105g is within the river and very marginal, while larger vessels cannot reach the open Baltic Sea because the channel has belonged to Russia since 1945. As of September 17, the construction of Vistula Spit canal on Polish territory has been completed. The city features three quay complexes, movable cranes, and railways.\nGeography.\nGeographical location.\nElbl\u0105g is located about south-east of Gda\u0144sk and south-west of Kaliningrad, Russia.\nThe city is a port on the river Elbl\u0105g, which flows into the Vistula Lagoon about to the north, thus giving the city access to the Baltic Sea via the Russian-controlled Strait of Baltiysk. The Old Town () is located on the river Elbl\u0105g connecting Lake Dru\u017cno to the Vistula Lagoon, about from the lagoon and from Gda\u0144sk.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Elbl\u0105g is an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\") closely bordering on a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\"), owing to its position of the Baltic Sea, which moderates the temperatures, compared to the interior of Poland. The climate is cool throughout the year and there is a somewhat uniform precipitation throughout the year. Typical of Northern Europe, there is little sunshine during the year.\nHistory.\nTruso.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n\u00a0Teutonic Order 1246\u20131454&lt;br&gt;\n Kingdom of Poland 1454\u20131569&lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth 1569\u20131772&lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0Kingdom of Prussia 1772\u20131871&lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0German Empire 1871\u20131918&lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0Weimar Germany 1918\u20131933&lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0Nazi Germany 1933\u20131945 &lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0People's Republic of Poland 1945\u20131989&lt;br&gt;\n\u00a0Republic of Poland 1989\u2013present\nThe settlement was first mentioned as \"Ilfing\" in \"\", an Anglo-Saxon chronicle written in King Alfred's reign using information from a Viking who had visited the area.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the Viking settlement of Truso was located on Lake Dru\u017cno, near the current site of Elbl\u0105g in historical Pogesania; the settlement burned down in the 10th century. Early in the 13th century the Teutonic Knights conquered the region, built a castle, and founded Elbing on the lake, with a population mostly from L\u00fcbeck (today the lake, now much smaller, no longer reaches the city). After the uprising against the Teutonic Knights and the destruction of the castle by the inhabitants, the city successively came under the sovereignty of the Kingdom of Poland (1454), the Kingdom of Prussia (1772), and Germany (1871). Elbing was heavily damaged in World War II, and its remaining German citizens were expelled upon the war's end in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement. The city became again part of Poland in 1945 and was repopulated with Polish citizens.\nThe seaport of Truso was first mentioned ca. 890 by Wulfstan of Hedeby, an Anglo-Saxon sailor, travelling on the south coast of the Baltic Sea at the behest of King Alfred the Great of England. The exact location of Truso was not known for a long time, as the seashore has significantly changed, but most historians trace the settlement inside or near to modern Elbl\u0105g on Lake Dru\u017cno. Truso was located at territory already known to the Roman Empire and earlier.\nIt was an important seaport serving the Vistula River bay on the early medieval Baltic Sea trade routes which led from Birka in the north to the island of Gotland and to Visby in the Baltic Sea. From there, traders continued further south to Carnuntum along the Amber Road. The ancient Amber Road led further southwest and southeast to the Black Sea and eventually to Asia. The east\u2013west trade route went from Truso, along the Baltic Sea to Jutland, and from there inland by river to Hedeby, a large trading center in Jutland. The main goods of Truso were amber, furs, and slaves.\nArchaeological finds in 1897 and diggings in the 1920s placed Truso at Gut Hansdorf. A large burial field was also found at Elbl\u0105g. Recent Polish diggings have found burned beams and ashes and thousand-year-old artifacts in an area of about 20 hectares. Many of these artifacts are now displayed at the Muzeum w Elbl\u0105gu.\nPrussian Crusade.\nAttempts to conquer Prussian land began in 997, when Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, at the urging of the Pope, sent a contingent of soldiers and a missionary (Adalbert of Prague) to the pagan Prussians, a non-Slavic people, on a crusade of conquest and conversion. The crusade encompassed much of the Baltic Sea coast east of the Polish city of Gda\u0144sk, up to Sambia. Starting in 1209 additional crusades were called for by Konrad of Masovia, who mainly sought to conquer Prussian territory, rather than actually convert the indigenous Prussians. Despite heroic efforts, Old Prussian sovereignty would eventually collapse after a succession of wars instigated by Pope Honorius III and his frequent calls for crusade.\nBefore the Prussians were finally brought to heel, Polish rulers and the Duchy of Masovia, both by then Christianised peoples, would be continually frustrated in their attempts at northern expansion. Aside from minor border raids, major campaigns against the Prussians would be launched in 1219, 1220, and 1222. After a particularly sound defeat by Prussian forces in 1223, Polish forces in Che\u0142mno, the seat of Christian of Oliva and the Duchy of Masovia, were forced onto the defensive.\nIn 1226 Duke Konrad I of Masovia summoned the Teutonic Knights for assistance; by 1230 they had secured Che\u0142mno (Culm) and begun claiming conquered territories for themselves under the authority of the Holy Roman Empire, although these claims were rejected by the Poles, whose ambition had been to conquer Prussia all along. The Teutonic Order's strategy was to move down the Vistula and secure the delta, establishing a barrier between the Prussians and Gda\u0144sk. The victorious Teutonic Knights built a castle at Elbing.\nThe Chronicon terrae Prussiae describes the conflict in the vicinity of Lake Dru\u017cno shortly before the founding of Elbing:\n\"All the little redoubts that they had in that place, which are said to be (list) ... and around the Drusine marsh ... he (frater Hermannus magister) assaulted and levelled by rendering them into ash, after the infidels had been killed or captured.\"\nTruso did not disappear suddenly to be replaced with the citadel and town of Elbing during the Prussian Crusade. It had already burned down in the tenth century, with the population dispersed in the area.\nTeutonic Order.\nThe Chronicon terrae Prussiae describes the founding of Elbing under the leadership of Hermann Balk. After building two ships, the Pilgerim (Pilgrim) and the Vridelant (Friedland), with the assistance of Margrave Henry III of Margraviate of Meissen, the Teutonic Knights used them to clear the Vistula Lagoon (\"Frisches Haff\") and the Vistula Spit of Prussians:\n... \"and the Vistula Spit was purged of the insult of the infidels...\"\nApparently the river was in Pomesania, which the knights had just finished clearing, but the bay was in Pogesania. The first Elbing was placed in Pogesania:\n\"The master ... came to the region of Pogesania, to that island which is in the middle of the Elbing river, in that place where the Elbing enters the Vistula Lagoon, and built there a fort, which he called by the name of the Elbing River, in the year of the incarnation of the Lord, 1237. Others report that the same fort was attacked by the infidels and then was moved to the place where it is now situated, and the city gathered around it.\"\nBoth landings were amphibious operations conducted from the ships. The \"Chronicon\" relates that they were in use for many years and then were sunk in Lake Dru\u017cno. In 1238 the Dominican Order was invited to build a monastery on a grant of land. Pomesania was not secured, however, and from 1240 to 1242 the order began building a brick castle on the south side of the settlement. It may be significant that Elbing's first industry was the same as Truso's had been: manufacture of amber and bone artifacts for export. In 1243 William of Modena created the Diocese of Pomesania and three others. They were at first only ideological constructs, but the tides of time turned them into reality in that same century.\nThe foundation of Elbing was perhaps not the end of the Old Prussian story in the region. In 1825 a manuscript listing a vocabulary of the Baltic Old Prussian language, named the Elbing-Prussian Dictionary (), or more commonly in English just Elbing Vocabulary, was found among some manuscripts from a merchant's house. It contained 802 words in a dialect now termed Pomesanian with their equivalents in an early form of German.\nThe origin of the vocabulary remains unknown. Its format is like that of modern travel dictionaries; i.e., it may have been used by German speakers to communicate with Old Prussians, but the specific circumstances are only speculative. The manuscript became the Codex Neumannianus. It disappeared after a British bombing raid destroyed the library at Elbing but before then facsimiles had been made. The date of the MSS was estimated at ca. 1400, but it was a copy. There is no evidence concerning the provenance of the original, except that it must have been in Pomesanian.\nIn 1246 the town was granted a constitution under L\u00fcbeck law, used in maritime circumstances, instead of Magdeburg rights common in other cities in Central Europe. This decision of the Order was in keeping with its general strategy of espousing the trade association that in 1358 would become the Hanseatic League. The Order seized on this association early and used it to establish bases throughout the Baltic. The Order's involvement in the League was somewhat contradictory. In whatever cities they founded the ultimate authority was the commander of the town, who kept office in the citadel, typically used as a prison. L\u00fcbeck law, on the other hand, provided for self-government of the town.\nMembership in the Hanseatic League meant having important trading contacts with England, Flanders, France, and the Netherlands. The city received numerous merchant privileges from the rulers of England, Poland, Pomerania, and the Teutonic Order. For instance, the privilege of the Old Town was upgraded in 1343, while in 1393 it was granted an emporium privilege for grains, metals, and forest products.\nExcept for the citadel and churches, Elbing at the time was more of a small village by modern standards. Its area was . It featured a wharf, a marketplace and five streets, as well as a number of churches. The castle was completed in 1251. In 1288 fire destroyed the entire settlement except for the churches, which were of brick. A new circuit wall was started immediately. From 1315 to 1340 Elbl\u0105g was rebuilt. A separate settlement called New Town was founded ca. 1337 and received L\u00fcbeck rights in 1347. In 1349 the Black Death struck the town, toward the end of the European plague. After the population recovered it continued building up the city and in 1364 a crane was built for the port.\nThe German-language \"Elbinger Rechtsbuch\", written in Elbing documented among other laws for the first time Polish common law. The German-language Polish laws are based on the Sachsenspiegel and were written down to aid the judges. It is thus the oldest source for documented Polish common law and is in Polish referred to as the \"Ksi\u0119ga Elbl\u0105ska\" (Book of Elbl\u0105g). It was written down in the second half of the 13th century.\nIn 1410, during the Polish\u2013Lithuanian\u2013Teutonic War, the inhabitants of the city rebelled against the Teutonic Knights and expelled them, while welcoming Polish troops and paying homage to Polish King W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o, who afterwards vested Elbl\u0105g with new privileges. As the castle was lightly defended by a Polish garrison, the Teutonic Knights managed to retake it, promising the Polish defenders that they will be given free passage back to Poland. After the castle was taken, the Knights broke their promise and subsequently murdered a number of the captured defenders while imprisoning the rest.\nKingdom of Poland.\nIn February 1440, the city hosted a convention at which delegates from various cities (including Elbing itself) and nobility from the region decided to establish the anti-Teutonic Prussian Confederation. In April and May 1440, further meetings were held in Elbing, at which more towns and noblemen joined the organisation. In 1454, the organisation led the revolt against the rule of the Teutonic Knights, and then its delegation submitted a petition to King Casimir IV of Poland asking him to include the region within the Kingdom of Poland. The King agreed and signed the act of incorporation of the region (including Elbing) to the Kingdom of Poland in March 1454 in Krak\u00f3w, which sparked the Thirteen Years' War, the longest of all Polish\u2013Teutonic wars. The local mayor pledged allegiance to the Polish King during the incorporation in March 1454, and the burghers of Elbl\u0105g recognized Casimir IV as rightful ruler. After paying homage to the King, the city was granted great privileges, similar to those of Toru\u0144 and Gda\u0144sk. Since 1454, the city was authorized by King Casimir IV to mint Polish coins. The war ended in a Polish victory in 1466, with the Second Peace of Thorn, in which the Teutonic Order renounced any claims to the city and recognised it as part of Poland.\nWithin the Kingdom of Poland, the city was administratively part of the Malbork Voivodeship in the newly established autonomous province of Royal Prussia, later also within the larger Greater Poland Province. The city was known to the Polish crown by its Polish name Elbl\u0105g, and to its inhabitants as Elbing. With the creation of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1569, the city was brought under direct control of the Polish crown. As one of the largest and most influential cities of Poland, it enjoyed voting rights during the royal election period in Poland.\nWith the 16th century Protestant Reformation the burghers became Lutherans and the first Lutheran Gymnasium was established in Elbl\u0105g in 1535.\nFrom 1579 Elbl\u0105g had close trade relations with England, to which the city accorded free trade. English, Scottish, and Irish merchants settled in the city. They formed the Scottish Reformed Church of Elbl\u0105g and became Elbl\u0105g citizens, aiding Lutheran Sweden in the Thirty Years' War. The rivalry of nearby Gda\u0144sk interrupted trading links several times. By 1618 Elbl\u0105g had left the Hanseatic League owing to its close business dealings with England.\nFamous inhabitants of the city at that time included native sons Hans von Bodeck and Samuel Hartlib. During the Thirty Years' War, Swedish Chancellor Axel Oxenstierna brought the Moravian Brethren refugee John Amos Comenius to Elbl\u0105g for six years (1642\u20131648). In 1642 Johann Stob\u00e4us, who composed with Johann Eccard, published the \" Preussische Fest-Lieder\", a number of evangelical Prussian songs. In 1646 the city recorder Daniel Barholz noted that the city council employed \"Bernsteindreher\", or \"Paternostermacher\", licensed and guilded amber craftsmen who worked on prayer beads, rosaries, and many other items made of amber. Members of the Barholz family became mayors and councillors.\nDuring the Thirty Years' War, the Vistula Lagoon was the main southern Baltic base of King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, who was hailed as the protector of the Protestants. By 1660 the Vistula Lagoon had gone to Elector Frederick William of Brandenburg-Prussia, but was returned in 1700.\nThe poet Christian Wernicke was born in 1661 in Elbl\u0105g, while Gottfried Achenwall became famous for his teachings in natural law and human rights law. In 1700\u20131710 it was occupied by Swedish troops. In 1709 it was besieged, taken by storm on February 2, 1710, by Russian troops with support of Prussian artillery. The city was handed over to Polish King Augustus II in 1712.\nThe Royal-Polish mathematician and cartographer Johann Friedrich Endersch completed a map of Warmia in 1755 and also made a copper etching of the galley named \"The City of Elbing\" .\nDuring the War of the Polish Succession in 1734, Elbl\u0105g was placed under military occupation by Russia and Saxony. The town came again under occupation by Russia from 1758 to 1762 during the Seven Years' War.\nKingdom of Prussia.\nDuring the First Partition of Poland in 1772 Elbl\u0105g was annexed by King Frederick the Great of the Kingdom of Prussia. Elbing became part of the newly established province of West Prussia in 1773. In the 1815 provincial reorganization following the Napoleonic Wars, Elbing and its hinterland were included within Regierungsbezirk Danzig in West Prussia.\nIn October and November 1831, various Polish infantry, cavalry and artillery units, engineer corps and sappers of the November Uprising stopped in the city and its environs on the way to their internment locations, whereas the general staff with Commander-in-Chief General Maciej Rybi\u0144ski and generals J\u00f3zef Bem, Marcin Klemensowski, Kazimierz Ma\u0142achowski, Ludwik Micha\u0142 Pac and Antoni Wroniecki was interned in the city. On December 22, 1831, the Prussian army attempted to pacify the Polish insurgents and launched a charge on the disarmed Poles, who resisted relocation, fearing deportation to the Russian Partition of Poland. Some insurgents eventually left partitioned Poland for the Great Emigration, including J\u00f3zef Bem, who was expelled by the Prussians in December 1831, and Maciej Rybi\u0144ski, who left the city in February 1832.\nElbing industrialized. In 1828 the first steamship was built by Ignatz Grunau. In 1837 Ferdinand Schichau started the Schichau-Werke company in Elbing as well as another shipyard in Danzig (Gda\u0144sk) later on. Schichau constructed the \"Borussia\", the first screw-vessel in Germany. Schichau-Werke built hydraulic machinery, ships, steam engines, and torpedoes. After the inauguration of the railway to K\u00f6nigsberg in 1853, Elbing's industry began to grow. Schichau worked together with his son-in-law Carl H. Zise, who continued the industrial complex after Schichau's death. Schichau erected large complexes for his many thousands of workers.\nGeorg Steenke, an engineer from K\u00f6nigsberg, connected Elbing near the Baltic Sea with the southern part of Prussia by building the Oberl\u00e4ndischer Kanal (Elbl\u0105g Canal).\nElbing became part of the Prussian-led German Empire in 1871 during the unification of Germany. As Elbing became an industrial city, the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) frequently received the majority of votes; in the 1912 Reichstag elections the SPD received 51% of the vote. After World War I, as most of the province of West Prussia was reintegrated with the reborn Polish Republic, Elbing was joined to the German province of East Prussia, and was separated from Weimar Germany by the so-called Polish Corridor.\nNazi Germany.\nDuring World War II, under Nazi Germany, a Nazi prison, a forced labour subcamp of the Stalag I-A POW camp, a forced labour subcamp of the Stalag XX-B POW camp, and three subcamps of the Stutthof concentration camp were operated in the city. The Germans also enslaved Poles as forced labour in the city. The Polish resistance was active and infiltrated the German arms industry. The prison and forced labour camps were closed and many of the German inhabitants forced to flee as the Soviet Red Army approached the city toward the end of the war. Laid under siege since January 23, 1945, about 65% of the city infrastructure was destroyed, including most of the historical city center. The town was captured by the Soviet Red Army during the night of February 9/10, 1945. During the first days of the siege most of the population of approximately 100,000 persons fled. After the end of war, in spring 1945, the region together with the city became again part of Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which stayed in power until the Fall of Communism in the 1980s, as a result of the Potsdam Conference. The area was settled by Poles after remaining Germans were either transferred or fled to Germany. As of 1 November 1945 16.838 Germans remained in the town.\nHistory after 1945.\nElbl\u0105g was part of the so-called Recovered Territories, from where the Germans were expelled, and out of the new inhabitants, 98% were Poles expelled from former eastern Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union. Parts of the damaged historical city center were completely demolished, with the bricks being used to rebuild Warsaw and Gda\u0144sk. The Communist authorities had originally planned that the Old Town, utterly destroyed during the fighting since January 23, 1945, would be built over with blocks of flats; however, economic difficulties thwarted this effort. Two churches were reconstructed and the remaining ruins of the old town were torn down in the 1960s.\nAlong with Tricity and Szczecin, Elbl\u0105g was the scene of the Polish 1970 protests. Since 1990 the German minority population has had a modest resurgence, with the Elbinger Deutsche Minderheit Organization counting around 450 members in 2000.\nRestoration of the Old Town began after 1989. Since the beginning of the restoration, an extensive archaeological programme has been carried out. Most of the city's heritage was destroyed during the construction of basements in the 19th century or during World War II, but the backyards and latrines of the houses remained largely unchanged, and have provided information on the city's history. In some instances, private investors have incorporated parts of preserved stonework into new architecture. By 2006, approximately 75% of the Old Town had been reconstructed.\nElbl\u0105g is also home to the Elbrewery, Poland's largest brewery, which belongs to the \u017bywiec Group (Heineken). The history of the Elblag Brewing Tradition dates back to 1309, when Teutonic Master Siegfried von Leuchtwangen granted brewing privileges to the city. The present brewery was founded in 1872 as the Elbinger Aktien-Brauerei. In the early 1900s, the brewery was the exclusive supplier of Pilsner beer to the court of German Emperor Wilhelm II.\nHistoric buildings.\nUntil World War II there were many Gothic, Renaissance and Baroque houses in Elbl\u0105g's Old Town; some of them are reconstructed. Other preserved buildings are:\nCulture.\nThe primary cultural institutions in Elbl\u0105g are the Archaeological and Historical Museum, the Cyprian Norwid Elbl\u0105g Library, the EL Gallery Art Center and the Aleksander Sewruk Theater. The museum presents many pieces of art and items of everyday use, including the only 15th century binoculars preserved in Europe.\nPolitics.\nConstituency.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Elbl\u0105g constituency.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2014 sister cities.\nElbl\u0105g is twinned with:\nFormer twin towns.\nOn 28 February 2022, Elbl\u0105g ended its partnership with the Russian cities of Kaliningrad and Baltiysk and the Belarusian city of Novogrudok as a response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and its active support by the Republic of Belarus.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9860", "revid": "31885086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9860", "title": "ESR", "text": "ESR may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9862", "revid": "25296459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9862", "title": "Europe of Democracies and Diversities", "text": "Europe of Democracies and Diversities (EDD) was an Eurosceptic political group with seats in the European Parliament between 1999 and 2004. Following the 2004 European elections, the group reformed as Independence/Democracy (IND/DEM).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9863", "revid": "424181", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9863", "title": "European Federation of Green Parties", "text": ""}
{"id": "9864", "revid": "17692702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9864", "title": "European Free Alliance", "text": "European political party\nThe European Free Alliance (EFA) is a European political party that consists of various regionalist, separatist and ethnic minority political parties in Europe. Member parties advocate either for full political independence and sovereignty, or some form of devolution or self-governance for their country or region. The alliance has generally limited its membership to progressive parties; therefore, only a fraction of European regionalist parties are members of the EFA.\nSince 1999, the EFA and the European Green Party (EGP) have joined forces within Greens\u2013European Free Alliance (Greens/EFA) group in the European Parliament, although some EFA members have joined other groups from time to time.\nThe EFA's youth wing is the European Free Alliance Youth (EFAY), founded in 2000.\nAs of 2021, four European regions are led by EFA politicians: Scotland with Humza Yousaf of the Scottish National Party, Flanders with Jan Jambon of the New Flemish Alliance, Corsica with Gilles Simeoni of For Corsica, and Catalonia with Pere Aragon\u00e8s of the Republican Left of Catalonia.\nHistory.\nRegionalists have long been represented in the European Parliament. In the 1979 election four regionalist parties obtained seats: the Scottish National Party (SNP), the Flemish People's Union (VU), the Brussels-based Democratic Front of Francophones (FDF) and the South Tyrolean People's Party (SVP). The SNP, although being predominantly social-democratic, joined the European Progressive Democrats, a conservative group led by the French Rally for the Republic. The VU and the FDF joined the heterogeneous Technical Group of Independents, while the SVP joined the European People's Party group.\nIn 1981 six parties (VU, the Frisian National Party, Independent Fianna F\u00e1il, the Party of German-speaking Belgians, the Party for the Organization of a Free Brittany and the Alsace-Lorraine National Association), plus three observers (the Union of the Corsican People, UPC, the Occitan Party and the Democratic Convergence of Catalonia, CDC), joined forces to form the European Free Alliance. Regionalist MEPs continued, however, to sit in different groups also after the 1984 election: the SNP in the Gaullist-dominated European Democratic Alliance; the VU, the Sardinian Action Party (PSd'Az) and Basque Solidarity (EA) in the Rainbow Group, together with Green parties; the SVP in the European People's Party group; the CDC with the Liberal Democrats; and Herri Batasuna among Non-Inscrits.\nOnly after the 1989 European Parliament election did EFA members form a united group, called Rainbow like its green predecessor. It consisted of three Italian MEPs (two for Lega Lombarda and one for the PSd'Az), two Spanish MEPs (one each for the PNV and the Andalusian Party, PA), one Belgian MEP (for VU), one French MEP (UPC), one British MEP (SNP) and one independent MEP from Ireland. They were joined by 4 MEPs from the Danish left-wing Eurosceptic People's Movement against the EU, while the other regionalist parties, including the SVP, Batasuna and the Convergence and Union of Catalonia (CiU) declined to join.\nIn the 1994 European Parliament election the regionalists lost many seats. Moreover, the EFA had suspended its major affiliate, Lega Nord, for having joined forces in government with the post-fascist National Alliance. Also, the PNV chose to switch to the European People's Party (EPP). The three remaining EFA MEPs (representing the SNP, the VU and the Canarian Coalition) formed a group with the French \"\u00c9nergie Radicale\" list and the Italian Pannella List: the European Radical Alliance.\nFollowing the 1999 European Parliament election, in which EFA parties did quite well, EFA elected MEPs formed a joint group with the European Green Party, under the name Greens\u2013European Free Alliance (Greens/EFA). In the event the EFA supplied ten members: two each from the Scottish SNP, the Welsh Plaid Cymru, and the Flemish VU, and one each from the Basque PNV and EA, the Andalusian PA and the Galician Nationalist Bloc (BNG).\nIn the 2004 European Parliament election, the EFA, which had formally become a European political party, was reduced to four MEPs: two from the SNP (Ian Hudghton and Alyn Smith), one from Plaid Cymru (Jill Evans) and one from the Republican Left of Catalonia (ERC; Bernat Joan i Mar\u00ed, replaced at the mid-term by MEP Mikel Irujo of the Basque EA). They were joined by two associate members: Tatjana \u017ddanoka of For Human Rights in United Latvia (PCTVL) and L\u00e1szl\u00f3 T\u0151k\u00e9s, an independent MEP and former member of the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania (UMDR). Co-operation between the EFA and the Greens continued.\nFollowing the 2008 revision of the EU Regulation that governs European political parties allowing the creation of European foundations affiliated to European political parties, the EFA established its official foundation/think tank, the Coppieters Foundation (CF), in September 2007.\nIn the 2009 European Parliament election, six MEPs were returned for the EFA: two from the SNP (Ian Hudghton and Alyn Smith), one from Plaid Cymru (Jill Evans), one from the Party of the Corsican Nation (PNC; Fran\u00e7ois Alfonsi), one from the ERC (Oriol Junqueras), and Tatjana \u017ddanoka, an individual member of the EFA from Latvia. After the election, the New Flemish Alliance (N-VA) also joined the EFA. The EFA subgroup thus counted seven MEPs.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election, EFA-affiliated parties returned twelve seats to the Parliament: four for the N-VA, two for the SNP, two for \"The Left for the Right to Decide\" (an electoral list primarily composed of the ERC), one for \"The Peoples Decide\" (an electoral list mainly comprising EH Bildu, a Basque coalition including EA), one for \"European Spring\" (an electoral list comprising the Valencian Nationalist Bloc, BNV, and the Aragonese Union, ChA), one from Plaid Cymru, and one from the Latvian Russian Union (LKS). Due to ideological divergences with the Flemish Greens, the N-VA defected to the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) group and the EH Bildu MEP joined the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left (GUE/NGL) group. Thus, EFA had seven members in the Greens/EFA group and four within ECR.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election the EFA gained a fourth seat in the United Kingdom, due to the SNP gaining a third seat to add to Plaid's one. However, the EFA suffered the loss of these seats in January 2020 due to Brexit, which meant SNP and PC MEPs had to leave.\nIdeology.\nIn the Brussels declaration of 2000 the EFA codified its political principles. The EFA stands for \"a Europe of Free Peoples based on the principle of subsidiarity, which believe in solidarity with each other and the peoples of the world.\" The EFA sees itself as an alliance of stateless peoples, striving towards recognition, autonomy, independence or wanting a proper voice in Europe. It supports European integration on basis of the subsidiarity-principle. It believes also that Europe should move away from further centralisation and works towards the formation of a \"Europe of regions\". It believes that regions should have more power in Europe, for instance participating in the Council of the European Union, when matters within their competence are discussed. It also wants to protect the linguistic and cultural diversity within the EU.\nThe EFA broadly stands on the left wing of the political spectrum. EFA members are generally progressive, although there are some notable exceptions as the conservative New Flemish Alliance, Bavaria Party, Democratic Party of Artsakh, Schleswig Party and Future of \u00c5land, the Christian-democratic Slovene Union, the centre-right Liga Veneta Repubblica, the far-right South Tyrolean Freedom and Hungarian People's Party of Transylvania which is said to be close to Fidesz.\nOrganisation.\nThe main organs of the EFA organisation are the General Assembly, the Bureau and the Secretariat.\nGeneral Assembly.\nIn the General Assembly, the supreme council of the EFA, every member party has one vote.\nBureau and Secretariat.\nThe Bureau takes care of daily affairs. It is chaired by Lorena Lopez de Lacalle (Basque Solidarity), president of the EFA, while Jordi Sol\u00e9 (Republican Left of Catalonia) is secretary-general and Anke Spoorendonk (South Schleswig Voters' Association) treasurer.\nThe Bureau is completed by ten vice-presidents: Peggy Eriksson (Future of \u00c5land), Jill Evans (Plaid Cymru), Fernando Fuente Cortina (More\u2014Commitment), David Grosclaude (Occitan Party), Wouter Patho (New Flemish Alliance), Frank de Boer (Frisian National Party), Patrik Pero\u0161a (The Olive Tree \u2013 Slovene Istria Party) and Livia Ceccaldi-Volpei (Femu \u00e0 Corsica).\nMember parties.\nBefore becoming a member party, an organisation needs to have been an observer of the EFA for at least one year. Only one member party per region is allowed. If a second party from a region wants to join the EFA, the first party needs to agree, at which point these two parties will then form a common delegation with one vote. The EFA also recognises friends of the EFA, a special status for regionalist parties outside of the European Union.\nThe following is the list of EFA members and former members.\nFull members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9865", "revid": "17218984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9865", "title": "Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party", "text": "European political party\nThe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party (ALDE Party) is a European political party composed of 60 national-level parties from across Europe, mainly active in the European Union. The ALDE Party is affiliated with the Liberal International and a recognised European political party, incorporated as a non-profit association under Belgian law.\nIt was founded on 26 March 1976 in Stuttgart as a confederation of national political parties under the name \"Federation of Liberal and Democrat Parties in Europe\" and renamed \"European Liberals and Democrats\" (ELD) in 1977 and \"European Liberal Democrats and Reformists\" (ELDR) in 1986. On 30 April 2004, the ELDR was reformed as an official European party, the \"European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party\" (ELDR Party).\nOn 10 November 2012, the party chose its current name of ALDE Party, taken from its then-European Parliament group, the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE), which had been formed on 20 July 2004 in conjunction with the European Democratic Party (EDP). Prior to the 2004 European election the European party had been represented through its own group, the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party Group (ELDR) Group. In June 2019, the ALDE group was succeeded by Renew Europe.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], ALDE is represented in European Union institutions, with 70 MEPs and five members of the European Commission. Of the 27 EU member states, there are four with ALDE-affiliated Prime Ministers: Mark Rutte (VVD) in the Netherlands, Xavier Bettel (DP) in Luxembourg, Kaja Kallas (Estonian Reform Party) in Estonia and Alexander De Croo (Open VLD) in Belgium. ALDE member parties are also in governments in seven other EU member states: Croatia, Finland, Ireland, Latvia, Slovenia, Lithuania and Germany. Some other ALDE member parties offer parliamentary support to governments in Croatia, Denmark, Italy, Romania and Sweden. Charles Michel, former Belgian Prime Minister, is current President of the European Council.\nALDE's think tank is the European Liberal Forum, led by Hilde Vautmans, MEP, and gathers 46 member organisations. The youth wing of ALDE is the European Liberal Youth (LYMEC), which is predominantly based upon youth and student liberal organisations but contains also a small number of individual members. LYMEC is led by Dan-Aria Sucuri.\nIn 2011, the ALDE Party became the first pan-European party to create the status of individual membership. Since then, between 1000 and close to 3000 members (the numbers fluctuate annually) maintain direct membership in the ALDE Party from several EU countries. Over 40 coordinators mobilise liberal ideas, initiatives and expertise across the continent under the leadership of the Steering Committee, which was first chaired by Julie Cantalou. The ALDE Party took a step further in the direction of becoming a truly pan-European party when granting voting rights to individual members\u2019 delegates at the Party Congress.\nStructure.\nBureau.\nThe day-to-day management of the ALDE Party is handled by the Bureau, the members of which are:\nHistory of pan-European liberalism.\nPan-European liberalism has a long history dating back to the foundation of Liberal International in April 1947. On 26 March 1976, the Federation of Liberal and Democrat Parties in Europe was established in Stuttgart. The founding parties of the federation were the Free Democratic Party of Germany, Radical Party of France, Venstre of Denmark, Italian Liberal Party, Dutch People's Party for Freedom and Democracy and Democratic Party of Luxembourg. Observer members joining later in 1976 were the Danish Social Liberal Party, French Radical Party of the Left and Independent Republicans, British Liberal Party, and Italian Republican Party. In 1977, the federation was renamed European Liberals and Democrats, in 1986, European Liberal Democrats and Reformists.\nIt evolved into the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party (ELDR Party) in 2004, when it was founded as an official European party under that name and incorporated under Belgian law at an extraordinary Congress in Brussels, held on 30 April 2004 the day before the enlargement of the European Union. At the same time the matching group in the European Parliament, the European Liberal Democrats and Reformists Group allied with the members of the newly elected European Democratic Party, forming the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE) with a matching ALDE Group in the European Parliament.\nOn 10 November 2012, the ELDR Party adopted the name of the alliance between the two parties, to match the parliamentary group and the alliance.\nOn 12 June 2019, the ALDE group was succeeded by a new enlarged group, Renew Europe, which primarily consists of ALDE and EDP member parties and France's La R\u00e9publique En Marche! (LREM).\nEuropean Commissioners.\nALDE Member Parties contribute four out of the 28 members of the European Commission:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9866", "revid": "31290781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9866", "title": "European People's Party Group", "text": "European Parliament political group\nThe European People's Party Group (EPP Group) is a centre-right political group of the European Parliament consisting of deputies (MEPs) from the member parties of the European People's Party (EPP). Sometimes it also includes independent MEPs and/or deputies from unaffiliated national parties. The EPP Group comprises politicians of Christian-democratic, conservative and liberal-conservative orientation.\nThe European People's Party was officially founded as a European political party in 1976. However, the European People's Party Group in the European Parliament has existed in one form or another since June 1953, from the Common Assembly of the European Coal and Steel Community, making it one of the oldest European-level political groups. It has been the largest political group in the European Parliament since 1999.\nHistory.\nThe Common Assembly of the European Coal and Steel Community (the predecessor of the present day European Parliament) first met on 10 September 1952 and the first Christian Democratic Group was unofficially formed the next day, with Maan Sassen as president. The group held 38 of the 78 seats, two short of an absolute majority. On 16 June 1953 the Common Assembly passed a resolution enabling the official formation of political groups, and on 23 June 1953 the constituent declaration of the group was published and the group was officially formed.\nThe Christian Democrat group was the biggest group at formation, but as time wore on, it lost support and was the second-biggest group by the time of the 1979 elections. As the European Community expanded into the European Union, the dominant centre-right parties in the new member states were not necessarily Christian democratic, and the EPP (European People's Party, the pan-continental political party founded in 1976, to which all group members are now affiliated) feared being sidelined. To counter this, the EPP expanded its remit to cover the centre-right regardless of tradition and pursued a policy of integrating liberal-conservative parties.\nThis policy led to Greek New Democracy and Spanish People's Party MEPs joining the EPP Group. The British Conservative Party and Danish Conservative People's Party tried to maintain a group of their own, named the \"European Democrats\" (ED), but lack of support and the problems inherent in maintaining a small group forced ED's collapse in the 1990s, and its members crossed the floor to join the EPP Group. The parties of these MEPs also became full members of the EPP (with the exception of the British Conservative Party, which did not join) and this consolidation process of the European centre-right continued during the 1990s with the acquisition of members from the Italian party . However, the consolidation was not unalloyed and a split emerged with the Eurosceptic MEPs who congregated in a subgroup within the Group, also called the \"European Democrats\" (ED).\nNevertheless, the consolidation held through the 1990s, assisted by the group being renamed the \"European People's Party \u2013 European Democrats\" (EPP-ED) Group, and after the 1999 European elections the EPP-ED reclaimed its position as the largest group in the Parliament from the Party of European Socialists (PES) Group.\nSize was not enough, however: the group did not have a majority. It continued therefore to engage in the \"Grand Coalition\" (a coalition with the PES Group, or occasionally the Liberals) to generate the majorities required by the cooperation procedure under the Single European Act.\nMeanwhile, the parties in the European Democrats subgroup were growing restless, with the establishment in July 2006 of the Movement for European Reform, and finally left following the 2009 elections, when the Czech Civic Democratic Party and British Conservative Party formed their own right-wing \"European Conservatives and Reformists\" (ECR) group on 22 June 2009, abolishing the European Democrats subgroup from that date. The EPP-ED Group reverted to its original name \u2013 the EPP Group \u2013 immediately.\nIn the 7th European Parliament the EPP Group remained the largest parliamentary group with 275 MEPs. It is currently the only political group in the European parliament to fully represent its corresponding European political party, i.e. the European People's Party. The United Kingdom was the only member state to not be represented in the group; this state of affairs ceased temporarily on 28 February 2018, when two MEPs suspended from the British Conservative Party left the ECR group and joined the EPP. The two MEPs later joined a breakaway political party in the UK, The Independent Group.\nAfter twelve member parties in the EPP called for Hungary's Fidesz's expulsion or suspension, Fidesz's membership was suspended with a common agreement on 20 March 2019. The suspension was applied only to the EPP but not to its group in the Parliament. On 3 March 2021, Fidesz decided to leave the EPP group, after the group's new rules, however still kept their membership in the party. On 18 March 2021, Fidesz decided to leave the European People's Party.\nIn the 9th European Parliament the EPP won 182 seats out of a total of 751. They formed a coalition with Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats and Renew Europe to elect Ursula von der Leyen as president of the European Commission.\nMembership at formation.\nThe 38 members in the group on 11 September 1952 were as follows:\nStructure.\nOrganisation.\nThe EPP Group is governed by a collective (referred to as the \"Presidency\") that allocates tasks. The Presidency consists of the Group Chair and a maximum of ten Vice-Chairs, including the Treasurer. The day-to-day running of the EPP Group is performed by its secretariat in the European Parliament, led by its Secretary-General. The Group runs its own think-tank, the European Ideas Network, which brings together opinion-formers from across Europe to discuss issues facing the European Union from a centre-right perspective.\nThe EPP Group Presidency includes:\nThe chairs of the group and its predecessors from 1952 to 2020 are as follows:\nActivities.\nIn the news.\nActivities performed by the group in the period between June 2004 and June 2008 include monitoring elections in Palestine and Ukraine; encouraging transeuropean rail travel, telecoms deregulation, energy security, a common energy policy, the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the Union, partial reform of the CAP and attempts to tackle illegal immigration; denouncing Russian involvement in South Ossetia; supporting the Constitution Treaty and the Lisbon Treaty; debating globalisation, relations with China, and Taiwan; backing plans to outlaw Holocaust denial; nominating Anna Politkovskaya for the 2007 Sakharov Prize; expelling Daniel Hannan from the Group; the discussion about whether ED MEPs should remain within EPP-ED or form a group of their own; criticisms of the group's approach to tackling low turnout for the 2009 elections; the group's use of the two-President arrangement; and the group's proposal to ban the Islamic Burka dress across the EU.\nParliamentary activity profile.\nThe debates and votes in the European Parliament are tracked by its website and categorised by the groups that participate in them and the rule of procedure that they fall into. The results give a profile for each group by category and the total indicates the group's level of participation in Parliamentary debates. The activity profile for each group for the period 1 August 2004 to 1 August 2008 in the Sixth Parliament is given on the diagram on the right. The group is denoted in blue.\nThe website shows the group as participating in 659 motions, making it the third most active group during the period.\nPublications.\nThe group produces many publications, which can be found on its website. Documents produced in 2008 cover subjects such as dialogue with the Orthodox Church, study days, its strategy for 2008\u201309, Euro-Mediterranean relations, and the Lisbon Treaty. It also publishes a yearbook and irregularly publishes a presentation, a two-page summary of the group.\nAcademic analysis.\nThe group has been characterised as a three-quarters-male group that, prior to ED's departure, was only 80% cohesive and split between centre-right Europhiles (the larger EPP subgroup) and right-wing Eurosceptics (the smaller ED subgroup). The group as a whole is described as ambiguous on hypothetical EU taxes, against taxation, Green issues, social liberal issues (LGBT rights, abortion, euthanasia) and full Turkish accession to the European Union, and for a deeper Federal Europe, deregulation, the Common Foreign and Security Policy and controlling migration into the EU.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9867", "revid": "44376486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9867", "title": "The Left in the European Parliament \u2013 GUE/NGL", "text": "European Parliament political group\nThe Left in the European Parliament \u2013 GUE/NGL is a left-wing political group of the European Parliament established in 1995. Before January 2021, it was named the European United Left/Nordic Green Left (, GUE/NGL).\nThe group comprises political parties with democratic socialist, communist, and eurosceptic orientation.\nHistory.\nIn 1995, the enlargement of the European Union led to the creation of the Nordic Green Left group of parties. The Nordic Green Left (NGL) merged with the Confederal Group of the European United Left (GUE) on 6 January 1995, forming the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left. The NGL suffix was added to the name of the expanded group on insistence of Swedish and Finnish MEPs. The group initially consisted of MEPs from the Finnish Left Alliance, the Swedish Left Party, the Danish Socialist People's Party, the United Left of Spain (including the Spanish Communist Party), the Synaspismos of Greece, the French Communist Party, the Portuguese Communist Party, the Communist Party of Greece, and the Communist Refoundation Party of Italy.\nIn 1998, Ken Coates, an expelled MEP from the British Labour Party who co-founded the Independent Labour Network, joined the group.\nIn 1999, the German Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) and the Greek Democratic Social Movement (DIKKI) joined as full members, while the five MEPs elected from the list of the French Trotskyist alliance LO\u2013LCR and the one MEP for the Dutch Socialist Party joined as associate members.\nIn 2002, four MEPs from the French Citizen and Republican Movement and one from the Danish People's Movement against the EU also joined the group.\nIn 2004, no MEPs were elected from LO\u2013LCR and DIKKI \u2014 which was undergoing a dispute with its leader over the party constitution \u2014 , as well as the French Citizen and Republican Movement, did not put forward candidates. MEPs from the Portuguese Left Block, the Irish Sinn F\u00e9in, the Progressive Party of Working People of Cyprus, and the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia joined the group. The Danish Socialist People's Party, a member of the Nordic Green Left, left the group to instead sit in the Greens\u2013European Free Alliance group.\nIn 2009, no MEPs were elected from the Italian Communist Refoundation Party and the Finnish Left Alliance. MEPs from the Irish Socialist Party, the Socialist Party of Latvia, and the French Left Party joined the group.\nIn 2013, one MEP from the Croatian Labourists \u2013 Labour Party also joined the group.\nIn 2014, no MEPs were elected from the Irish Socialist Party, the Socialist Party of Latvia, and the Croatian Labourists \u2013 Labour Party. MEPs from the Spanish Podemos as well as EH Bildu and the Dutch Party for the Animals joined the group, while MEPs from the Italian Communist Refoundation Party and the Finnish Left Alliance re-entered parliament and rejoined. The Communist Party of Greece, a founding member of the group, decided to leave and instead sit as Non-Inscrits.\nIn 2019, no MEPs were elected from the French Communist Party, the Danish People's Movement against the EU, the Dutch Socialist Party, and from the Italian parties The Left and the Communist Refoundation Party. MEPs from the French La France insoumise, the Belgian Workers' Party of Belgium, the German Human Environment Animal Protection, the Irish Independents 4 Change, and the Danish Red-Green Alliance joined the group.\nPosition.\nAccording to its 1994 constituent declaration, the group is opposed to the present European Union political structure, but it is committed to integration. That declaration sets out three aims for the construction of another European Union, the total change of institutions to make them fully democratic, breaking with neoliberal monetarist policies, and a policy of co-development and equitable cooperation. The group wants to disband the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and strengthen the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).\nThe group is ambiguous between reformism and revolution, leaving it up to each party to decide on the manner they deem best suited to achieve these aims. As such, it has simultaneously positioned itself as insiders within the European institutions, enabling it to influence the decisions made by co-decision; and as outsiders by its willingness to seek another Europe, which would abolish the Maastricht Treaty.\nOrganisation.\nThe GUE/NGL is a confederal group that is composed of MEPs from national parties. Those national parties must share common political objectives with the group, as specified in the group's constituent declaration. Nevertheless, those national parties, and not the group, retain control of their MEPs; therefore, the group may be divided on certain issues.\nMembers of the group meet regularly to prepare for meetings, debate on policies, and vote on resolutions. The group also publishes reports on various topics.\nMember parties.\nMEPs may be full or associate members.\nNational parties may be full or associate members.\nMembership.\n9th European Parliament.\nThe initial member parties for the 9th European Parliament was determined at the first meeting on 29 May 2019.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9868", "revid": "45382375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9868", "title": "European Democrats", "text": "Political party in Europe\nThe European Democrats were a loose association of conservative political parties in Europe. It was a political group in the European Parliament from 1979 until 1992, when it became a subgroup of the European People's Party\u2013European Democrats (EPP-ED) group. The European Democrats continued to exist as a political group in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) until 2014, when it became the European Conservatives Group.\nEuropean Democrats in the European Parliament.\n1979\u20131992.\nThe European Democratic Group (ED) was formed on 17 July 1979 by British Conservative Party, Danish Conservative People's Party and other MEPs after their success in the 1979 elections. It supplanted the earlier European Conservative Group.\nIn the late seventies and early eighties, the ED was the third-largest political group in the European Parliament.\nHowever, the group saw its membership fall sharply in the late 1980s, as many centre-right members moved to the rival European People's Party (EPP), dominated by the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU), Italian Christian Democrats and the ideology of Christian democracy in general. The ED had been somewhat further from the political centre and less pro-European than the EPP. Largely isolated, even hardline eurosceptics like Margaret Thatcher conceded that the British Conservatives could not be effectively heard from such a peripheral group.\n1992\u20131999.\nOn 1 May 1992, the ED (now largely composed of UK Conservative Party members) dissolved, and its remaining members were accorded \"associated party\" status in the European People's Party Group; that is, being part of the parliamentary group without retaining actual membership in the EPP Europarty organisation. This was considered essential for the Conservatives, as the EPP was generally seen as quite favourable to European integration, a stance at odds with their core ideology. The Conservatives' relationship to the EPP would become a sore point in the following years, particularly for the eurosceptic general membership in Britain. Then-leader of the British Conservative Party William Hague hoped to put the issue to rest by negotiating a new arrangement in 1999 by which the EPP's parliamentary group would rebrand itself as the European People's Party\u2013European Democrats (EPP-ED), with the \"European Democrat\" nomenclature returning after a seven-year hiatus. This was intended to nominally underscore the Conservatives' status apart from the rest of EPP, and it was hoped that with the coming enlargement of the European Union numerous newly involved right-wing parties, averse to the EPP proper for its perceived European federalism, would be willing to instead enter the ED subgroup, growing the overall alignment.\n1999\u20132009.\nThe arrangement proved to do little to appease opposition. Hague's successor, Iain Duncan Smith, made a concerted drive at one point to resurrect the European Democratic Group, but backed off when it became clear that Conservative MEPs would not move voluntarily. The hope that multiple Central and European parties would join ED also proved to be dubious, as only the Czech Civic Democratic Party took up the offer, with the remainder joining EPP proper or other groups such as Union for Europe of the Nations (UEN) or Independence and Democracy (IND/DEM). Meanwhile, the ED remained a more eurosceptic subgroup within the broader EPP-ED bloc that contributed slightly more than 10% of its total MEPs. It resisted the trend of incorporating as a European political party.\nDuring the 2005 Conservative leadership contest, eventual winner David Cameron pledged to withdraw the Conservatives from the EPP-ED group, while opponent David Davis argued in a letter to the editor of \"The Daily Telegraph\" that the current ED arrangement allowed the Conservatives to maintain suitable distance from EPP while still having influence in the largest parliamentary grouping. Conservative/EPP-ED MEP Martin Callanan responded in that paper the following day:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;SIR - David Davis (Letter, November 10) is sadly misinformed about our Conservative MEPs' relationship with the European People's Party (EPP) in the European Parliament. He claims that \"Conservatives are members of the European Democrat group, which forms an alliance with the EPP\". In reality, though, the ED does not exist. It has no staff or money and is, in effect, a discussion group within the EPP. [\u2026] Far from being a symbolic step, as Mr Davis suggests, leaving the EPP is the one hard, bankable commitment to have come out of this leadership campaign.\nThe Czech Civic Democratic Party (ODS), the Law and Justice (PiS) of Poland and the Rally For France party were among the first to discuss forming a breakaway group under the Movement for European Reform. Sir Reg Empey, Leader of the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) has committed his party thereunto Its position would be that the European Union should exist, but as a looser supranational organisation than at present, making the group less eurosceptic than the UEN and IND/DEM groups. Some members from the above parties founded a new organization, the Alliance for an Open Europe, in the midst of this debate, with broadly similar objectives.\nCameron initially intended to form the new group in 2006, though this aspiration had to be cancelled due to their main prospective partners, the ODS and PiS, being unable or unwilling to break away from their then-groupings; the new grouping was put on hiatus until the 2009 European elections. By then, new factors\u2014including the collapse of the UEN group\u2014made conditions for forming a new political grouping much more favourable. On 22 June 2009, the founder members of the European Conservatives and Reformists (ECR) group, all signatories of the Prague Declaration announced that they were to leave the EPP-ED, and in virtue of that fact, the European Democrats movement. This announcement ended the 30-year existence of the European Democrats in the European Parliament.\nFormer member parties.\nThe following political parties were associated with the European Democrats at some point:\nEuropean Democrats in PACE (Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe).\nThe European Democrat Group in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe was founded as the Group of Independent Representatives in 1970 by British and Scandinavian members of PACE, having about 35\u201340 members from the UK, Ireland, Norway, Denmark, Turkey, Sweden and Switzerland. It adopted the European Democrats Group name in September 1980, later becoming the European Conservatives Group in 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9869", "revid": "4034676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9869", "title": "Epistle to the Ephesians", "text": "Book of the New Testament\nThe Epistle to the Ephesians is the tenth book of the New Testament. According to its text, the letter was written by Paul the Apostle, an attribution that Christians traditionally accepted. However, starting in 1792, some scholars have claimed the letter is actually Deutero-Pauline, meaning that it is pseudepigrapha written in Paul's name by a later author strongly influenced by Paul's thought. According to one scholarly source, the letter was probably written \"by a loyal disciple to sum up Paul's teaching and to apply it to a new situation fifteen to twenty-five years after the Apostle's death\".\nThemes.\nAccording to New Testament scholar Daniel Wallace, the theme may be stated pragmatically as \"Christians, get along with each other! Maintain the unity practically which Christ has effected positionally by his death.\"\nAnother major theme in Ephesians is the keeping of Christ's body (that is, the Church) pure and holy. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Therefore be imitators of God, as beloved children. And walk in love, as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us, a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God.\nIn the second part of the letter, Ephesians 4:17\u20136:20, the author gives practical advice in how to live a holy, pure, and Christ-inspired lifestyle.\nComposition.\nAccording to tradition, the Apostle Paul wrote the letter while he was in prison in Rome (around AD 62). This would be about the same time as the Epistle to the Colossians (which in many points it resembles) and the Epistle to Philemon. However, many critical scholars have questioned the authorship of the letter and suggest that it may have been written between AD 80 and 100.\nAuthorship.\nThe first verse in the letter identifies Paul as its author. While early lists of New Testament books, including the Muratorian fragment and possibly Marcion's canon (if it is to be equated with the Epistle to the Laodiceans), attribute the letter to Paul, more recently there have been challenges to Pauline authorship on the basis of the letter's characteristically non-Pauline syntax, terminology, and eschatology.\nBiblical scholar Harold Hoehner, surveying 279 commentaries written between 1519 and 2001, found that 54% favored Pauline authorship, 39% concluded against Pauline authorship and 7% remained uncertain. Norman Perrin and Dennis C. Duling found that of six authoritative scholarly references, \"four of the six decide for pseudonymity, and the other two (Peake's Commentary on the Bible and the Jerome Biblical Commentary) recognize the difficulties in maintaining Pauline authorship. Indeed, the difficulties are insurmountable.\" Bible scholar Raymond E. Brown asserts that about 80% of critical scholarship judges that Paul did not write Ephesians.\nThere are four main theories in biblical scholarship that address the question of Pauline authorship.\nPlace, date, and purpose of the writing of the letter.\nWhile most English translations indicate that the letter was addressed to \"the saints who are in Ephesus\" (1:1), the words \"in Ephesus\" do not appear in the best and earliest manuscripts of the letter, leading most textual critics, like Bart Ehrman, to regard the words as an interpolation. This lack of any internal references to Ephesus in the early manuscripts may have led Marcion, a second-century heresiarch who created the first New Testament canon, to believe that the letter was actually addressed to the church at Laodicea. For details see Epistle to the Laodiceans.\nFurthermore, if Paul is regarded as the author, the impersonal character of the letter, which lacks personal greetings or any indication that the author has personal knowledge of his recipients, is incongruous with the account in Acts of Paul staying more than two years in Ephesus. For these reasons, most regard Ephesians to be a circular letter intended for many churches. The Jerusalem Bible notes that some critics think the words \"who are\" would have been followed by a blank to be filled in with the name of \"whichever church was being sent the letter\".\nIf Paul was the author of the letter, then it was probably written from Rome during Paul's first imprisonment, and probably soon after his arrival there in the year 62, four years after he had parted with the Ephesian elders at Miletus. However, scholars who dispute Paul's authorship date the letter to between 70 and 80 AD. In the latter case, the possible location of the authorship could have been within the church of Ephesus itself. Ignatius of Antioch seemed to be very well versed in the epistle to the Ephesians, and mirrors many of his own thoughts in his own epistle to the Ephesians.\nOutline.\nEphesians contains:\nFounding of the church at Ephesus.\nPaul's first and hurried visit for the space of three months to Ephesus is recorded in Acts 18:19\u201321. The work he began on this occasion was carried forward by Apollos and Aquila and Priscilla. On his second visit early in the following year, he remained at Ephesus \"three years\", for he found it was the key to the western provinces of Asia Minor. Here \"a great door and effectual\" was opened to him, and the church was established and strengthened by his diligent labours there. From Ephesus the gospel spread abroad \"almost throughout all Asia.\" The word \"mightily grew and prevailed\" despite all the opposition and persecution he encountered.\nOn his last journey to Jerusalem, the apostle landed at Miletus and, summoning together the elders of the church from Ephesus, delivered to them a farewell charge, expecting to see them no more.\nThe following parallels between this epistle and the Milesian charge may be traced:\nPurpose.\nThe purpose of the epistle, and to whom it was written, are matters of much speculation. It was regarded by C.H. Dodd as the \"crown of Paulinism.\" In general, it is born out of its particular socio-historical context and the situational context of both the author and the audience. Originating in the circumstance of a multicultural church (primarily Jewish and Hellenistic), the author addressed issues appropriate to the diverse religious and cultural backgrounds present in the community.\nThe author exhorts the church repeatedly to embrace a specific view of salvation, which he then explicates.\nFrank Charles Thompson argues that the main theme of Ephesians is in response to the newly converted Jews who often separated themselves from their Gentile brethren. The unity of the church, especially between Jew and Gentile believers, is the keynote of the book.\nInterpretations.\nEphesians is notable for its domestic code treatment in Ephesians 5:22\u20136:9, covering husband-wife, parent-child, and master-slave relationships. In Ephesians 5:22, wives are urged to submit to their husbands, and husbands to love their wives \"as Christ loved the Church.\" Christian Egalitarian theologians, such as Katharine Bushnell and Jessie Penn-Lewis, interpret these commands in the context of the preceding verse, for all Christians to \"submit to one another.\" Thus, it is two-way, mutual submission of both husbands to wives and wives to husbands. But according to Peter O'Brien, Professor Emeritus at Moore Theological College, this would be the only instance of this meaning of submission in the whole New Testament, indeed in any extant comparable Greek texts; by O'Brien's account, the word simply does not connote mutuality. Dallas Theological Seminary professor Daniel Wallace understands it to be an extension of Ephesians 5:15-21 on being filled by the Holy Spirit.\nIn the period leading up to the American Civil War (1861\u201365), Ephesians 6:5 on master-slave relationships was one of the Bible verses used by Confederate slaveholders in support of a slaveholding position.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9872", "revid": "24565488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9872", "title": "Electric bus (disambiguation)", "text": "Electric bus is a bus powered by electric energy. \"Electric bus\" can also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9875", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9875", "title": "Exploit (computer security)", "text": "Compromising a computer system\nAn exploit (from the English verb \"to exploit\", meaning \"to use something to one\u2019s own advantage\") is a piece of software, a chunk of data, or a sequence of commands that takes advantage of a bug or vulnerability to cause unintended or unanticipated behavior to occur on computer software, hardware, or something electronic (usually computerized). Such behavior frequently includes things like gaining control of a computer system, allowing privilege escalation, or a denial-of-service (DoS or related DDoS) attack. In lay terms, some exploit is akin to a 'hack'.\nClassification.\nThere are several methods of classifying exploits. The most common is by how the exploit communicates to the vulnerable software.\nA \"remote exploit\" works over a network and exploits the security vulnerability without any prior access to the vulnerable system.\nA \"local exploit\" requires prior access to the vulnerable system and usually increases the privileges of the person running the exploit past those granted by the system administrator. Exploits against client applications also exist, usually consisting of modified servers that send an exploit if accessed with a client application. A common form of exploits against client applications are browser exploits.\nExploits against client applications may also require some interaction with the user and thus may be used in combination with the social engineering method. Another classification is by the action against the vulnerable system; unauthorized data access, arbitrary code execution, and denial of service are examples.\nMany exploits are designed to provide superuser-level access to a computer system. However, it is also possible to use several exploits, first to gain low-level access, then to escalate privileges repeatedly until one reaches the highest administrative level (often called \"root\").\nAfter an exploit is made known to the authors of the affected software, the vulnerability is often fixed through a patch and the exploit becomes unusable. That is the reason why some black hat hackers as well as military or intelligence agencies' hackers do not publish their exploits but keep them private.\nExploits unknown to everyone except the people that found and developed them are referred to as \"zero day exploits\".\nTypes.\nExploitations are commonly categorized and named by the type of vulnerability they exploit (see vulnerabilities for a list), whether they are local/remote and the result of running the exploit (e.g. EoP, DoS, spoofing). One scheme that offers zero day exploits is exploit as a service.\nZero-click.\nA zero-click attack is an exploit that requires no user interaction to operate \u2013 that is to say, no key-presses or mouse clicks. FORCEDENTRY, discovered in 2021, is an example of a zero-click attack.\nIn 2022, NSO Group was reportedly selling zero-click exploits to governments for breaking into individuals' phones.\nPivoting.\nPivoting is a method used by hackers and penetration testers to expand the attack surface of a target organization. A compromised system to attack other systems on the same network that are not directly reachable from the Internet due to restrictions such as firewall. There tends to be more machines reachable from inside a network as compared to Internet facing hosts. For example, if an attacker compromises a web server on a corporate network, the attacker can then use the compromised web server to attack any reachable system on the network. These types of attacks are often called multi-layered attacks. Pivoting is also known as \"island hopping\". \nPivoting can further be distinguished into proxy pivoting and VPN pivoting:\nTypically, the proxy or VPN applications enabling pivoting are executed on the target computer as the payload of an exploit.\nPivoting is usually done by infiltrating a part of a network infrastructure (as an example, a vulnerable printer or thermostat) and using a scanner to find other devices connected to attack them. By attacking a vulnerable piece of networking, an attacker could infect most or all of a network and gain complete control.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9877", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9877", "title": "Erg", "text": "Unit of energy and mechanical work\nThe erg is a unit of energy equal to 10\u22127joules (100nJ). It originated in the Centimetre\u2013gram\u2013second system of units (CGS). It has the symbol \"erg\". The erg is not an SI unit. Its name is derived from (), a Greek word meaning 'work' or 'task'.\nAn erg is the amount of work done by a force of one dyne exerted for a distance of one centimetre. In the CGS base units, it is equal to one gram centimetre-squared per second-squared (g\u22c5cm2/s2). It is thus equal to 10\u22127 joules or 100 nanojoules (nJ) in SI units.\nHistory.\nIn 1864, Rudolf Clausius proposed the Greek word () for the unit of energy, work and heat. In 1873, a committee of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, including British physicists James Clerk Maxwell and William Thomson recommended the general adoption of the centimetre, the gramme, and the second as fundamental units (C.G.S. System of Units). To distinguish derived units, they recommended using the prefix \"C.G.S. unit of ...\" and requested that the word \"erg\" or \"ergon\" be strictly limited to refer to the \"C.G.S. unit of energy\".\nIn 1922, chemist William Draper Harkins proposed the name micri-erg as a convenient unit to measure the surface energy of molecules in surface chemistry. It would equate to 10\u221214\u00a0erg, the equivalent to 10\u221221\u00a0joule.\nThe erg has not been a valid unit since 1 January 1978 when the European Economic Community ratified a directive of 1971 that implemented the International System (SI) as agreed by the General Conference of Weights and Measures. It is still widely used in astrophysics and sometimes in mechanics."}
{"id": "9878", "revid": "5984052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9878", "title": "Everway", "text": "Fantasy tabletop role-playing game by Jonathan Tweet\nEverway is a fantasy role-playing game first published by Wizards of the Coast under their Alter Ego brand in 1995. Its lead designer was Jonathan Tweet. Marketed as a \"Visionary Roleplaying Game\", it has often been characterized as an innovative piece with a limited commercial success. Wizards later abandoned the line, and Rubicon Games purchased it, and published several supplements. The line was sold again to Gaslight Press in February 2001. The line is currently with The Everway Company, which is working on both a Silver Anniversary Edition and 2nd Edition. \nThe game has a fantasy setting of the multiverse type, with many different worlds, some of which differed from generic fantasy. It appears to have been heavily influenced by divinatory tarot, the four classical elements of ancient Greece, and mythologies from around the world.\nEverway was first with implementing, in a commercial game, several new concepts including much more picture-based/visual source material and character creation than usual. Like other works by Jonathan Tweet, the rules are very simple and flexible. It is also one of a few diceless role-playing games. The Fortune Deck works as a randomizer and inspirational tool, and the results obtained by it are highly subjective. In order to clarify their use, Tweet coined some new vocabulary to describe and formalize methods of gamemaster adjudication; these terms have been adopted by the wider tabletop RPG community. Tweet's adjudication terms are: Karma (making a decision based on character abilities, tactics, and the internal logic of a fictional situation), Drama (making a decision based on what moves the story along), and Fortune (letting a randomizer \u2014 drawing a card in \"Everway\", but could also refer to rolling dice in other games \u2014 determine the outcome).\nDescription.\n\"Everway\" was a boxed set designed by Jonathan Tweet, Jenny Scott, Aron Anderson, Scott Hungerford, Kathy Ice, Bob Kruger, and John Tynes, with illustrations by Doug Alexander, Rick Berry, Daniel Gelon, Janine Johnston, Hannibal King, Scott Kirschner, Ed Lee, John Matson, Martin McKenna, Ian Miller, Jeff Miracola, Roger Raupp, Andrew Robinson, Christopher Rush, and Amy Weber, and cover art by Susan Harris\nThe components included:\nSetting.\nThe official setting for Everway revolves around heroes with the power of \"spherewalking,\" traveling between worlds called \"spheres.\" Spheres typically consist of many \"realms.\" The city of Everway is located in a realm called Roundwander, in the sphere called Fourcorner. Roundwander is the only realm in Fourcorner that is described. There is some detail on the sphere's main city, Everway, which contains a stone pyramid, a set of family-oriented guilds, and various exotic events related to the city's position as an inter-dimensional trading center. Several dozen other spheres are described as one-sentence blurbs, a few as page-long summaries, and one in detail as the setting for a sample adventure, \"Journey to Stonekeep.\" The theme is strongly fantasy-oriented as opposed to science fictional, with advanced technology explicitly forbidden in the character creation rules. The authors gave significant thought to anthropology by describing how the people of various spheres live, including many similarities across cultures. Some of these common features are entirely realistic (language, art), and others plainly related to the game's fantasy elements (magic, knowledge of the Fortune Deck). Nearly all spheres are inhabited by humans, with mostly realistic physics.\nCharacter creation.\nCharacter design is abstract and simple by most role-playing games' standards. Each character begins with twenty points to divide between four Element scores roughly equivalent to statistics for Strength (Fire), Perception (Water), Intelligence (Air) and Endurance (Earth). Scores range from 1 (pathetic) to 3 (average) to 10 (godlike), so a generic hero would have scores of 5. Each Element also has a specialty for which a character can get a 1-point bonus; e.g., a 5-Air hero with an Air specialty of \"Writing\" could write as though their Air score were 6. As a general rule a statistic of N is twice as capable as a level of N-1, where this makes sense. (A 5-Fire, 5-Earth hero can typically defeat two 4-Fire, 5-Earth enemies, or handily defeat a 3-Fire, 5-Earth character in foot race, but cannot necessarily run twice as fast even though speed is governed by Fire.)\nEach character also has Powers representing unusual abilities. These cost from 0 to 3 or more points depending on whether they should be considered Frequent, Major (or even \"Twice Major\", for especially powerful abilities that significantly affect gameplay) and/or Versatile. For instance, a \"Cat Familiar,\" a slightly intelligent cat, is arguably worth 2 points for being Frequent (usually around and often useful) and Versatile (able to scout, carry messages, and fight). A \"Winning Smile\" that makes the hero likable is worth 0 points because of its trivial effect, while a \"Charming Song\" that inspires one emotion when played might be useful enough to count as Frequent (1 point). There is no strict rule for deciding what a Power is worth. Each hero can have one 0-point Power for free; additional Powers that would otherwise cost 0 points instead cost 1.\nMagic is also abstract. A hero wanting access to magic, as opposed to a few specific Powers, must design their own magic system. This is done by choosing an Element for its basis, which affects its theme; e.g., Air is associated with speech and intellect and would be suitable for a system of spoken spells gained through study. The new Magic statistic has a 1\u201310 rating and point cost, and can be no higher than the Element on what it is based. The game's rules suggest listing examples of what the magic system can do at each power level, working these out with the GM. It is suggested that most characters do not need magic and that it is not suitable for new players.\nFinally, each hero has personality traits based on the game's Fortune and Vision cards. Players are to choose one or more Vision cards and base a backstory on them, and to have three Fortune cards representing a Virtue, Fault, and Fate (a challenge they will face). These three cards can change to represent new phases in the hero's life. There is a list of suggested Motives for why the hero is adventuring, such as \"Adversity\" or \"Wanderlust\", but this feature has no gameplay effect.\nEquipment such as weaponry is handled completely abstractly, with no specific rules for item cost, carrying capacity, or combat statistics. However, a particularly powerful piece of equipment\u2014for example, a cloak that renders its wearer invisible for a brief period\u2014may be treated as a Power that the hero must spend their initial element points on.\nThe Fortune Deck.\nTo decide what happens, the GM considers the rules of Karma (characters' abilities, tactics, logic), Drama (the needs of the plot), and Fortune, the result of a card drawn from the Fortune Deck. Many of these cards are based on the \"Major Arcana\" of tarot divination, such as \"The Fool\" and \"Death\", but the deck includes original cards such as \"Drowning in Armor\" and \"Law.\" As with the Tarot deck there is symbolic art and each card has two complementary meanings when upright or reversed (while face up). The meanings are printed on the cards (e.g., \"Protective Measures Turn Dangerous\" vs. \"True Prudence\" for \"Drowning in Armor\") and explained more fully in the game's books. The rules are flexible about how often the GM should consult the Fortune Deck, whether the cards should be shown to players, and how much influence the draw should have\u2014it is entirely acceptable for the GM to never use the deck at all, if she so desires. Though cards sometimes have obvious interpretations for the context in which they are drawn, the rules explain that sometimes they are best read simply as \"a positive (or negative) result.\"\nAlthough the Fortune Deck resembles (and can be used as) a fortune-telling device, Everway treats the Deck only as a storytelling device and an element of the fictional setting. It does not in any way endorse \"real\" fortune-telling or other supernatural concepts.\nReception.\nIn the December 1995 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 224), Rick Swan was surprised by Wizards of the Coast's choice of the very different \"Everway\" to enter the role-playing game market: \"Everway is so far out of the mainstream, it\u2019s barely recognizable as an RPG. For starters, it has no dice. It has no tables or charts. A deck of cards directs the flow of the game. Monster bashing, treasure hunting, dungeon crawling\u2014bye-bye; \"Everway\" is pure narrative.\" Swan liked the \"first class\" production values of the components, but found the maps \"lifeless\". Swan was a big fan of the diceless system, saying, \"It makes for a brisk game, and Everway, to its credit, plays at blinding speed.\" But Swan was concerned by the how the game placed an unreasonable onus on the improvisational skills of both the gamemaster and the players. He concluded by giving the game an average rating of 4 out of 6."}
{"id": "9880", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9880", "title": "Expellees", "text": ""}
{"id": "9881", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9881", "title": "Efficient Markets Hypothesis", "text": ""}
{"id": "9882", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9882", "title": "Efficient markets theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "9883", "revid": "13263935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9883", "title": "Eurocard (printed circuit board)", "text": "Standard for PCBs which may be interconnected in a rack mounted chassis\nEurocard is an IEEE standard format for printed circuit board (PCB) cards that can be plugged together into a standard chassis which, in turn, can be mounted in a 19-inch rack. The chassis consists of a series of slotted card guides on the top and bottom, into which the cards are slid so they stand on end, like books on a shelf. At the spine of each card is one or more connectors which plug into mating connectors on a backplane that closes the rear of the chassis.\nDimensions.\nAs the cards are assumed to be installed in a vertical orientation, the usual meanings of height and width are transposed: A card might be 233.35\u00a0mm \"high\", but only 20\u00a0mm \"wide\". Height is measured in rack units, \"U\", with 1 U being . This dimension refers to the subrack in which the card is to be mounted, rather than the card itself. \nA single card is 100\u00a0mm high. Taller cards add a 133.35\u00a0mm, so that a double height card is 233.35\u00a0mm high and a triple 366.7\u00a0mm high.\nEnclosure heights are multiples of 3U, with the cards always shorter than the enclosure. Two common heights are 3U (a 100\u00a0mm card in a subrack) and 6U (a 233.35\u00a0mm card in a high subrack). As two 3U cards are shorter than a 6U card (by 33.35\u00a0mm), it is possible to install two 3U cards in one slot of a 6U subrack, with a mid-height structure for proper support.\nCard widths are specified in horizontal pitch units \"HP\", with 1 HP being .\nCard depths start at and increase in increments. The most common today is , but standard hardware is available for depths of , , , , , and .\nStandards and architecture.\nThe Eurocard mechanical architecture was defined originally under IEC-60297-3. Today, the most widely recognized standards for this mechanical structure are IEEE 1101.1, IEEE 1101.10 (also known commonly as \"dot ten\") and IEEE 1101.11. IEEE 1101.10 covers the additional mechanical and electromagnetic interference features required for VITA 1.1-1997(R2002), which is the VME64 Extensions standard, as well as PICMG 2.0 (R3.0), which is the CompactPCI specification.\nThe IEEE 1101.11 standard covers rear plug-in units that are also called rear transition modules or RTMs.\nThe Eurocard is a mechanical system and does not define the specific connector to be used or the signals that are assigned to connector contacts.\nThe connector systems that are commonly used with Eurocard architectures include the original DIN 41612 connector that is also standardized as IEC 60603.2. This is the connector that is used for the VMEbus standard, which was IEEE 1014. The connector known as the 5-row DIN, which is used for the VME64 Extensions standard is IEC 61076-4-113. The VME64 Extension architecture defined by VITA 1.1-1997 (R2002).\nAnother popular computer architecture that utilizes the 6U-160 Eurocard is CompactPCI and CompactPCI Express. These are defined by PICMG 2.0R3 and PICMG Exp0 R1 respectively. Other computer architectures that utilize the Eurocard system are VME eXtensions for Instrumentation (VXI), PCI eXtensions for Instrumentation (PXI), and PXI Express.\nA computer architecture that used the 6U-220 Eurocard format was Multibus-II, which was IEEE 1296.\nBecause the Eurocard system provided for so many modular card sizes and because connector manufacturers have continued to create new connectors that are compatible with this system, it is a popular mechanical standard that is also used for innumerable \"one-off\" applications.\nConduction-cooled Eurocards are used in military and aerospace applications. They are defined by the IEEE 1101.2-1992 (2001) standard.\nThe Eurocard standard is also the basis of the \"Eurorack\" format for modular electronic music synthesizers, popularized by Doepfer and other manufacturers."}
{"id": "9885", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9885", "title": "England/City", "text": ""}
{"id": "9888", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9888", "title": "England/Food and Drink", "text": ""}
{"id": "9890", "revid": "1674167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9890", "title": "Electron counting", "text": "Formalism used for classifying compounds\nIn chemistry, electron counting is a formalism for assigning a number of valence electrons to individual atoms in a molecule. It is used for classifying compounds and for explaining or predicting their electronic structure and bonding. Many rules in chemistry rely on electron-counting:\nAtoms are called \"electron-deficient\" when they have too few electrons as compared to their respective rules, or \"hypervalent\" when they have too many electrons. Since these compounds tend to be more reactive than compounds that obey their rule, electron counting is an important tool for identifying the reactivity of molecules. While the counting formalism considers each atom separately, these individual atoms (with their hypothetical assigned charge) do not generally exist as free species. \nCounting rules.\nTwo methods of electron counting are \"neutral counting\" and \"ionic counting\". Both approaches give the same result (and can therefore be used to verify one's calculation). \nIt is important, though, to be aware that most chemical species exist between the purely covalent and ionic extremes.\nE.g. in period 2: B, C, N, O, and F have 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 valence electrons, respectively.\nE.g. in period 4: K, Ca, Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Fe, Ni have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10 valence electrons respectively.\nE.g. for a Fe2+ has 6 electrons\nS2\u2212 has 8 electrons\nElectrons donated by common fragments.\n\"Special cases\".\nThe numbers of electrons \"donated\" by some ligands depends on the geometry of the metal-ligand ensemble. An example of this complication is the M\u2013NO entity. When this grouping is linear, the NO ligand is considered to be a three-electron ligand. When the M\u2013NO subunit is strongly bent at N, the NO is treated as a pseudohalide and is thus a one electron (in the neutral counting approach). The situation is not very different from the \"\u03b7\"3 versus the \"\u03b7\"1 allyl. Another unusual ligand from the electron counting perspective is sulfur dioxide. \nneutral counting: C contributes 4 electrons, each H radical contributes one each: 4 + 4 \u00d7 1 = 8 valence electrons\nionic counting: C4\u2212 contributes 8 electrons, each proton contributes 0 each: 8 + 4 \u00d7 0 = 8 electrons.\nSimilar for H:\nneutral counting: H contributes 1 electron, the C contributes 1 electron (the other 3 electrons of C are for the other 3 hydrogens in the molecule): 1 + 1 \u00d7 1 = 2 valence electrons.\nionic counting: H contributes 0 electrons (H+), C4\u2212 contributes 2 electrons (per H), 0 + 1 \u00d7 2 = 2 valence electrons\nconclusion: Methane follows the octet-rule for carbon, and the duet rule for hydrogen, and hence is expected to be a stable molecule (as we see from daily life)\nneutral counting: S contributes 6 electrons, each hydrogen radical contributes one each: 6 + 2 \u00d7 1 = 8 valence electrons\nionic counting: S2\u2212 contributes 8 electrons, each proton contributes 0: 8 + 2 \u00d7 0 = 8 valence electrons\nconclusion: with an octet electron count (on sulfur), we can anticipate that H2S would be pseudo-tetrahedral if one considers the two lone pairs.\nneutral counting: S contributes 6 electrons, each chlorine radical contributes one each: 6 + 2 \u00d7 1 = 8 valence electrons\nionic counting: S2+ contributes 4 electrons, each chloride anion contributes 2: 4 + 2 \u00d7 2 = 8 valence electrons\nconclusion: see discussion for H2S above. Both SCl2 and H2S follow the octet rule - the behavior of these molecules is however quite different.\nneutral counting: S contributes 6 electrons, each fluorine radical contributes one each: 6 + 6 \u00d7 1 = 12 valence electrons\nionic counting: S6+ contributes 0 electrons, each fluoride anion contributes 2: 0 + 6 \u00d7 2 = 12 valence electrons\nconclusion: ionic counting indicates a molecule lacking lone pairs of electrons, therefore its structure will be octahedral, as predicted by VSEPR. One might conclude that this molecule would be highly reactive - but the opposite is true: SF6 is inert, and it is widely used in industry because of this property.\nneutral counting: Ti contributes 4 electrons, each chlorine radical contributes one each: 4 + 4 \u00d7 1 = 8 valence electrons\nionic counting: Ti4+ contributes 0 electrons, each chloride anion contributes two each: 0 + 4 \u00d7 2 = 8 valence electrons\nconclusion: Having only 8e (vs. 18 possible), we can anticipate that TiCl4 will be a good Lewis acid. Indeed, it reacts (in some cases violently) with water, alcohols, ethers, amines.\nneutral counting: Fe contributes 8 electrons, each CO contributes 2 each: 8 + 2 \u00d7 5 = 18 valence electrons\nionic counting: Fe(0) contributes 8 electrons, each CO contributes 2 each: 8 + 2 \u00d7 5 = 18 valence electrons\nconclusions: this is a special case, where ionic counting is the same as neutral counting, all fragments being neutral. Since this is an 18-electron complex, it is expected to be isolable compound.\nneutral counting: Fe contributes 8 electrons, the 2 cyclopentadienyl-rings contribute 5 each: 8 + 2 \u00d7 5 = 18 electrons\nionic counting: Fe2+ contributes 6 electrons, the two aromatic cyclopentadienyl rings contribute 6 each: 6 + 2 \u00d7 6 = 18 valence electrons on iron.\nconclusion: Ferrocene is expected to be an isolable compound.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9891", "revid": "7073512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9891", "title": "Entropy", "text": "Property of a thermodynamic system\nEntropy is a scientific concept, as well as a measurable physical property, that is most commonly associated with a state of disorder, randomness, or uncertainty. The term and the concept are used in diverse fields, from classical thermodynamics, where it was first recognized, to the microscopic description of nature in statistical physics, and to the principles of information theory. It has found far-ranging applications in chemistry and physics, in biological systems and their relation to life, in cosmology, economics, sociology, weather science, climate change, and information systems including the transmission of information in telecommunication.\nThe thermodynamic concept was referred to by Scottish scientist and engineer William Rankine in 1850 with the names \"thermodynamic function\" and \"heat-potential\". In 1865, German physicist Rudolf Clausius, one of the leading founders of the field of thermodynamics, defined it as the quotient of an infinitesimal amount of heat to the instantaneous temperature. He initially described it as \"transformation-content\", in German \"Verwandlungsinhalt\", and later coined the term \"entropy\" from a Greek word for \"transformation\". Referring to microscopic constitution and structure, in 1862, Clausius interpreted the concept as meaning disgregation.\nA consequence of entropy is that certain processes are irreversible or impossible, aside from the requirement of not violating the conservation of energy, the latter being expressed in the first law of thermodynamics. Entropy is central to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the entropy of isolated systems left to spontaneous evolution cannot decrease with time, as they always arrive at a state of thermodynamic equilibrium, where the entropy is highest.\nAustrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann explained entropy as the measure of the number of possible microscopic arrangements or states of individual atoms and molecules of a system that comply with the macroscopic condition of the system. He thereby introduced the concept of statistical disorder and probability distributions into a new field of thermodynamics, called statistical mechanics, and found the link between the microscopic interactions, which fluctuate about an average configuration, to the macroscopically observable behavior, in form of a simple logarithmic law, with a proportionality constant, the Boltzmann constant, that has become one of the defining universal constants for the modern International System of Units (SI).\nIn 1948, Bell Labs scientist Claude Shannon developed similar statistical concepts of measuring microscopic uncertainty and multiplicity to the problem of random losses of information in telecommunication signals. Upon John von Neumann's suggestion, Shannon named this entity of \"missing information\" in analogous manner to its use in statistical mechanics as \"entropy\", and gave birth to the field of information theory. This description has been identified as a universal definition of the concept of entropy.\nHistory.\nIn his 1803 paper \"Fundamental Principles of Equilibrium and Movement\", the French mathematician Lazare Carnot proposed that in any machine, the accelerations and shocks of the moving parts represent losses of \"moment of activity\"; in any natural process there exists an inherent tendency towards the dissipation of useful energy. In 1824, building on that work, Lazare's son, Sadi Carnot, published \"Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire\", which posited that in all heat-engines, whenever \"caloric\" (what is now known as heat) falls through a temperature difference, work or motive power can be produced from the actions of its fall from a hot to cold body. He used an analogy with how water falls in a water wheel. That was an early insight into the second law of thermodynamics. Carnot based his views of heat partially on the early 18th-century \"Newtonian hypothesis\" that both heat and light were types of indestructible forms of matter, which are attracted and repelled by other matter, and partially on the contemporary views of Count Rumford, who showed in 1789 that heat could be created by friction, as when cannon bores are machined. Carnot reasoned that if the body of the working substance, such as a body of steam, is returned to its original state at the end of a complete engine cycle, \"no change occurs in the condition of the working body\".\nThe first law of thermodynamics, deduced from the heat-friction experiments of James Joule in 1843, expresses the concept of energy and its conservation in all processes; the first law, however, is unsuitable to separately quantify the effects of friction and dissipation.\nIn the 1850s and 1860s, German physicist Rudolf Clausius objected to the supposition that no change occurs in the working body, and gave that change a mathematical interpretation, by questioning the nature of the inherent loss of usable heat when work is done, e.g., heat produced by friction. He described his observations as a dissipative use of energy, resulting in a \"transformation-content\" ( in German), of a thermodynamic system or working body of chemical species during a change of state. That was in contrast to earlier views, based on the theories of Isaac Newton, that heat was an indestructible particle that had mass. Clausius discovered that the non-usable energy increases as steam proceeds from inlet to exhaust in a steam engine. From the prefix \"en-\", as in 'energy', and from the Greek word [trop\u0113], which is translated in an established lexicon as \"turning\" or \"change\" and that he rendered in German as , a word often translated into English as \"transformation\", in 1865 Clausius coined the name of that property as \"entropy\". The word was adopted into the English language in 1868.\nLater, scientists such as Ludwig Boltzmann, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and James Clerk Maxwell gave entropy a statistical basis. In 1877, Boltzmann visualized a probabilistic way to measure the entropy of an ensemble of ideal gas particles, in which he defined entropy as proportional to the natural logarithm of the number of microstates such a gas could occupy. The proportionality constant in this definition, called the Boltzmann constant, has become one of the defining universal constants for the modern International System of Units (SI). Henceforth, the essential problem in statistical thermodynamics has been to determine the distribution of a given amount of energy \"E\" over \"N\" identical systems. Constantin Carath\u00e9odory, a Greek mathematician, linked entropy with a mathematical definition of irreversibility, in terms of trajectories and integrability.\nEtymology.\nIn 1865, Clausius named the concept of \"the differential of a quantity which depends on the configuration of the system\", \"entropy\" () after the Greek word for 'transformation'. He gave \"transformational content\" () as a synonym, paralleling his \"thermal and ergonal content\" () as the name of formula_1, but preferring the term \"entropy\" as a close parallel of the word \"energy\", as he found the concepts nearly \"analogous in their physical significance\". This term was formed by replacing the root of ('ergon', 'work') by that of ('tropy', 'transformation').\nIn more detail, Clausius explained his choice of \"entropy\" as a name as follows:\nI prefer going to the ancient languages for the names of important scientific quantities, so that they may mean the same thing in all living tongues. I propose, therefore, to call \"S\" the \"entropy\" of a body, after the Greek word \"transformation\". I have designedly coined the word \"entropy\" to be similar to energy, for these two quantities are so analogous in their physical significance, that an analogy of denominations seems to me helpful.\nLeon Cooper added that in this way \"he succeeded in coining a word that meant the same thing to everybody: nothing\".\nDefinitions and descriptions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAny method involving the notion of entropy, the very existence of which depends on the second law of thermodynamics, will doubtless seem to many far-fetched, and may repel beginners as obscure and difficult of comprehension.\nWillard Gibbs, \"Graphical Methods in the Thermodynamics of Fluids\"\nThe concept of entropy is described by two principal approaches, the macroscopic perspective of classical thermodynamics, and the microscopic description central to statistical mechanics. The classical approach defines entropy in terms of macroscopically measurable physical properties, such as bulk mass, volume, pressure, and temperature. The statistical definition of entropy defines it in terms of the statistics of the motions of the microscopic constituents of a system \u2013 modeled at first classically, e.g. Newtonian particles constituting a gas, and later quantum-mechanically (photons, phonons, spins, etc.). The two approaches form a consistent, unified view of the same phenomenon as expressed in the second law of thermodynamics, which has found universal applicability to physical processes.\nState variables and functions of state.\nMany thermodynamic properties are defined by physical variables that define a state of thermodynamic equilibrium; these are \"state variables\". State variables depend only on the equilibrium condition, not on the path evolution to that state. State variables can be functions of state, also called \"state functions\", in a sense that one state variable is a mathematical function of other state variables. Often, if some properties of a system are determined, they are sufficient to determine the state of the system and thus other properties' values. For example, temperature and pressure of a given quantity of gas determine its state, and thus also its volume via the ideal gas law. A system composed of a pure substance of a single phase at a particular uniform temperature and pressure is determined, and is thus a particular state, and has not only a particular volume but also a specific entropy. The fact that entropy is a function of state makes it useful. In the Carnot cycle, the working fluid returns to the same state that it had at the start of the cycle, hence the change or line integral of any state function, such as entropy, over this reversible cycle is zero.\nReversible process.\nTotal entropy may be conserved during a reversible process. The entropy change \"formula_2\" of the system (not including the surroundings) is well-defined as heat \"formula_3\" transferred to the system divided by the system temperature \"formula_4\", formula_5. A reversible process is a quasistatic one that deviates only infinitesimally from thermodynamic equilibrium and avoids friction or other dissipation. Any process that happens quickly enough to deviate from thermal equilibrium cannot be reversible, total entropy increases, and the potential for maximum work to be done in the process is also lost. For example, in the Carnot cycle, while the heat flow from the hot reservoir to the cold reservoir represents an increase in entropy in the cold reservoir, the work output, if reversibly and perfectly stored in some energy storage mechanism, represents a decrease in entropy that could be used to operate the heat engine in reverse and return to the previous state; thus the \"total\" entropy change may still be zero at all times if the entire process is reversible. An irreversible process increases the total entropy of the system and surroundings.\nCarnot cycle.\nThe concept of entropy arose from Rudolf Clausius's study of the Carnot cycle that is a thermodynamic cycle performed by a Carnot heat engine as a reversible heat engine. In a Carnot cycle, heat \"Q\"H is absorbed isothermally at temperature \"T\"H from a 'hot' reservoir (in the isothermal expansion stage) and given up isothermally as heat \"Q\"C to a 'cold' reservoir at \"T\"C (in the isothermal compression stage). According to Carnot's principle or theorem, work from a heat engine with two thermal reservoirs can be produced only when there is a temperature difference between these reservoirs, and for reversible engines which are mostly and equally efficient among all heat engines for a given thermal reservoir pair, the work is a function of the reservoir temperatures and the heat absorbed to the engine \"Q\"H (heat engine work output = heat engine efficiency \u00d7 heat to the engine, where the efficiency is a function of the reservoir temperatures for reversible heat engines). Carnot did not distinguish between \"Q\"H and \"Q\"C, since he was using the incorrect hypothesis that caloric theory was valid, and hence heat was conserved (the incorrect assumption that \"Q\"H and \"Q\"C were equal in magnitude) when, in fact, \"Q\"H is greater than the magnitude of \"Q\"C in magnitude. Through the efforts of Clausius and Kelvin, it is now known that the work done by a reversible heat engine is the product of the Carnot efficiency (it is the efficiency of all reversible heat engines with the same thermal reservoir pairs according to the Carnot's theorem) and the heat absorbed from the hot reservoir:\nHere formula_6 is work done by the Carnot heat engine, formula_7 is heat to the engine from the hot reservoir, and formula_8 is heat to the cold reservoir from the engine. To derive the \"Carnot efficiency\", which is 1 \u2212 \"T\"C/\"T\"H (a number less than one), Kelvin had to evaluate the ratio of the work output to the heat absorbed during the isothermal expansion with the help of the Carnot\u2013Clapeyron equation, which contained an unknown function called the Carnot function. The possibility that the Carnot function could be the temperature as measured from a zero point of temperature was suggested by Joule in a letter to Kelvin. This allowed Kelvin to establish his absolute temperature scale. It is also known that the net work \"W\" produced by the system in one cycle is the net heat absorbed, which is the sum (or difference of the magnitudes) of the heat \"Q\"H &gt; 0 absorbed from the hot reservoir and the waste heat \"Q\"C &lt; 0 given off to the cold reservoir:\nSince the latter is valid over the entire cycle, this gave Clausius the hint that at each stage of the cycle, work and heat would not be equal, but rather their difference would be the change of a state function that would vanish upon completion of the cycle. The state function was called the internal energy, that is central to the first law of thermodynamics.\nNow equating (1) and (2) gives, for the engine per Carnot cycle,\nThis implies that there is a function of state whose change is \"Q\"/\"T\" and this state function is conserved over a complete Carnot cycle, like other state function such as the internal energy. Clausius called this state function \"entropy\". One can see that entropy was discovered through mathematics rather than through laboratory experimental results. It is a mathematical construct and has no easy physical analogy. This makes the concept somewhat obscure or abstract, akin to how the concept of energy arose. This equation shows an entropy change per Carnot cycle is zero. In fact, an entropy change in the both thermal reservoirs per Carnot cycle is also zero since that change is simply expressed by reverting the sign of each term in the equation (3) according to the fact that, for example, for heat transfer from the hot reservoir to the engine, the engine receives the heat while the hot reservoir loses the same amount of the heat;\nwhere we denote an entropy change for a thermal reservoir by \u0394\"S\"\"r,i\" = - \"Q\"\"i\"/\"T\"\"i\", for \"i\" as either H (Hot reservoir) or C (Cold reservoir), by considering the above-mentioned signal convention of heat for the engine.\nClausius then asked what would happen if less work is produced by the system than that predicted by Carnot's principle for the same thermal reservoir pair and the same heat transfer from the hot reservoir to the engine \"Q\"H. In this case, the right-hand side of the equation (1) would be the upper bound of the work output by the system, and the equation would now be converted into an inequalityformula_9When the equation (2) is used to express the work as a net or total heat exchanged in a cycle, we getformula_10orformula_11by considering the sign convention of heat where \"Q\"H &gt; 0 is heat that is from the hot reservoir and is absorbed by the engine and \"Q\"C &lt; 0 is the waste heat given off to the cold reservoir from the engine. So, more heat is given up to the cold reservoir than in the Carnot cycle. The above inequality formula_12 can be written asformula_13If we, again, denote an entropy change for a thermal reservoir by \u0394\"S\"\"r,i\" = - \"Q\"\"i\"/\"T\"\"i\", for \"i\" as either H (Hot reservoir) or C (Cold reservoir), by considering the abovementioned signal convention of heat for the engine, thenformula_14or\ntelling that the magnitude of the entropy earned by the cold reservoir is greater than the entropy lost by the hot reservoir. The net entropy change in the engine per its thermodynamic cycle is zero, so the net entropy change in the engine and both the thermal reservoirs per cycle increases if work produced by the engine is less than the work achieved by a Carnot engine in the equation (1).\nThe Carnot cycle and Carnot efficiency as shown in the equation (1) are useful because they define the upper bound of the possible work output and the efficiency of any classical thermodynamic heat engine. Other cycles, such as the Otto cycle, Diesel cycle and Brayton cycle, can be analyzed from the standpoint of the Carnot cycle. Any machine or cyclic process that converts heat to work and is claimed to produce an efficiency greater than the Carnot efficiency is not viable because it violates the second law of thermodynamics.\nFor very small numbers of particles in the system, statistical thermodynamics must be used. The efficiency of devices such as photovoltaic cells requires an analysis from the standpoint of quantum mechanics.\nClassical thermodynamics.\nThe thermodynamic definition of entropy was developed in the early 1850s by Rudolf Clausius and essentially describes how to measure the entropy of an isolated system in thermodynamic equilibrium with its parts. Clausius created the term entropy as an extensive thermodynamic variable that was shown to be useful in characterizing the Carnot cycle. Heat transfer in the isotherm steps (isothermal expansion and isothermal compression) of the Carnot cycle was found to be proportional to the temperature of a system (known as its absolute temperature). This relationship was expressed in an increment of entropy that is equal to incremental heat transfer divided by temperature. Entropy was found to vary in the thermodynamic cycle but eventually returned to the same value at the end of every cycle. Thus it was found to be a function of state, specifically a thermodynamic state of the system.\nWhile Clausius based his definition on a reversible process, there are also irreversible processes that change entropy. Following the second law of thermodynamics, entropy of an isolated system always increases for irreversible processes. The difference between an isolated system and closed system is that energy may \"not\" flow to and from an isolated system, but energy flow to and from a closed system is possible. Nevertheless, for both closed and isolated systems, and indeed, also in open systems, irreversible thermodynamics processes may occur.\nAccording to the Clausius equality, for a reversible cyclic process: formula_15. This means the line integral formula_16 is path-independent.\nSo we can define a state function S called entropy, which satisfies formula_5.\nTo find the entropy difference between any two states of a system, the integral must be evaluated for some reversible path between the initial and final states. Since entropy is a state function, the entropy change of the system for an irreversible path is the same as for a reversible path between the same two states. However, the heat transferred to or from, and the entropy change of, the surroundings is different.\nWe can only obtain the change of entropy by integrating the above formula. To obtain the absolute value of the entropy, we need the third law of thermodynamics, which states that \"S\" = 0 at absolute zero for perfect crystals.\nFrom a macroscopic perspective, in classical thermodynamics the entropy is interpreted as a state function of a thermodynamic system: that is, a property depending only on the current state of the system, independent of how that state came to be achieved. In any process where the system gives up energy \u0394\"E\", and its entropy falls by \u0394\"S\", a quantity at least \"T\"R \u0394\"S\" of that energy must be given up to the system's surroundings as heat (\"T\"R is the temperature of the system's external surroundings). Otherwise the process cannot go forward. In classical thermodynamics, the entropy of a system is defined only if it is in physical thermodynamic equilibrium. (But chemical equilibrium is not required: the entropy of a mixture of two moles of hydrogen and one mole of oxygen at 1 bar pressure and 298 K is well-defined.)\nStatistical mechanics.\nThe statistical definition was developed by Ludwig Boltzmann in the 1870s by analyzing the statistical behavior of the microscopic components of the system. Boltzmann showed that this definition of entropy was equivalent to the thermodynamic entropy to within a constant factor\u2014known as the Boltzmann constant. In short, the thermodynamic definition of entropy provides the experimental verification of entropy, while the statistical definition of entropy extends the concept, providing an explanation and a deeper understanding of its nature.\nThe interpretation of entropy in statistical mechanics is the measure of uncertainty, disorder, or \"mixedupness\" in the phrase of Gibbs, which remains about a system after its observable macroscopic properties, such as temperature, pressure and volume, have been taken into account. For a given set of macroscopic variables, the entropy measures the degree to which the probability of the system is spread out over different possible microstates. In contrast to the macrostate, which characterizes plainly observable average quantities, a microstate specifies all molecular details about the system including the position and velocity of every molecule. The more such states are available to the system with appreciable probability, the greater the entropy. In statistical mechanics, entropy is a measure of the number of ways a system can be arranged, often taken to be a measure of \"disorder\" (the higher the entropy, the higher the disorder). This definition describes the entropy as being proportional to the natural logarithm of the number of possible microscopic configurations of the individual atoms and molecules of the system (microstates) that could cause the observed macroscopic state (macrostate) of the system. The constant of proportionality is the Boltzmann constant.\nThe Boltzmann constant, and therefore entropy, have dimensions of energy divided by temperature, which has a unit of joules per kelvin (J\u22c5K\u22121) in the International System of Units (or kg\u22c5m2\u22c5s\u22122\u22c5K\u22121 in terms of base units). The entropy of a substance is usually given as an intensive property\u00a0\u2013 either entropy per unit mass (SI unit: J\u22c5K\u22121\u22c5kg\u22121) or entropy per unit amount of substance (SI unit: J\u22c5K\u22121\u22c5mol\u22121).\nSpecifically, entropy is a logarithmic measure of the number of system states with significant probability of being occupied:\nformula_18\n(formula_19 is the probability that the system is in formula_20th state, usually given by the Boltzmann distribution; if states are defined in a continuous manner, the summation is replaced by an integral over all possible states) or, equivalently, the expected value of the logarithm of the probability that a microstate is occupied\nformula_21\nwhere \"k\"B is the Boltzmann constant, equal to .\nThe summation is over all the possible microstates of the system, and \"pi\" is the probability that the system is in the \"i\"-th microstate. This definition assumes that the basis set of states has been picked so that there is no information on their relative phases. In a different basis set, the more general expression is\nformula_22\nwhere formula_23 is the density matrix, formula_24 is trace, and formula_25 is the matrix logarithm. This density matrix formulation is not needed in cases of thermal equilibrium so long as the basis states are chosen to be energy eigenstates. For most practical purposes, this can be taken as the fundamental definition of entropy since all other formulas for \"S\" can be mathematically derived from it, but not vice versa.\nIn what has been called \"the fundamental assumption of statistical thermodynamics\" or \"the fundamental postulate in statistical mechanics\", among system microstates of the same energy (degenerate microstates) each microstate is assumed to be populated with equal probability; this assumption is usually justified for an isolated system in equilibrium. Then for an isolated system \"p\"\"i\" = 1/\u03a9, where \u03a9 is the number of microstates whose energy equals the system's energy, and the previous equation reduces to\nformula_26\nIn thermodynamics, such a system is one in which the volume, number of molecules, and internal energy are fixed (the microcanonical ensemble).\nFor a given thermodynamic system, the \"excess entropy\" is defined as the entropy minus that of an ideal gas at the same density and temperature, a quantity that is always negative because an ideal gas is maximally disordered. This concept plays an important role in liquid-state theory. For instance, Rosenfeld's excess-entropy scaling principle states that reduced transport coefficients throughout the two-dimensional phase diagram are functions uniquely determined by the excess entropy.\nThe most general interpretation of entropy is as a measure of the extent of uncertainty about a system. The equilibrium state of a system maximizes the entropy because it does not reflect all information about the initial conditions, except for the conserved variables. This uncertainty is not of the everyday subjective kind, but rather the uncertainty inherent to the experimental method and interpretative model.\nThe interpretative model has a central role in determining entropy. The qualifier \"for a given set of macroscopic variables\" above has deep implications: if two observers use different sets of macroscopic variables, they see different entropies. For example, if observer A uses the variables \"U\", \"V\" and \"W\", and observer B uses \"U\", \"V\", \"W\", \"X\", then, by changing \"X\", observer B can cause an effect that looks like a violation of the second law of thermodynamics to observer A. In other words: the set of macroscopic variables one chooses must include everything that may change in the experiment, otherwise one might see decreasing entropy.\nEntropy can be defined for any Markov processes with reversible dynamics and the detailed balance property.\nIn Boltzmann's 1896 \"Lectures on Gas Theory\", he showed that this expression gives a measure of entropy for systems of atoms and molecules in the gas phase, thus providing a measure for the entropy of classical thermodynamics.\nEntropy of a system.\nEntropy arises directly from the Carnot cycle. It can also be described as the reversible heat divided by temperature. Entropy is a fundamental function of state.\nIn a thermodynamic system, pressure and temperature tend to become uniform over time because the equilibrium state has higher probability (more possible combinations of microstates) than any other state.\nAs an example, for a glass of ice water in air at room temperature, the difference in temperature between the warm room (the surroundings) and the cold glass of ice and water (the system and not part of the room) decreases as portions of the thermal energy from the warm surroundings spread to the cooler system of ice and water. Over time the temperature of the glass and its contents and the temperature of the room become equal. In other words, the entropy of the room has decreased as some of its energy has been dispersed to the ice and water, of which the entropy has increased.\nHowever, as calculated in the example, the entropy of the system of ice and water has increased more than the entropy of the surrounding room has decreased. In an isolated system such as the room and ice water taken together, the dispersal of energy from warmer to cooler always results in a net increase in entropy. Thus, when the \"universe\" of the room and ice water system has reached a temperature equilibrium, the entropy change from the initial state is at a maximum. The entropy of the thermodynamic system is a measure of how far the equalization has progressed.\nThermodynamic entropy is a non-conserved state function that is of great importance in the sciences of physics and chemistry. Historically, the concept of entropy evolved to explain why some processes (permitted by conservation laws) occur spontaneously while their time reversals (also permitted by conservation laws) do not; systems tend to progress in the direction of increasing entropy. For isolated systems, entropy never decreases. This fact has several important consequences in science: first, it prohibits \"perpetual motion\" machines; and second, it implies the arrow of entropy has the same direction as the arrow of time. Increases in the total entropy of system and surroundings correspond to irreversible changes, because some energy is expended as waste heat, limiting the amount of work a system can do.\nUnlike many other functions of state, entropy cannot be directly observed but must be calculated. Absolute standard molar entropy of a substance can be calculated from the measured temperature dependence of its heat capacity. The molar entropy of ions is obtained as a difference in entropy from a reference state defined as zero entropy. The second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of an isolated system must increase or remain constant. Therefore, entropy is not a conserved quantity: for example, in an isolated system with non-uniform temperature, heat might irreversibly flow and the temperature become more uniform such that entropy increases. Chemical reactions cause changes in entropy and system entropy, in conjunction with enthalpy, plays an important role in determining in which direction a chemical reaction spontaneously proceeds.\nOne dictionary definition of entropy is that it is \"a measure of thermal energy per unit temperature that is not available for useful work\" in a cyclic process. For instance, a substance at uniform temperature is at maximum entropy and cannot drive a heat engine. A substance at non-uniform temperature is at a lower entropy (than if the heat distribution is allowed to even out) and some of the thermal energy can drive a heat engine.\nA special case of entropy increase, the entropy of mixing, occurs when two or more different substances are mixed. If the substances are at the same temperature and pressure, there is no net exchange of heat or work \u2013 the entropy change is entirely due to the mixing of the different substances. At a statistical mechanical level, this results due to the change in available volume per particle with mixing.\nEquivalence of definitions.\nProofs of equivalence between the definition of entropy in statistical mechanics (the Gibbs entropy formula formula_27) and in classical thermodynamics (formula_5 together with the fundamental thermodynamic relation) are known for the microcanonical ensemble, the canonical ensemble, the grand canonical ensemble, and the isothermal\u2013isobaric ensemble. These proofs are based on the probability density of microstates of the generalized Boltzmann distribution and the identification of the thermodynamic internal energy as the ensemble average formula_29. Thermodynamic relations are then employed to derive the well-known Gibbs entropy formula. However, the equivalence between the Gibbs entropy formula and the thermodynamic definition of entropy is not a fundamental thermodynamic relation but rather a consequence of the form of the generalized Boltzmann distribution.\nFurthermore, it has been shown that the definitions of entropy in statistical mechanics is the only entropy that is equivalent to the classical thermodynamics entropy under the following postulates:\nSecond law of thermodynamics.\nThe second law of thermodynamics requires that, in general, the total entropy of any system does not decrease other than by increasing the entropy of some other system. Hence, in a system isolated from its environment, the entropy of that system tends not to decrease. It follows that heat cannot flow from a colder body to a hotter body without the application of work to the colder body. Secondly, it is impossible for any device operating on a cycle to produce net work from a single temperature reservoir; the production of net work requires flow of heat from a hotter reservoir to a colder reservoir, or a single expanding reservoir undergoing adiabatic cooling, which performs adiabatic work. As a result, there is no possibility of a perpetual motion machine. It follows that a reduction in the increase of entropy in a specified process, such as a chemical reaction, means that it is energetically more efficient.\nIt follows from the second law of thermodynamics that the entropy of a system that is not isolated may decrease. An air conditioner, for example, may cool the air in a room, thus reducing the entropy of the air of that system. The heat expelled from the room (the system), which the air conditioner transports and discharges to the outside air, always makes a bigger contribution to the entropy of the environment than the decrease of the entropy of the air of that system. Thus, the total of entropy of the room plus the entropy of the environment increases, in agreement with the second law of thermodynamics.\nIn mechanics, the second law in conjunction with the fundamental thermodynamic relation places limits on a system's ability to do useful work. The entropy change of a system at temperature formula_4 absorbing an infinitesimal amount of heat formula_31 in a reversible way, is given by formula_32. More explicitly, an energy formula_33 is not available to do useful work, where formula_34 is the temperature of the coldest accessible reservoir or heat sink external to the system. For further discussion, see \"Exergy\".\nStatistical mechanics demonstrates that entropy is governed by probability, thus allowing for a decrease in disorder even in an isolated system. Although this is possible, such an event has a small probability of occurring, making it unlikely.\nThe applicability of a second law of thermodynamics is limited to systems in or sufficiently near equilibrium state, so that they have defined entropy. Some inhomogeneous systems out of thermodynamic equilibrium still satisfy the hypothesis of local thermodynamic equilibrium, so that entropy density is locally defined as an intensive quantity. For such systems, there may apply a principle of maximum time rate of entropy production. It states that such a system may evolve to a steady state that maximizes its time rate of entropy production. This does not mean that such a system is necessarily always in a condition of maximum time rate of entropy production; it means that it may evolve to such a steady state.\nApplications.\nThe fundamental thermodynamic relation.\nThe entropy of a system depends on its internal energy and its external parameters, such as its volume. In the thermodynamic limit, this fact leads to an equation relating the change in the internal energy formula_1 to changes in the entropy and the external parameters. This relation is known as the \"fundamental thermodynamic relation\". If external pressure formula_36 bears on the volume formula_37 as the only external parameter, this relation is:\n formula_38\nSince both internal energy and entropy are monotonic functions of temperature formula_39, implying that the internal energy is fixed when one specifies the entropy and the volume, this relation is valid even if the change from one state of thermal equilibrium to another with infinitesimally larger entropy and volume happens in a non-quasistatic way (so during this change the system may be very far out of thermal equilibrium and then the whole-system entropy, pressure, and temperature may not exist).\nThe fundamental thermodynamic relation implies many thermodynamic identities that are valid in general, independent of the microscopic details of the system. Important examples are the Maxwell relations and the relations between heat capacities.\nEntropy in chemical thermodynamics.\nThermodynamic entropy is central in chemical thermodynamics, enabling changes to be quantified and the outcome of reactions predicted. The second law of thermodynamics states that entropy in an isolated system \u2013 the combination of a subsystem under study and its surroundings \u2013 increases during all spontaneous chemical and physical processes. The Clausius equation of formula_40 introduces the measurement of entropy change, formula_41. Entropy change describes the direction and quantifies the magnitude of simple changes such as heat transfer between systems \u2013 always from hotter to cooler spontaneously.\nThe thermodynamic entropy therefore has the dimension of energy divided by temperature, and the unit joule per kelvin (J/K) in the International System of Units (SI).\nThermodynamic entropy is an extensive property, meaning that it scales with the size or extent of a system. In many processes it is useful to specify the entropy as an intensive property independent of the size, as a specific entropy characteristic of the type of system studied. Specific entropy may be expressed relative to a unit of mass, typically the kilogram (unit: J\u22c5kg\u22121\u22c5K\u22121). Alternatively, in chemistry, it is also referred to one mole of substance, in which case it is called the \"molar entropy\" with a unit of J\u22c5mol\u22121\u22c5K\u22121.\nThus, when one mole of substance at about is warmed by its surroundings to , the sum of the incremental values of formula_42 constitute each element's or compound's standard molar entropy, an indicator of the amount of energy stored by a substance at . Entropy change also measures the mixing of substances as a summation of their relative quantities in the final mixture.\nEntropy is equally essential in predicting the extent and direction of complex chemical reactions. For such applications, formula_41 must be incorporated in an expression that includes both the system and its surroundings, formula_44. This expression becomes, via some steps, the Gibbs free energy equation for reactants and products in the system: formula_45 [the Gibbs free energy change of the system] formula_46 [the enthalpy change] formula_47 [the entropy change].\nWorld's technological capacity to store and communicate entropic information.\nA 2011 study in Science (journal) estimated the world's technological capacity to store and communicate optimally compressed information normalized on the most effective compression algorithms available in the year 2007, therefore estimating the entropy of the technologically available sources. The author's estimate that human kind's technological capacity to store information grew from 2.6 (entropically compressed) exabytes in 1986 to 295 (entropically compressed) exabytes in 2007. The world's technological capacity to receive information through one-way broadcast networks was 432 exabytes of (entropically compressed) information in 1986, to 1.9 zettabytes in 2007. The world's effective capacity to exchange information through two-way telecommunication networks was 281 petabytes of (entropically compressed) information in 1986, to 65 (entropically compressed) exabytes in 2007.\nEntropy balance equation for open systems.\nIn chemical engineering, the principles of thermodynamics are commonly applied to \"open systems\", i.e. those in which heat, work, and mass flow across the system boundary. Flows of both heat (formula_48) and work, i.e. formula_49 (shaft work) and formula_50 (pressure-volume work), across the system boundaries, in general cause changes in the entropy of the system. Transfer as heat entails entropy transfer formula_51, where formula_39 is the absolute thermodynamic temperature of the system at the point of the heat flow. If there are mass flows across the system boundaries, they also influence the total entropy of the system. This account, in terms of heat and work, is valid only for cases in which the work and heat transfers are by paths physically distinct from the paths of entry and exit of matter from the system.\nTo derive a generalized entropy balanced equation, we start with the general balance equation for the change in any extensive quantity formula_53 in a thermodynamic system, a quantity that may be either conserved, such as energy, or non-conserved, such as entropy. The basic generic balance expression states that formula_54, i.e. the rate of change of formula_53 in the system, equals the rate at which formula_53 enters the system at the boundaries, minus the rate at which formula_53 leaves the system across the system boundaries, plus the rate at which formula_53 is generated within the system. For an open thermodynamic system in which heat and work are transferred by paths separate from the paths for transfer of matter, using this generic balance equation, with respect to the rate of change with time formula_59 of the extensive quantity entropy formula_60, the entropy balance equation is:\nformula_61\nwhere\nIf there are multiple heat flows, the term formula_51 is replaced by formula_67 where formula_68 is the heat flow and formula_69 is the temperature at the formula_70th heat flow port into the system.\nThe nomenclature \"entropy balance\" is misleading and often deemed inappropriate because entropy is not a conserved quantity. In other words, the term formula_71 is never a known quantity but always a derived one based on the expression above. Therefore, the open system version of the second law is more appropriately described as the \"entropy generation equation\" since it specifies that formula_72, with zero for reversible processes or greater than zero for irreversible ones.\nEntropy change formulas for simple processes.\nFor certain simple transformations in systems of constant composition, the entropy changes are given by simple formulas.\nIsothermal expansion or compression of an ideal gas.\nFor the expansion (or compression) of an ideal gas from an initial volume formula_73 and pressure formula_74 to a final volume formula_37 and pressure formula_76 at any constant temperature, the change in entropy is given by:\nformula_77\nHere formula_78 is the amount of gas (in moles) and formula_79 is the ideal gas constant. These equations also apply for expansion into a finite vacuum or a throttling process, where the temperature, internal energy and enthalpy for an ideal gas remain constant.\nCooling and heating.\nFor pure heating or cooling of any system (gas, liquid or solid) at constant pressure from an initial temperature formula_80 to a final temperature formula_39, the entropy change is\nformula_82\nprovided that the constant-pressure molar heat capacity (or specific heat) \"C\"\"P\" is constant and that no phase transition occurs in this temperature interval.\nSimilarly at constant volume, the entropy change is\nformula_83\nwhere the constant-volume molar heat capacity \"C\"v is constant and there is no phase change.\nAt low temperatures near absolute zero, heat capacities of solids quickly drop off to near zero, so the assumption of constant heat capacity does not apply.\nSince entropy is a state function, the entropy change of any process in which temperature and volume both vary is the same as for a path divided into two steps \u2013 heating at constant volume and expansion at constant temperature. For an ideal gas, the total entropy change is\nformula_84\nSimilarly if the temperature and pressure of an ideal gas both vary,\nformula_85\nPhase transitions.\nReversible phase transitions occur at constant temperature and pressure. The reversible heat is the enthalpy change for the transition, and the entropy change is the enthalpy change divided by the thermodynamic temperature. For fusion (melting) of a solid to a liquid at the melting point \"T\"m, the entropy of fusion is\nformula_86\nSimilarly, for vaporization of a liquid to a gas at the boiling point \"T\"b, the entropy of vaporization is\nformula_87\nApproaches to understanding entropy.\nAs a fundamental aspect of thermodynamics and physics, several different approaches to entropy beyond that of Clausius and Boltzmann are valid.\nStandard textbook definitions.\nThe following is a list of additional definitions of entropy from a collection of textbooks:\nIn Boltzmann's analysis in terms of constituent particles, entropy is a measure of the number of possible microscopic states (or microstates) of a system in thermodynamic equilibrium.\nOrder and disorder.\nEntropy is often loosely associated with the amount of order or disorder, or of chaos, in a thermodynamic system. The traditional qualitative description of entropy is that it refers to changes in the status quo of the system and is a measure of \"molecular disorder\" and the amount of wasted energy in a dynamical energy transformation from one state or form to another. In this direction, several recent authors have derived exact entropy formulas to account for and measure disorder and order in atomic and molecular assemblies. One of the simpler entropy order/disorder formulas is that derived in 1984 by thermodynamic physicist Peter Landsberg, based on a combination of thermodynamics and information theory arguments. He argues that when constraints operate on a system, such that it is prevented from entering one or more of its possible or permitted states, as contrasted with its forbidden states, the measure of the total amount of \"disorder\" in the system is given by:\nformula_88\nSimilarly, the total amount of \"order\" in the system is given by:\nformula_89\nIn which \"C\"D is the \"disorder\" capacity of the system, which is the entropy of the parts contained in the permitted ensemble, \"C\"I is the \"information\" capacity of the system, an expression similar to Shannon's channel capacity, and \"C\"O is the \"order\" capacity of the system.\nEnergy dispersal.\nThe concept of entropy can be described qualitatively as a measure of energy dispersal at a specific temperature. Similar terms have been in use from early in the history of classical thermodynamics, and with the development of statistical thermodynamics and quantum theory, entropy changes have been described in terms of the mixing or \"spreading\" of the total energy of each constituent of a system over its particular quantized energy levels.\nAmbiguities in the terms \"disorder\" and \"chaos\", which usually have meanings directly opposed to equilibrium, contribute to widespread confusion and hamper comprehension of entropy for most students. As the second law of thermodynamics shows, in an isolated system internal portions at different temperatures tend to adjust to a single uniform temperature and thus produce equilibrium. A recently developed educational approach avoids ambiguous terms and describes such spreading out of energy as dispersal, which leads to loss of the differentials required for work even though the total energy remains constant in accordance with the first law of thermodynamics (compare discussion in next section). Physical chemist Peter Atkins, in his textbook \"Physical Chemistry\", introduces entropy with the statement that \"spontaneous changes are always accompanied by a dispersal of energy or matter and often both\".\nRelating entropy to energy \"usefulness\".\nIt is possible (in a thermal context) to regard lower entropy as a measure of the \"effectiveness\" or \"usefulness\" of a particular quantity of energy. Energy supplied at a higher temperature (i.e. with low entropy) tends to be more useful than the same amount of energy available at a lower temperature. Mixing a hot parcel of a fluid with a cold one produces a parcel of intermediate temperature, in which the overall increase in entropy represents a \"loss\" that can never be replaced.\nAs the entropy of the universe is steadily increasing, its total energy is becoming less useful. Eventually, this leads to the heat death of the universe.\nEntropy and adiabatic accessibility.\nA definition of entropy based entirely on the relation of adiabatic accessibility between equilibrium states was given by E.\u00a0H.\u00a0Lieb and J.\u00a0Yngvason in 1999. This approach has several predecessors, including the pioneering work of Constantin Carath\u00e9odory from 1909 and the monograph by R.\u00a0Giles. In the setting of Lieb and Yngvason, one starts by picking, for a unit amount of the substance under consideration, two reference states formula_90 and formula_91 such that the latter is adiabatically accessible from the former but not conversely. Defining the entropies of the reference states to be 0 and 1 respectively, the entropy of a state formula_92 is defined as the largest number formula_93 such that formula_92 is adiabatically accessible from a composite state consisting of an amount formula_93 in the state formula_91 and a complementary amount, formula_97, in the state formula_90. A simple but important result within this setting is that entropy is uniquely determined, apart from a choice of unit and an additive constant for each chemical element, by the following properties: It is monotonic with respect to the relation of adiabatic accessibility, additive on composite systems, and extensive under scaling.\nEntropy in quantum mechanics.\nIn quantum statistical mechanics, the concept of entropy was developed by John von Neumann and is generally referred to as \"von Neumann entropy\",\n formula_99\nwhere \"\u03c1\" is the density matrix, and Tr is the trace operator.\nThis upholds the correspondence principle, because in the classical limit, when the phases between the basis states used for the classical probabilities are purely random, this expression is equivalent to the familiar classical definition of entropy,\n formula_100\ni.e. in such a basis the density matrix is diagonal.\nVon Neumann established a rigorous mathematical framework for quantum mechanics with his work . He provided in this work a theory of measurement, where the usual notion of wave function collapse is described as an irreversible process (the so-called von Neumann or projective measurement). Using this concept, in conjunction with the density matrix he extended the classical concept of entropy into the quantum domain.\nInformation theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI thought of calling it \"information\", but the word was overly used, so I decided to call it \"uncertainty\". [...] Von Neumann told me, \"You should call it entropy, for two reasons. In the first place your uncertainty function has been used in statistical mechanics under that name, so it already has a name. In the second place, and more important, nobody knows what entropy really is, so in a debate you will always have the advantage.\nConversation between Claude Shannon and John von Neumann regarding what name to give to the attenuation in phone-line signals\nWhen viewed in terms of information theory, the entropy state function is the amount of information in the system that is needed to fully specify the microstate of the system. Entropy is the measure of the amount of missing information before reception. Often called \"Shannon entropy\", it was originally devised by Claude Shannon in 1948 to study the size of information of a transmitted message. The definition of information entropy is expressed in terms of a discrete set of probabilities formula_19 so that\nformula_102\nwhere the base of the logarithm determines the units (for example, the binary logarithm corresponds to bits).\nIn the case of transmitted messages, these probabilities were the probabilities that a particular message was actually transmitted, and the entropy of the message system was a measure of the average size of information of a message. For the case of equal probabilities (i.e. each message is equally probable), the Shannon entropy (in bits) is just the number of binary questions needed to determine the content of the message.\nMost researchers consider information entropy and thermodynamic entropy directly linked to the same concept, while others argue that they are distinct. Both expressions are mathematically similar. If formula_6 is the number of microstates that can yield a given macrostate, and each microstate has the same \"a priori\" probability, then that probability is formula_104. The Shannon entropy (in nats) is\nformula_105\nand if entropy is measured in units of formula_106 per nat, then the entropy is given by\nformula_107\nwhich is the Boltzmann entropy formula, where formula_106 is the Boltzmann constant, which may be interpreted as the thermodynamic entropy per nat. Some authors argue for dropping the word entropy for the formula_109 function of information theory and using Shannon's other term, \"uncertainty\", instead.\nMeasurement.\nThe entropy of a substance can be measured, although in an indirect way. The measurement, known as entropymetry, is done on a closed system (with particle number N and volume V being constants) and uses the definition of temperature in terms of entropy, while limiting energy exchange to heat (formula_110).\n formula_111\nThe resulting relation describes how entropy changes formula_112 when a small amount of energy formula_113 is introduced into the system at a certain temperature\u00a0formula_39.\nThe process of measurement goes as follows. First, a sample of the substance is cooled as close to absolute zero as possible. At such temperatures, the entropy approaches zero\u00a0\u2013 due to the definition of temperature. Then, small amounts of heat are introduced into the sample and the change in temperature is recorded, until the temperature reaches a desired value (usually 25\u00a0\u00b0C). The obtained data allows the user to integrate the equation above, yielding the absolute value of entropy of the substance at the final temperature. This value of entropy is called calorimetric entropy.\nInterdisciplinary applications.\nAlthough the concept of entropy was originally a thermodynamic concept, it has been adapted in other fields of study, including information theory, psychodynamics, thermoeconomics/ecological economics, and evolution.\nPhilosophy and theoretical physics.\nEntropy is the only quantity in the physical sciences that seems to imply a particular direction of progress, sometimes called an arrow of time. As time progresses, the second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of an isolated system never decreases in large systems over significant periods of time. Hence, from this perspective, entropy measurement is thought of as a clock in these conditions.\nBiology.\nChiavazzo \"et\u00a0al.\" proposed that where cave spiders choose to lay their eggs can be explained through entropy minimization.\nEntropy has been proven useful in the analysis of base pair sequences in DNA. Many entropy-based measures have been shown to distinguish between different structural regions of the genome, differentiate between coding and non-coding regions of DNA, and can also be applied for the recreation of evolutionary trees by determining the evolutionary distance between different species.\nCosmology.\nAssuming that a finite universe is an isolated system, the second law of thermodynamics states that its total entropy is continually increasing. It has been speculated, since the 19th century, that the universe is fated to a heat death in which all the energy ends up as a homogeneous distribution of thermal energy so that no more work can be extracted from any source.\nIf the universe can be considered to have generally increasing entropy, then \u2013 as Roger Penrose has pointed out \u2013 gravity plays an important role in the increase because gravity causes dispersed matter to accumulate into stars, which collapse eventually into black holes. The entropy of a black hole is proportional to the surface area of the black hole's event horizon. Jacob Bekenstein and Stephen Hawking have shown that black holes have the maximum possible entropy of any object of equal size. This makes them likely end points of all entropy-increasing processes, if they are totally effective matter and energy traps. However, the escape of energy from black holes might be possible due to quantum activity (see Hawking radiation).\nThe role of entropy in cosmology remains a controversial subject since the time of Ludwig Boltzmann. Recent work has cast some doubt on the heat death hypothesis and the applicability of any simple thermodynamic model to the universe in general. Although entropy does increase in the model of an expanding universe, the maximum possible entropy rises much more rapidly, moving the universe further from the heat death with time, not closer. This results in an \"entropy gap\" pushing the system further away from the posited heat death equilibrium. Other complicating factors, such as the energy density of the vacuum and macroscopic quantum effects, are difficult to reconcile with thermodynamical models, making any predictions of large-scale thermodynamics extremely difficult.\nCurrent theories suggest the entropy gap to have been originally opened up by the early rapid exponential expansion of the universe.\nEconomics.\nRomanian American economist Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, a progenitor in economics and a paradigm founder of ecological economics, made extensive use of the entropy concept in his magnum opus on \"The Entropy Law and the Economic Process\". Due to Georgescu-Roegen's work, the laws of thermodynamics form an integral part of the ecological economics school. Although his work was blemished somewhat by mistakes, a full chapter on the economics of Georgescu-Roegen has approvingly been included in one elementary physics textbook on the historical development of thermodynamics.\nIn economics, Georgescu-Roegen's work has generated the term 'entropy pessimism'. Since the 1990s, leading ecological economist and steady-state theorist Herman Daly \u2013 a student of Georgescu-Roegen \u2013 has been the economics profession's most influential proponent of the entropy pessimism position.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9892", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9892", "title": "Expert", "text": "Person with broad and profound competence in a particular field\nAn expert is somebody who has a broad and deep understanding and competence in terms of knowledge, skill and experience through practice and education in a particular field. Informally, an expert is someone widely recognized as a reliable source of technique or skill whose faculty for judging or deciding rightly, justly, or wisely is accorded authority and status by peers or the public in a specific well-distinguished domain. An expert, more generally, is a person with extensive knowledge or ability based on research, experience, or occupation and in a particular area of study. Experts are called in for advice on their respective subject, but they do not always agree on the particulars of a field of study. An expert can be believed, by virtue of credentials, training, education, profession, publication or experience, to have special knowledge of a subject beyond that of the average person, sufficient that others may officially (and legally) rely upon the individual's opinion on that topic. Historically, an expert was referred to as a sage. The individual was usually a profound thinker distinguished for wisdom and sound judgment.\nIn specific fields, the definition of expert is well established by consensus and therefore it is not always necessary for individuals to have a professional or academic qualification for them to be accepted as an expert. In this respect, a shepherd with 50 years of experience tending flocks would be widely recognized as having complete expertise in the use and training of sheep dogs and the care of sheep. Another example from computer science is that an expert system may be taught by a human and thereafter considered an expert, often outperforming human beings at particular tasks. In law, an expert witness must be recognized by argument and authority.\nResearch in this area attempts to understand the relation between expert knowledge, skills and personal characteristics and exceptional performance. Some researchers have investigated the cognitive structures and processes of experts. The fundamental aim of this research is to describe what it is that experts know and how they use their knowledge to achieve performance that most people assume requires extreme or extraordinary ability. Studies have investigated the factors that enable experts to be fast and accurate.\nExpertise.\nExpertise characteristics, skills and knowledge of a person (that is, expert) or of a system, which distinguish experts from novices and less experienced people. In many domains there are objective measures of performance capable of distinguishing experts from novices: expert chess players will almost always win games against recreational chess players; expert medical specialists are more likely to diagnose a disease correctly; etc.\nThe word expertise is used to refer also to expert determination, where an expert is invited to decide a disputed issue. The decision may be binding or advisory, according to the agreement between the parties in dispute.\nAcademic views.\nThere are two academic approaches to the understanding and study of expertise. The first understands expertise as an emergent property of communities of practice. In this view expertise is socially constructed; tools for thinking and scripts for action are jointly constructed within social groups enabling that group jointly to define and acquire expertise in some domain.\nIn the second view, expertise is a characteristic of individuals and is a consequence of the human capacity for extensive adaptation to physical and social environments. Many accounts of the development of expertise emphasize that it comes about through long periods of deliberate practice. In many domains of expertise estimates of 10 years' experience deliberate practice are common. Recent research on expertise emphasizes the nurture side of the nature and nurture argument. Some factors not fitting the nature-nurture dichotomy are biological but not genetic, such as starting age, handedness, and season of birth.\nIn the field of education there is a potential \"expert blind spot\" (see also Dunning\u2013Kruger effect) in newly practicing educators who are experts in their content area. This is based on the \"expert blind spot hypothesis\" researched by Mitchell Nathan and Andrew Petrosino. Newly practicing educators with advanced subject-area expertise of an educational content area tend to use the formalities and analysis methods of their particular area of expertise as a major guiding factor of student instruction and knowledge development, rather than being guided by student learning and developmental needs that are prevalent among novice learners.\nThe blind spot metaphor refers to the physiological blind spot in human vision in which perceptions of surroundings and circumstances are strongly impacted by their expectations. Beginning practicing educators tend to overlook the importance of novice levels of prior knowledge and other factors involved in adjusting and adapting pedagogy for learner understanding. This expert blind spot is in part due to an assumption that novices\u2019 cognitive schemata are less elaborate, interconnected, and accessible than experts\u2019 and that their pedagogical reasoning skills are less well developed. Essential knowledge of subject matter for practicing educators consists of overlapping knowledge domains: subject matter knowledge and pedagogical content matter. Pedagogical content matter consists of an understanding of how to represent certain concepts in ways appropriate to the learner contexts, including abilities and interests. The expert blind spot is a pedagogical phenomenon that is typically overcome through educators\u2019 experience with instructing learners over time.\nHistorical views.\nIn line with the socially constructed view of expertise, expertise can also be understood as a form of power; that is, experts have the ability to influence others as a result of their defined social status. By a similar token, a fear of experts can arise from fear of an intellectual elite's power. In earlier periods of history, simply being able to read made one part of an intellectual elite. The introduction of the printing press in Europe during the fifteenth century and the diffusion of printed matter contributed to higher literacy rates and wider access to the once-rarefied knowledge of academia. The subsequent spread of education and learning changed society, and initiated an era of widespread education whose elite would now instead be those who produced the written content itself for consumption, in education and all other spheres.\nPlato's \"Noble Lie\", concerns expertise. Plato did not believe most people were clever enough to look after their own and society's best interest, so the few clever people of the world needed to lead the rest of the flock. Therefore, the idea was born that only the elite should know the truth in its complete form and the rulers, Plato said, must tell the people of the city \"the noble lie\" to keep them passive and content, without the risk of upheaval and unrest.\nIn contemporary society, doctors and scientists, for example, are considered to be experts in that they hold a body of dominant knowledge that is, on the whole, inaccessible to the layman. However, this inaccessibility and perhaps even mystery that surrounds expertise does not cause the layman to disregard the opinion of the experts on account of the unknown. Instead, the complete opposite occurs whereby members of the public believe in and highly value the opinion of medical professionals or of scientific discoveries, despite not understanding it.\nRelated research.\nA number of computational models have been developed in cognitive science to explain the development from novice to expert. In particular, Herbert A. Simon and Kevin Gilmartin proposed a model of learning in chess called MAPP (Memory-Aided Pattern Recognizer). Based on simulations, they estimated that about 50,000 chunks (units of memory) are necessary to become an expert, and hence the many years needed to reach this level. More recently, the CHREST model (Chunk Hierarchy and REtrieval STructures) has simulated in detail a number of phenomena in chess expertise (eye movements, performance in a variety of memory tasks, development from novice to expert) and in other domains.\nAn important feature of expert performance seems to be the way in which experts are able to rapidly retrieve complex configurations of information from long-term memory. They recognize situations because they have meaning. It is perhaps this central concern with meaning and how it attaches to situations which provides an important link between the individual and social approaches to the development of expertise. Work on \"Skilled Memory and Expertise\" by Anders Ericsson and James J. Staszewski confronts the paradox of expertise and claims that people not only acquire content knowledge as they practice cognitive skills, they also develop mechanisms that enable them to use a large and familiar knowledge base efficiently.\nWork on expert systems (computer software designed to provide an answer to a problem, or clarify uncertainties where normally one or more human experts would need to be consulted) typically is grounded on the premise that expertise is based on acquired repertoires of rules and frameworks for decision making which can be elicited as the basis for computer supported judgment and decision-making. However, there is increasing evidence that expertise does not work in this fashion. Rather, experts recognize situations based on experience of many prior situations. They are in consequence able to make rapid decisions in complex and dynamic situations.\nIn a critique of the expert systems literature, Dreyfus &amp; Dreyfus suggest:\n If one asks an expert for the rules he or she is using, one will, in effect, force the expert to regress to the level of a beginner and state the rules learned in school. Thus, instead of using rules he or she no longer remembers, as the knowledge engineers suppose, the expert is forced to remember rules he or she no longer uses. ... No amount of rules and facts can capture the knowledge an expert has when he or she has stored experience of the actual outcomes of tens of thousands of situations.\nSkilled memory theory.\nThe role of long-term memory in the skilled memory effect was first articulated by Chase and Simon in their classic studies of chess expertise. They asserted that organized patterns of information stored in long-term memory (chunks) mediated experts' rapid encoding and superior retention. Their study revealed that all subjects retrieved about the same number of chunks, but the size of the chunks varied with subjects' prior experience. Experts' chunks contained more individual pieces than those of novices. This research did not investigate how experts find, distinguish, and retrieve the right chunks from the vast number they hold without a lengthy search of long-term memory.\nSkilled memory enables experts to rapidly encode, store, and retrieve information within the domain of their expertise and thereby circumvent the capacity limitations that typically constrain novice performance. For example, it explains experts' ability to recall large amounts of material displayed for only brief study intervals, provided that the material comes from their domain of expertise. When unfamiliar material (not from their domain of expertise) is presented to experts, their recall is no better than that of novices.\nThe first principle of skilled memory, the \"meaningful encoding principle,\" states that experts exploit prior knowledge to durably encode information needed to perform a familiar task successfully. Experts form more elaborate and accessible memory representations than novices. The elaborate semantic memory network creates meaningful memory codes that create multiple potential cues and avenues for retrieval.\nThe second principle, the \"retrieval structure principle\" states that experts develop memory mechanisms called retrieval structures to facilitate the retrieval of information stored in long-term memory. These mechanisms operate in a fashion consistent with the meaningful encoding principle to provide cues that can later be regenerated to retrieve the stored information efficiently without a lengthy search.\nThe third principle, the \"speed up principle\" states that long-term memory encoding and retrieval operations speed up with practice, so that their speed and accuracy approach the speed and accuracy of short-term memory storage and retrieval.\nExamples of skilled memory research described in the Ericsson and Stasewski study include:\nIn problem solving.\nMuch of the research regarding expertise involves the studies of how experts and novices differ in solving problems. Mathematics and physics are common domains for these studies.\nOne of the most cited works in this area examines how experts (PhD students in physics) and novices (undergraduate students that completed one semester of mechanics) categorize and represent physics problems. They found that novices sort problems into categories based upon surface features (e.g., keywords in the problem statement or visual configurations of the objects depicted). Experts, however, categorize problems based upon their deep structures (i.e., the main physics principle used to solve the problem).\nTheir findings also suggest that while the schemas of both novices and experts are activated by the same features of a problem statement, the experts\u2019 schemas contain more procedural knowledge which aid in determining which principle to apply, and novices\u2019 schemas contain mostly declarative knowledge which do not aid in determining methods for solution.\nGermain's scale.\nRelative to a specific field, an expert has:\nMarie-Line Germain developed a psychometric measure of perception of employee expertise called the Generalized Expertise Measure. She defined a behavioral dimension in experts, in addition to the dimensions suggested by Swanson and Holton. Her 16-item scale contains objective expertise items and subjective expertise items. Objective items were named Evidence-Based items. Subjective items (the remaining 11 items from the measure below) were named Self-Enhancement items because of their behavioral component.\nRhetoric.\nScholars in rhetoric have also turned their attention to the concept of the expert. Considered an appeal to ethos or \"the personal character of the speaker\", established expertise allows a speaker to make statements regarding special topics of which the audience may be ignorant. In other words, the expert enjoys the deference of the audience's judgment and can appeal to authority where a non-expert cannot.\nIn The Rhetoric of Expertise, E. Johanna Hartelius defines two basic modes of expertise: autonomous and attributed expertise. While an autonomous expert can \"possess expert knowledge without recognition from other people,\" attributed expertise is \"a performance that may or may not indicate genuine knowledge.\" With these two categories, Hartelius isolates the rhetorical problems faced by experts: just as someone with autonomous expertise may not possess the skill to persuade people to hold their points of view, someone with merely attributed expertise may be persuasive but lack the actual knowledge pertaining to a given subject. The problem faced by audiences follows from the problem facing experts: when faced with competing claims of expertise, what resources do non-experts have to evaluate claims put before them?\nDialogic expertise.\nHartelius and other scholars have also noted the challenges that projects such as Wikipedia pose to how experts have traditionally constructed their authority. In \"Wikipedia and the Emergence of Dialogic Expertise\", she highlights Wikipedia as an example of the \"dialogic expertise\" made possible by collaborative digital spaces. Predicated upon the notion that \"truth emerges from dialogue\", Wikipedia challenges traditional expertise both because anyone can edit it and because no single person, regardless of their credentials, can end a discussion by fiat. In other words, the community, rather than single individuals, direct the course of discussion. The production of knowledge, then, as a process of dialogue and argumentation, becomes an inherently rhetorical activity.\nHartelius calls attention to two competing norm systems of expertise: \u201cnetwork norms of dialogic collaboration\u201d and \u201cdeferential norms of socially sanctioned professionalism\u201d; Wikipedia being evidence of the first. Drawing on a Bakhtinian framework, Hartelius posits that Wikipedia is an example of an epistemic network that is driven by the view that individuals\u2019 ideas clash with one another so as to generate expertise collaboratively. Hartelius compares Wikipedia's methodology of open-ended discussions of topics to that of Bakhtin's theory of speech communication, where genuine dialogue is considered a live event, which is continuously open to new additions and participants. Hartelius acknowledges that knowledge, experience, training, skill, and qualification are important dimensions of expertise but posits that the concept is more complex than sociologists and psychologists suggest. Arguing that expertise is rhetorical, then, Hartelius explains that expertise \"is not simply about one person's skills being different from another's. It is also fundamentally contingent on a struggle for ownership and legitimacy.\" Effective communication is an inherent element in expertise in the same style as knowledge is. Rather than leaving each other out, substance and communicative style are complementary. Hartelius further suggests that Wikipedia's dialogic construction of expertise illustrates both the instrumental and the constitutive dimensions of rhetoric; instrumentally as it challenges traditional encyclopedias and constitutively as a function of its knowledge production. Going over the historical development of the encyclopedic project, Hartelius argues that changes in traditional encyclopedias have led to changes in traditional expertise. Wikipedia's use of hyperlinks to connect one topic to another depends on, and develops, electronic interactivity meaning that Wikipedia's way of knowing is dialogic. Dialogic expertise then, emerges from multiple interactions between utterances within the discourse community. The ongoing dialogue between contributors on Wikipedia not only results in the emergence of truth; it also explicates the topics one can be an expert of. As Hartelius explains, \"the very act of presenting information about topics that are not included in traditional encyclopedias is a construction of new expertise.\" While Wikipedia insists that contributors must only publish preexisting knowledge, the dynamics behind dialogic expertise creates new information nonetheless. Knowledge production is created as a function of dialogue. According to Hartelius, dialogic expertise has emerged on Wikipedia not only because of its interactive structure but also because of the site's hortative discourse which is not found in traditional encyclopedias. By Wikipedia's hortative discourse, Hartelius means various encouragements to edit certain topics and instructions on how to do so that appear on the site. One further reason to the emergence of dialogic expertise on Wikipedia is the site's , which function as a techne; explicating Wikipedia's expert methodology.\nNetworked expertise.\nBuilding on Hartelius, Damien Pfister developed the concept of \"networked expertise\". Noting that Wikipedia employs a \"many to many\" rather than a \"one to one\" model of communication, he notes how expertise likewise shifts to become a quality of a group rather than an individual. With the information traditionally associated with individual experts now stored within a text produced by a collective, knowing about something is less important than knowing how to find something. As he puts it, \"With the internet, the historical power of subject matter expertise is eroded: the archival nature of the Web means that what and how to information is readily available.\" The rhetorical authority previously afforded to subject matter expertise, then, is given to those with the procedural knowledge of how to find information called for by a situation.\nContrasts and comparisons.\nAssociated terms.\nAn expert differs from the specialist in that a specialist has to \"be able to solve\" a problem and an expert has to \"know its solution\". The opposite of an expert is generally known as a layperson, while someone who occupies a middle grade of understanding is generally known as a technician and often employed to assist experts. A person may well be an expert in one field and a layperson in many other fields. The concepts of experts and expertise are debated within the field of epistemology under the general heading of expert knowledge. In contrast, the opposite of a specialist would be a generalist or polymath.\nThe term is widely used informally, with people being described as 'experts' in order to bolster the relative value of their opinion, when no objective criteria for their expertise is available. The term crank is likewise used to disparage opinions. Academic elitism arises when experts become convinced that only their opinion is useful, sometimes on matters beyond their personal expertise.\nIn contrast to an expert, a novice (known colloquially as a newbie or 'greenhorn') is any person that is new to any science or field of study or activity or social cause and who is undergoing training in order to meet normal requirements of being regarded a mature and equal participant.\n\"Expert\" is also being mistakenly interchanged with the term \"authority\" in new media. An expert can be an authority if through relationships to people and technology, that expert is allowed to control access to his expertise. However, a person who merely wields authority is not by right an expert. In new media, users are being misled by the term \"authority\". Many sites and search engines such as Google and Technorati use the term \"authority\" to denote the link value and traffic to a particular topic. However, this authority only measures populist information. It in no way assures that the author of that site or blog is an expert.\nAn expert is not to be confused with a professional. A professional is someone who gets paid to do something. An amateur is the opposite of a professional, not the opposite of an expert.\nDevelopmental characteristics.\nSome characteristics of the development of an expert have been found to include\nUse in literature.\nMark Twain defined an expert as \"an ordinary fellow from another town\". Will Rogers described an expert as \"A man fifty miles from home with a briefcase.\" Danish scientist and Nobel laureate Niels Bohr defined an expert as \"A person that has made every possible mistake within his or her field.\" Malcolm Gladwell describes expertise as a matter of practicing the correct way for a total of around 10,000 hours.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9895", "revid": "1161042335", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9895", "title": "Economy of Afghanistan", "text": "National economy\nThe economy of Afghanistan is listed as 96th in the world in terms of gross domestic product (GDP) based on purchasing power parity (PPP). With a population of nearly 41 million people, Afghanistan's GDP (PPP) stands at around $118.68 billion with an GDP Nominal of $120.01 billion (2023), and the GDP (PPP) per capita is about $2,844.71 while the GDP per capita Nominal is about 2,874.93The country imports around $7 billion worth of goods and exports $2 billion worth of legal products, mainly fresh and dried fruits. Its total external debt is $1.4 billion as of 2022. \nThe Afghan economy continues to improve due to the influx of expats, establishment of more trade routes with neighboring and regional countries, and expansion of the nation's agriculture, energy and mining sectors. The billions of dollars in assistance that came from expats and the international community saw this increase when there was more political reliability after NATO became involved in Afghanistan.\nDespite holding over one trillion dollars in proven untapped mineral deposits, Afghanistan remains one of the least developed countries in the world. Its unemployment rate is over 23% and about half of its population lives below the poverty line. The main factor behind this has been the continuous war in the country, which deterred business investors and left much of the population fighting among each other instead of catching up with the rest of the world. Afghanistan has long sought foreign investment in order to improve its economy. The population of Afghanistan increased by more than 50% between 2001 and 2014, while its GDP grew eightfold. After the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan and the Taliban's return to power in 2021, the Biden administration decided to confiscate or withhold $9.5 billion worth of assets from the Afghanistan Central Bank to stop the Taliban from accessing it.\nThe national currency of Afghanistan is the afghani (AFN), which has an exchange rate of around 85 afghanis to 1 US dollar. The central bank of Afghanistan is Da Afghanistan Bank. A number of local banks operate in the country, including the Afghanistan International Bank, Azizi Bank, New Kabul Bank and Pashtany Bank. \nEconomic history.\nWhen Afghanistan was ruled by Emir Abdur Rahman Khan (1880\u20131901) and his son Habibullah Khan (1901\u20131919), a great deal of commerce was controlled by the government. These monarchs were eager to develop the stature of government and the country's military capability, and so attempted to raise money by the imposition of state monopolies on the sale of commodities and high taxes. This slowed the long-term development of Afghanistan during that period. Western technologies and manufacturing methods were introduced at the command of the Afghan ruler, but in general only according to the logistical requirements of the growing army. An emphasis was placed on the manufacture of weapons and other military material. This process was in the hands of a small number of foreign experts invited to Kabul by the Afghan kings. Otherwise, it was not possible for non-Afghans, particularly westerners, to set up large-scale enterprises in Afghanistan during that period.\nIn the post-independence period, the Da Afghanistan Bank strongly financed the cultivation of cotton; at one point, the Spinzar Cotton Company in Kunduz Province was one of the largest providers of cotton in the world, most of which were exported to the Soviet Union. Fruits were mainly exported to British-controlled India.\nThe first prominent plan to develop Afghanistan's economy in modern times was the Helmand Valley Authority project of 1952, modeled on the Tennessee Valley Authority in the United States, which was expected to be of primary economic importance. Glenn Foster, an American contractor working in Afghanistan in the 1950s, stated this about the Afghan people:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their diet may not be abundant but you don't see the hunger that you do in some countries and beggars are seldom seen. Even though there are masses of people the country seems able to feed them all.\nAfghanistan began facing severe economic hardships during the 1979 Soviet invasion and ensuing civil war destroyed much of the country's limited infrastructure, and disrupted normal patterns of economic activity. Eventually, Afghanistan went from a traditional economy to a centrally planned economy up until 2002 when it was replaced by a free market economy. Gross domestic product has fallen substantially since the 1980s due to disruption of trade and transport as well as loss of labor and capital. Continuing internal strife severely hampered domestic efforts to rebuild the nation or provide ways for the international community to help.\nAccording to the International Monetary Fund, the Afghan economy grew 20% in the fiscal year ending in March 2004, after expanding 30% in the previous 12 months. The growth was mainly attributed to international aid and to the end of droughts. Billions of dollars in international aid had entered Afghanistan from 2002 to 2021 but most of it was military aid. A GDP of $4 billion in fiscal year 2003 was recalculated by the IMF to $6.1 billion, after adding proceeds from opium production. Mean graduate pay was $0.56 per man-hour in 2010. The country expects to be self sufficient in wheat, rice, poultry and dairy production by 2026.\nThe recent reestablishment of the Taliban government led to temporary suspension of international development aid to Afghanistan. The World Bank and International Monetary Fund also halted payments during that period. In this regard, Taliban's spiritual leader Hibatullah Akhundzada stated, \"The economy of a country is built when its people work together and do not rely on foreign aid[.]\" The Biden administration froze about $9 billion in assets belonging to the Afghan central bank, which was intended to block the Taliban from accessing the money. The recent floods, earthquake and famine have created further adverse economic situation for many Afghans across the country. The Ministry of Finance has collected over $2 billion in 2022.\nAgriculture and livestock.\nAgriculture remains Afghanistan\u2019s most important source of employment: 60-80 percent of Afghanistan\u2019s population works in this sector, although it accounts for less than a third of GDP due to insufficient irrigation, drought, lack of market access, and other structural impediments. Most Afghan farmers are primarily subsistence farmers.\nAfghanistan produced in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nAfghanistan produces around 1.5 million tons of fresh fruits annually, which could be increased significantly. It is known for producing some of the finest fruits, especially pomegranates and grapes as well as sweet melons and mulberries. Other fruits grown in the country include apples, apricots, cherries, figs, oranges, peaches, pears, and strawberries. The number of farms are steadily increasing. The growing of vegetables in greenhouses is also expanding in the country.\nThe northern and western Afghan provinces are long known for pistachio cultivation. In recent years, farmers in the southern provinces began growing American pistachio trees. Provinces in the east of the country, particularly Khost and Paktia, are famous for pine nuts. The northern and central provinces are also famous for almonds and walnuts. The Bamyan Province in central Afghanistan is known for growing superior quality potatoes, which produced 370,000 tons in 2020. Nangarhar, Kunar and Laghman are the only provinces in the country where large farms of oranges and lemons can be found. Nangarhar also has farms of olives, peanuts and dates. Cultivation of these products have spread to other provinces of the country. Some locals have recently planted a small number of banana trees in the provinces of Helmand and Balkh.\nWheat and cereal production is Afghanistan's traditional agricultural mainstay. The nation is nearing self-sufficiency in grain production. It requires an additional 1 to 3 million tons of wheat to become self-sufficient, which is predicted to be accomplished in the near future.\nLivestock in Afghanistan mainly include cattle, sheep, and goats. Poultry farming is widespread in the warmer parts of the country.\nArable land in Afghanistan was reported to be over 7.5 million hectares. Wheat production had stood at about 5 million tonnes in 2015, nurseries held 119,000 hectares of land, and grape production is at 615,000 tonnes. It was reported in 2012 that almond production has jumped to 56,000 tons and cotton to 45,000 tonnes. Around of farm land in Afghanistan is used to cultivate saffron, mostly in the west, north and south of the country.\nForestry.\nAccording to a 2010 report, only about 2.1% (or ) of Afghanistan is forested. This can be significantly increased by planting trees, including in the non-rocky hills and mountains which trap underground water. Some steps have been taken in recent years in planting trees in the urban areas all across Afghanistan. Even the Taliban spiritual leader has recently called for planting more trees. Felling has been made illegal nationally.\nFishing.\nAfghanistan is landlocked with its citizens having no direct access to an ocean. The country has many reservoirs, lakes, ponds, springs, streams, and rivers, which make it a suitable climate for fish farming. Historically, fish constituted a smaller part of the Afghan diet because of the unavailability of modern fish farms. Fishing only took place in the lakes and rivers, particularly in the Amu, Helmand and Kabul rivers. Consumption of fish has increased sharply due to the establishment of many fish farms. There are over 2,600 of them in the country. The largest ones are at the national reservoirs, which supply fish eggs to smaller fish farms.\nTrade and industry.\nAfghanistan's geographical location makes it economically secured. The Lapis Lazuli corridor connects Afghanistan with Turkmenistan and ultimately ends somewhere in Europe. Other such trade routes connect Afghanistan with neighboring Iran, Pakistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. The country also has direct trade with China and India via air corridor. It has four international airports, which include: Kabul International Airport in the capital city; Mazar-e Sharif International Airport in the north of the country; Herat International Airport in the west; and the Ahmad Shah Baba International Airport in Kandahar. It also has over a dozen domestic airports all across the country. Ariana Afghan Airlines and Kam Air are currently the only airlines of Afghanistan. Its national rail network is slowly expanding to connect Central Asia with Pakistan and Iran. In addition to Central Asia, imported goods also come by rail from neighboring Iran.\nThe Afghanistan\u2013Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement (APTTA) allows Afghan and Pakistani cargo trucks to transit goods within both nations. This revised US-sponsored APTTA agreement also allows Afghan trucks to transport exports to India via Pakistan up to the Wagah crossing point. There are over a dozen official border crossing points all around Afghanistan. They include Abu Nasir Port in Farah Province, Angur Ada in Paktika Province, Aqina in Faryab Province, Dand-aw-Patan in Paktia Province, Ghulam Khan in Khost Province, Hairatan in Balkh Province, Islam Qala in Herat Province, Sher Khan Bandar in Kunduz Province, Torghundi in Herat Province, Torkham border crossing in Nangarhar Province, Spin Boldak in Kandahar Province, Wakhjir in Wakhan, and Zaranj in Nimruz Province. The country also has legal access to two major seaports in Pakistan, the Gwadar Port in Balochistan and the Port Qasim in Sindh. Afghanistan also has legal access to two major seaports in Iran, which include the Bandar Abbas and the Chabahar Port in the south of the country.\nAfghanistan is endowed with a wealth of natural resources, which include extensive deposits of barites, chromite, coal, copper, gold, iron ore, lead, lithium, marble, natural gas, petroleum, gemstone, salt, sulfur, talc, and zinc. Rare-earth elements can be found all over the country. In 2006, a U.S. Geological Survey estimated that Afghanistan has as much as of natural gas, of oil and condensate reserves. According to a 2007 assessment, Afghanistan has significant amounts of undiscovered non-fuel mineral resources. Geologists also found indications of abundant deposits of colored stones and gemstones, including emerald, ruby, sapphire, garnet, lapis lazuli, kunzite, spinel, tourmaline and peridot.\nIt is widely claimed that Afghanistan has at least $1 trillion in untapped mineral deposits. A memo from the Pentagon stated that Afghanistan could become the \"Saudi Arabia of lithium\". Some believe that the untapped minerals are worth up to $3 trillion. The Khanashin carbonatites in the Helmand Province of the country have an estimated 1 million metric tonnes of rare earth elements.\nAfghanistan currently has a copper mining deal with China Metallurgical Group Corporation, which involves the investment of $2.8 billion by China and an annual income of about $400 million to the Afghan government. The country's Ainak copper mine, located in Logar Province, is one of the biggest in the world. It is estimated to hold at least 11 million tonnes or US$33 billion worth of copper.\nThe previous government has signed a 30-year contract with investment group Centar and its operating company, Afghan Gold and Minerals Co., to explore and develop a copper mining operation in Balkhab District in Sar-e Pol Province, including a gold mining operation in Badakhshan Province. The copper contract involved a $56 million investment and the gold contract a $22 million investment.\nThe country's other recently announced treasure is the Hajigak iron ore mine, located west of Kabul and is believed to hold an estimated 1.8 billion to 2 billion metric tons of the mineral used to make steel. The country also has a number of coal mines.\nAfghanistan's important resource in the past has been natural gas, which was first tapped in 1967. During the 1980s, gas sales accounted for $300 million a year in export revenues (56% of the total). About 90% of these exports went to the Soviet Union to pay for imports and debts. However, during the withdrawal of Soviet troops in 1989, the natural gas fields were capped to prevent sabotage by criminals. Gas production has dropped from a high of per day in the 1980s to a low of about in 2001. Production of natural gas was restored during the Karzai administration in 2010.\nThe Afghan government and China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) had sign a contract in late 2011 for the development of three oil fields along the Amu River, in the northern provinces of Sar-e Pol, Jowzjan and Faryab. It was later reported that CNPC began extracting of oil annually. In early 2023, the Xinjiang Central Asia Petroleum and Gas Company signed a similar contract with the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. Russia had also found interest in oil and gas supply to Afghanistan.\nEconomic development and recovery.\nAfghanistan embarked on a modest economic development program in the 1930s. The government founded banks; introduced paper money; established a university; expanded primary, secondary, and technical schools; and sent students abroad for education. In 1952 it created the Helmand Valley Authority to manage the economic development of the Helmand and Arghandab valleys through irrigation and land development, a scheme which remains one of the country's most important capital resources.\nIn 1956, the government promulgated the first in a long series of ambitious development plans. By the late 1970s, these had achieved only mixed results due to flaws in the planning process as well as inadequate funding and a shortage of the skilled managers and technicians needed for implementation.\nDa Afghanistan Bank serves as the central bank of the nation. The \"afghani\" (AFN) is the national currency, which has an exchange rate of around 85 afghanis to 1 US dollar. There are over a dozen different banks operating in the country, including Afghanistan International Bank, Kabul Bank, Azizi Bank, Pashtany Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, and First Micro Finance Bank. Cash is still widely used for most transactions. A new law on private investment provides three to seven-year tax holidays to eligible companies and a four-year exemption from exports tariffs and duties. Improvements to the business-enabling environment have resulted in more than $1.5 billion in telecom investment and created more than 100,000 jobs since 2003.\nAfghanistan is a member of World Trade Organization, SAARC, ECO, OIC, and has an observer status in the SCO. It seeks to complete the so-called \"New Silk Road\" trade project, which is aimed to connecting South Asia with Central Asia and the Middle East. This way Afghanistan will be able to collect large fees from trade passing through the country, including from the Trans-Afghanistan Pipeline. Foreign Minister Zalmai Rassoul has stated that the \"goal is to achieve an Afghan economy whose growth is based on trade, private enterprise and investment\". Experts believe that this will revolutionize the economy of the region.\nSome of the ongoing national mega projects include the Qosh Tepa Canal project in the north of the country and the New Kabul City. Other smaller development projects include the Qatar Township in Kabul, Aino Mena in Kandahar and the Ghazi Amanullah Khan Town east of Jalalabad. Similar projects are also found in Herat in the west, Mazar-e-Sharif in the north, Khost in the east, and in other cities. These projects not only benefit many workers and factories in the country but also attract overseas wealthy Afghan investors.\nThere are as much as 5,000 factories in Afghanistan. Most are locally owned, while others involve foreign investors. They produce construction materials, furniture, household items, apparel, food, beverages, etc. The country imports roughly $500 million of textile goods from other countries. It exported about $168 million worth of cotton in 2022. Afghan handwoven rugs are one of the most popular products for exportation. Other products include hand crafted antique replicas as well as leather and furs. Afghanistan is the third largest exporter of cashmere.\nAfter the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan returned to power, the country suffered from a major liquidity crisis and lack of banknotes. Because outside donors have severely cut funding to support Afghanistan's health, education, and other essential sectors, many Afghans lost their incomes. Under the assessment system of the World Food Programme (WFP), almost 20 million people suffered either level-3 \u201ccrisis\u201d or level-4 \u201cemergency\u201d levels of food insecurity. The crisis\u2019 impact on women and girls was especially severe. Officials under the new Islamic Emirate continue to provide communication services to areas that lacked them. The government collected 61 billion afghanis in tariffs between March and September 2022.\nTourism.\nTourism in Afghanistan was at its peak in 1977. Many tourists from around the world came to visit Afghanistan, including from as far away as Europe and North America. All of that ended with the start of the April 1978 Saur Revolution. However, it is again gradually increasing despite having reputation as one of the most dangerous countries in the world. Each year about 20,000 foreign tourists visit Afghanistan. Tourists are advised to avoid areas where armed criminals are known to operate.\nThe city of Kabul has many guest houses and hotels, which include the Serena Hotel, the Hotel Inter-Continental Kabul, and the Safi Landmark Hotel. Small number of guest houses and hotels are also available in other cities such Kandahar, Herat, Mazar-i-Sharif, Jalalabad, Bamyan, Fayezabad, etc. There are bus terminals with mosques, Afghan style restaurants and small shops in the major cities.\nThe following are some of the notable places in Afghanistan that tourists visit:\nNational data.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 2002\u20132020 (with IMF staff estimates in 2021\u20132026). Inflation below 5% is in green. The annual unemployment rate is extracted from the World Bank, although the International Monetary Fund find them unreliable.\nGross national saving: 22.7% of GDP (2017)\nGDP - composition by sector:\nnote: data excludes opium production\nGDP - composition by end use:\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\nAgriculture - products: wheat, milk, grapes, vegetables, potatoes, watermelons, melons, rice, onions, apples\nIndustries: small-scale production of bricks, textiles, soap, furniture, shoes, fertilizer, apparel, food-products, non-alcoholic beverages, mineral water, cement; handwoven carpets; natural gas, coal, copper\nIndustrial production growth rate: -1.9% (2016)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 181\nLabor force: 8.478 million (2017) \n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 58\nLabor force - by occupation: agriculture 44.3%, industry 18.1%, services 37.6% (2017)\nPopulation below poverty line: 54.5% (2017)\nBudget:\nTaxes and other revenues: 11.2% (of GDP) (2017)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 210\nExports: $2 billion (2022)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 164\nExports - commodities: gold, grapes, opium, fruits and nuts, insect resins, cotton, handwoven carpets, soapstone, scrap metal (2019)\nExports - partners: United Arab Emirates 45%, Pakistan 24%, India 22%, China 1% (2019)\nImports: $7 billion (2022)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 125\nImports - commodities: wheat flours, broadcasting equipment, refined petroleum, rolled tobacco, aircraft parts, synthetic fabrics (2019)\nImports - partners: United Arab Emirates 23%, Pakistan 17%, India 13%, China 9%, United States 9%, Uzbekistan 7%, Kazakhstan 6% (2019)\nReserves of foreign exchange and gold: $7.187 billion (2017)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 85\nCurrent account balance: $1.014 billion (2017)\n&lt;br&gt;\"country comparison to the world:\" 49\nCurrency: Afghani (AFN)\nExchange rates: 85 afghanis to 1 US dollar\nFiscal year: 21 December - 20 December\nEnergy in Afghanistan.\nEnergy in Afghanistan is provided by hydropower followed by fossil fuel and solar power. The nation currently generates over 600 megawatts (MW) of electricity from its several hydroelectric plants as well as using fossil fuel and solar panels. Over 670 MW more is imported from neighboring Iran, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.\nPrice of electricity is 2.5 afghanis per kw in Kabul Province, 4 afghanis in Herat Province, and around 6 afghanis in Balkh Province. The government wants to use the nation's coal reserves to produce extra electricity. The CASA-1000 project will also add 300 MW of electricity to the national grid.\nDue to large influx of expats from neighboring Pakistan and Iran, the nation may require as much as 7,000 MW of electricity in the coming years. The Afghan National Development Strategy has identified renewable energy alternatives, such as wind and solar energy, as a high value power source to develop. A number of major solar and wind farms already exist in the country, with more under development.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9896", "revid": "20381871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9896", "title": "Elf", "text": "Supernatural being in Germanic folklore\nAn elf (plural form\u00a0elves) is a type of humanoid supernatural being in Germanic folklore. Elves appear especially in North Germanic mythology, being mentioned in the Icelandic Poetic Edda and Snorri Sturluson's Prose Edda.\nIn medieval Germanic-speaking cultures, elves generally seem to have been thought of as beings with magical powers and supernatural beauty, ambivalent towards everyday people and capable of either helping or hindering them. However, the details of these beliefs have varied considerably over time and space and have flourished in both pre-Christian and Christian cultures.\nSometimes elves are, like dwarfs, associated with craftmanship. Wayland the Smith embodies this feature. He is known under many names, depending on the language in which the stories were distributed. The names include \"V\u00f6lund\" in Old Norse, \"W\u0113land\" in Anglo-Saxon and \"Wieland\" in German. The story of Wayland is also to be found in the \"Prose Edda\". \nThe word \"elf\" is found throughout the Germanic languages and seems originally to have meant 'white being'. However, reconstructing the early concept of an elf depends largely on texts written by Christians, in Old and Middle English, medieval German, and Old Norse. These associate elves variously with the gods of Norse mythology, with causing illness, with magic, and with beauty and seduction.\nAfter the medieval period, the word \"elf\" tended to become less common throughout the Germanic languages, losing out to alternative native terms like \"Zwerg\" ('dwarf') in German and \"huldra\" ('hidden being') in North Germanic languages, and to loan-words like \"fairy\" (borrowed from French into most of the Germanic languages). Still, beliefs in elves persisted in the early modern period, particularly in Scotland and Scandinavia, where elves were thought of as magically powerful people living, usually invisibly, alongside everyday human communities. They continued to be associated with causing illnesses and with sexual threats. For example, several early modern ballads in the British Isles and Scandinavia, originating in the medieval period, describe elves attempting to seduce or abduct human characters.\nWith urbanisation and industrialisation in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, beliefs in elves declined rapidly (though Iceland has some claim to continued popular belief in elves). However, elves started to be prominent in the literature and art of educated elites from the early modern period onwards. These literary elves were imagined as tiny, playful beings, with William Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" being a key development of this idea. In the eighteenth century, German Romantic writers were influenced by this notion of the elf and re-imported the English word \"elf\" into the German language. \nFrom the Romantic idea of elves came the elves of popular culture that emerged in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The \"Christmas elves\" of contemporary popular culture are a relatively recent creation, popularized during the late nineteenth century in the United States. Elves entered the twentieth-century high fantasy genre in the wake of works published by authors such as J.\u00a0R.\u00a0R. Tolkien; these re-popularised the idea of elves as human-sized and humanlike beings. Elves remain a prominent feature of fantasy media today.\nRelationship with reality.\nReality and perception.\nFrom a scientific viewpoint, elves are not considered objectively real. However, elves have in many times and places been believed to be real beings. Where enough people have believed in the reality of elves that those beliefs then had real effects in the world, they can be understood as part of people's worldview, and as a social reality: a thing which, like the exchange value of a dollar bill or the sense of pride stirred up by a national flag, is real because of people's beliefs rather than as an objective reality. Accordingly, beliefs about elves and their social functions have varied over time and space.\nEven in the twenty-first century, fantasy stories about elves have been argued both to reflect and to shape their audiences' understanding of the real world, and traditions about Santa Claus and his elves relate to Christmas.\nOver time, people have attempted to demythologise or rationalise beliefs in elves in various ways.\nIntegration into Christian cosmologies.\nBeliefs about elves have their origins before the conversion to Christianity and associated Christianization of northwest Europe. For this reason, belief in elves has, from the Middle Ages through into recent scholarship, often been labelled \"pagan\" and a \"superstition.\" However, almost all surviving textual sources about elves were produced by Christians (whether Anglo-Saxon monks, medieval Icelandic poets, early modern ballad-singers, nineteenth-century folklore collectors, or even twentieth-century fantasy authors). Attested beliefs about elves, therefore, need to be understood as part of Germanic-speakers' Christian culture and not merely a relic of their pre-Christian religion. Accordingly, investigating the relationship between beliefs in elves and Christian cosmology has been a preoccupation of scholarship about elves both in early times and modern research.\nHistorically, people have taken three main approaches to integrate elves into Christian cosmology, all of which are found widely across time and space:\nDemythologising elves as indigenous peoples.\nSome nineteenth- and twentieth-century scholars attempted to rationalise beliefs in elves as folk memories of lost indigenous peoples. Since belief in supernatural beings is ubiquitous in human cultures, scholars no longer believe such explanations are valid. Research has shown, however, that stories about elves have often been used as a way for people to think metaphorically about real-life ethnic others.\nDemythologising elves as people with illness or disability.\nScholars have at times also tried to explain beliefs in elves as being inspired by people suffering certain kinds of illnesses (such as Williams syndrome). Elves were certainly often seen as a cause of illness, and indeed the English word \"oaf\" seems to have originated as a form of \"elf\": the word \"elf\" came to mean 'changeling left by an elf' and then, because changelings were noted for their failure to thrive, to its modern sense 'a fool, a stupid person; a large, clumsy man or boy'. However, it again seems unlikely that the origin of beliefs in elves itself is to be explained by people's encounters with objectively real people affected by disease.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"elf\" is from the Old English word most often attested as (whose plural would have been *). Although this word took a variety of forms in different Old English dialects, these converged on the form \"elf\" during the Middle English period. During the Old English period, separate forms were used for female elves (such as , putatively from Proto-Germanic *\"\u0251l\u03b2(i)innj\u014d\"), but during the Middle English period the word \"elf\" routinely came to include female beings.\nThe Old English forms are cognates \u2013 linguistic siblings stemming from a common origin \u2013 with medieval Germanic terms such as Old Norse ('elf'; plural ), Old High German ('evil spirit'; pl. , ; feminine ), Burgundian *\"alfs\" ('elf'), and Middle Low German \"\" ('evil spirit'). These words must come from Proto-Germanic, the ancestor-language of the attested Germanic languages; the Proto-Germanic forms are reconstructed as *\"\u0251l\u03b2i-z\" and *\"\u0251l\u03b2\u0251-z\".\nGermanic \"*\u0251l\u03b2i-z~*\u0251l\u03b2\u0251-z\" is generally agreed to be a cognate with Latin \"albus\" ('(matt) white'), Old Irish \"ailbh\u00edn\" ('flock'), Ancient Greek \u1f00\u03bb\u03c6\u03cc\u03c2 (\"alph\u00f3s\"; 'whiteness, white leprosy';), and Albanian \"elb\" ('barley'); and the Germanic word for 'swan' reconstructed as \"*albit-\" (compare Modern Icelandic \"\u00e1lpt\") is often thought to be derived from it. These all come from a Proto-Indo-European root \"*h\u2082elb\u02b0-\", and seem to be connected by the idea of whiteness. The Germanic word presumably originally meant 'white one', perhaps as a euphemism. Jakob Grimm thought whiteness implied positive moral connotations, and, noting Snorri Sturluson's \"lj\u00f3s\u00e1lfar\", suggested that elves were divinities of light. This is not necessarily the case, however. For example, because the cognates suggest matt white rather than shining white, and because in medieval Scandinavian texts whiteness is associated with beauty, Alaric Hall has suggested that elves may have been called 'the white people' because whiteness was associated with (specifically feminine) beauty. Some scholars have argued that the names Albion and Alps may also be related (possibly through Celtic).\nA completely different etymology, making \"elf\" a cognate with the \"\u1e5abhus\", semi-divine craftsmen in Indian mythology, was suggested by Adalbert Kuhn in 1855. In this case, *\"\u0251l\u03b2i-z\" would connote the meaning 'skillful, inventive, clever', and could be a cognate with Latin \"labor\", in the sense of 'creative work'. While often mentioned, this etymology is not widely accepted.\nIn proper names.\nThroughout the medieval Germanic languages, \"elf\" was one of the nouns used in personal names, almost invariably as a first element. These names may have been influenced by Celtic names beginning in \"Albio-\" such as \"Albiorix\".\nPersonal names provide the only evidence for \"elf\" in Gothic, which must have had the word * (plural *). The most famous name of this kind is \"Alboin\". Old English names in \"elf\"- include the cognate of \"Alboin\" \u00c6lfwine (literally \"elf-friend\", m.), \u00c6lfric (\"elf-powerful\", m.), \u00c6lfweard (\"elf-guardian\", m.), and \u00c6lfwaru (\"elf-care\", f.). A widespread survivor of these in modern English is Alfred (Old English \"\u00c6lfr\u0113d\", \"elf-advice\"). Also surviving are the English surname Elgar (\"\u00c6lfgar\", \"elf-spear\") and the name of St Alphege (\"\u00c6lfh\u0113ah\", \"elf-tall\"). German examples are \"Alberich\", \"Alphart\" and \"Alphere\" (father of Walter of Aquitaine) and Icelandic examples include \"\u00c1lfhildur\". These names suggest that elves were positively regarded in early Germanic culture. Of the many words for supernatural beings in Germanic languages, the only ones regularly used in personal names are \"elf\" and words denoting pagan gods, suggesting that elves were considered similar to gods.\nIn later Old Icelandic, (\"elf\") and the personal name which in Common Germanic had been * both coincidentally became .\nElves appear in some place names, though it is difficult to be sure how many of other words, including personal names, can appear similar to \"elf\". The clearest English examples are \"Elveden\" (\"elves' hill\", Suffolk) and \"Elvendon\" (\"elves' valley\", Oxfordshire); other examples may be \"Eldon Hill\" (\"Elves' hill\", Derbyshire); and \"Alden Valley\" (\"elves' valley\", Lancashire). These seem to associate elves fairly consistently with woods and valleys.\nIn medieval texts and post-medieval folk belief.\nMedieval English-language sources.\nAs causes of illnesses.\nThe earliest surviving manuscripts mentioning elves in any Germanic language are from Anglo-Saxon England. Medieval English evidence has, therefore, attracted quite extensive research and debate. In Old English, elves are most often mentioned in medical texts which attest to the belief that elves might afflict humans and livestock with illnesses: apparently mostly sharp, internal pains and mental disorders. The most famous of the medical texts is the metrical charm \"Wi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice\" (\"against a stabbing pain\"), from the tenth-century compilation \"Lacnunga\", but most of the attestations are in the tenth-century \"Bald's Leechbook\" and \"Leechbook III\". This tradition continues into later English-language traditions too: elves continue to appear in Middle English medical texts.\nBeliefs in elves causing illnesses remained prominent in early modern Scotland, where elves were viewed as supernaturally powerful people who lived invisibly alongside everyday rural people. Thus, elves were often mentioned in the early modern Scottish witchcraft trials: many witnesses in the trials believed themselves to have been given healing powers or to know of people or animals made sick by elves. Throughout these sources, elves are sometimes associated with the succubus-like supernatural being called the \"mare\".\nWhile they may have been thought to cause diseases with magical weapons, elves are more clearly associated in Old English with a kind of magic denoted by Old English \"s\u012bden\" and \"s\u012bdsa\", a cognate with the Old Norse \"sei\u00f0r\", and also paralleled in the Old Irish \"Serglige Con Culainn\". By the fourteenth century, they were also associated with the arcane practice of alchemy.\n\"Elf-shot\".\nIn one or two Old English medical texts, elves might be envisaged as inflicting illnesses with projectiles. In the twentieth century, scholars often labelled the illnesses elves caused as \"elf-shot\", but work from the 1990s onwards showed that the medieval evidence for elves' being thought to cause illnesses in this way is slender; debate about its significance is ongoing.\nThe noun \"elf-shot\" is first attested in a Scots poem, \"Rowlis Cursing,\" from around 1500, where \"elf schot\" is listed among a range of curses to be inflicted on some chicken thieves. The term may not always have denoted an actual projectile: \"shot\" could mean \"a sharp pain\" as well as \"projectile.\" But in early modern Scotland, \"elf-schot\" and other terms like \"elf-arrowhead\" are sometimes used of neolithic arrow-heads, apparently thought to have been made by elves. In a few witchcraft trials, people attest that these arrow-heads were used in healing rituals and occasionally alleged that witches (and perhaps elves) used them to injure people and cattle. Compare with the following excerpt from a 1749\u201350 ode by William Collins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSize, appearance, and sexuality.\nBecause of elves' association with illness, in the twentieth century, most scholars imagined that elves in the Anglo-Saxon tradition were small, invisible, demonic beings, causing illnesses with arrows. This was encouraged by the idea that \"elf-shot\" is depicted in the Eadwine Psalter, in an image which became well known in this connection. However, this is now thought to be a misunderstanding: the image proves to be a conventional illustration of God's arrows and Christian demons. Rather, twenty-first century scholarship suggests that Anglo-Saxon elves, like elves in Scandinavia or the Irish \"Aos S\u00ed\", were regarded as people.\nLike words for gods and men, the word \"elf\" is used in personal names where words for monsters and demons are not. Just as \"\u00e1lfar\" is associated with \"\u00c6sir\" in Old Norse, the Old English \"Wi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice\" associates elves with \"\u0113se\"; whatever this word meant by the tenth century, etymologically it denoted pagan gods. In Old English, the plural (attested in \"Beowulf\") is grammatically an ethnonym (a word for an ethnic group), suggesting that elves were seen as people. As well as appearing in medical texts, the Old English word \"\u00e6lf\" and its feminine derivative \"\u00e6lbinne\" were used in glosses to translate Latin words for nymphs. This fits well with the word \"\u00e6lfsc\u0233ne\", which meant \"elf-beautiful\" and is attested describing the seductively beautiful Biblical heroines Sarah and Judith.\nLikewise, in Middle English and early modern Scottish evidence, while still appearing as causes of harm and danger, elves appear clearly as humanlike beings. They became associated with medieval chivalric romance traditions of fairies and particularly with the idea of a Fairy Queen. A propensity to seduce or rape people becomes increasingly prominent in the source material. Around the fifteenth century, evidence starts to appear for the belief that elves might steal human babies and replace them with changelings.\nDecline in the use of the word \"elf\".\nBy the end of the medieval period, \"elf\" was increasingly being supplanted by the French loan-word \"fairy\". An example is Geoffrey Chaucer's satirical tale \"Sir Thopas\", where the title character sets out in a quest for the \"elf-queen\", who dwells in the \"countree of the Faerie\".\nOld Norse texts.\nMythological texts.\nEvidence for elf beliefs in medieval Scandinavia outside Iceland is sparse, but the Icelandic evidence is uniquely rich. For a long time, views about elves in Old Norse mythology were defined by Snorri Sturluson's \"Prose Edda\", which talks about \"svart\u00e1lfar\", \"d\u00f6kk\u00e1lfar\" and \"lj\u00f3s\u00e1lfar\" (\"black elves\", \"dark elves\", and \"light elves\"). For example, Snorri recounts how the \"svart\u00e1lfar\" create new blond hair for Thor's wife Sif after Loki had shorn off Sif's long hair. However, these terms are attested only in the Prose Edda and texts based on it. It is now agreed that they reflect traditions of dwarves, demons, and angels, partly showing Snorri's \"paganisation\" of a Christian cosmology learned from the \"Elucidarius\", a popular digest of Christian thought.\nScholars of Old Norse mythology now focus on references to elves in Old Norse poetry, particularly the Elder Edda. The only character explicitly identified as an elf in classical Eddaic poetry, if any, is V\u00f6lundr, the protagonist of \"V\u00f6lundarkvi\u00f0a\". However, elves are frequently mentioned in the alliterating phrase \"\u00c6sir ok \u00c1lfar\" ('\u00c6sir and elves') and its variants. This was a well-established poetic formula, indicating a strong tradition of associating elves with the group of gods known as the \u00c6sir, or even suggesting that the elves and \u00c6sir were one and the same. The pairing is paralleled in the Old English poem \"Wi\u00f0 f\u00e6rstice\" and in the Germanic personal name system; moreover, in Skaldic verse the word \"elf\" is used in the same way as words for gods. Sigvatr \u00de\u00f3r\u00f0arson's skaldic travelogue \"Austrfarav\u00edsur\", composed around 1020, mentions an \"\u00e1lfabl\u00f3t\" ('elves' sacrifice') in Edskogen in what is now southern Sweden. There does not seem to have been any clear-cut distinction between humans and gods; like the \u00c6sir, then, elves were presumably thought of as being humanlike and existing in opposition to the giants. Many commentators have also (or instead) argued for conceptual overlap between elves and dwarves in Old Norse mythology, which may fit with trends in the medieval German evidence.\nThere are hints that the god Freyr was associated with elves. In particular, \"\u00c1lfheimr\" (literally \"elf-world\") is mentioned as being given to Freyr in \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\". Snorri Sturluson identified Freyr as one of the Vanir. However, the term \"Vanir\" is rare in Eddaic verse, very rare in Skaldic verse, and is not generally thought to appear in other Germanic languages. Given the link between Freyr and the elves, it has therefore long been suspected that \"\u00e1lfar\" and \"Vanir\" are, more or less, different words for the same group of beings. However, this is not uniformly accepted.\nA kenning (poetic metaphor) for the sun, \"\u00e1lfr\u00f6\u00f0ull\" (literally \"elf disc\"), is of uncertain meaning but is to some suggestive of a close link between elves and the sun.\nAlthough the relevant words are of slightly uncertain meaning, it seems fairly clear that V\u00f6lundr is described as one of the elves in \"V\u00f6lundarkvi\u00f0a\". As his most prominent deed in the poem is to rape B\u00f6\u00f0vildr, the poem associates elves with being a sexual threat to maidens. The same idea is present in two post-classical Eddaic poems, which are also influenced by chivalric romance or Breton \"lais\", \"K\u00f6tludraumur\" and \"Gullk\u00e1rslj\u00f3\u00f0\". The idea also occurs in later traditions in Scandinavia and beyond, so it may be an early attestation of a prominent tradition. Elves also appear in a couple of verse spells, including the Bergen rune-charm from among the Bryggen inscriptions.\nOther sources.\nThe appearance of elves in sagas is closely defined by genre. The Sagas of Icelanders, Bishops' sagas, and contemporary sagas, whose portrayal of the supernatural is generally restrained, rarely mention \"\u00e1lfar\", and then only in passing. But although limited, these texts provide some of the best evidence for the presence of elves in everyday beliefs in medieval Scandinavia. They include a fleeting mention of elves seen out riding in 1168 (in \"Sturlunga saga\"); mention of an \"\u00e1lfabl\u00f3t\" (\"elves' sacrifice\") in \"Korm\u00e1ks saga\"; and the existence of the euphemism \"ganga \u00e1lfrek\" ('go to drive away the elves') for \"going to the toilet\" in \"Eyrbyggja saga\".\nThe Kings' sagas include a rather elliptical but widely studied account of an early Swedish king being worshipped after his death and being called \u00d3lafr Geirsta\u00f0a\u00e1lfr ('\u00d3lafr the elf of Geirsta\u00f0ir'), and a demonic elf at the beginning of \"Norna-Gests \u00fe\u00e1ttr\".\nThe legendary sagas tend to focus on elves as legendary ancestors or on heroes' sexual relations with elf-women. Mention of the land of \u00c1lfheimr is found in \"Heimskringla\" while \"\u00deorsteins saga V\u00edkingssonar\" recounts a line of local kings who ruled over \u00c1lfheim, who since they had elven blood were said to be more beautiful than most men. According to \"Hr\u00f3lfs saga kraka\", Hrolfr Kraki's half-sister Skuld was the half-elven child of King Helgi and an elf-woman (\"\u00e1lfkona\"). Skuld was skilled in witchcraft (\"sei\u00f0r\"). Accounts of Skuld in earlier sources, however, do not include this material. The \"\u00dei\u00f0reks saga\" version of the Nibelungen (Niflungar) describes H\u00f6gni as the son of a human queen and an elf, but no such lineage is reported in the Eddas, \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\", or the \"Nibelungenlied\". The relatively few mentions of elves in the chivalric sagas tend even to be whimsical.\nIn his \"Rerum Danicarum fragmenta\" (1596) written mostly in Latin with some Old Danish and Old Icelandic passages, Arngr\u00edmur J\u00f3nsson explains the Scandinavian and Icelandic belief in elves (called \"Allffuafolch\").\nBoth Continental Scandinavia and Iceland have a scattering of mentions of elves in medical texts, sometimes in Latin and sometimes in the form of amulets, where elves are viewed as a possible cause of illness. Most of them have Low German connections.\nMedieval and early modern German texts.\nThe Old High German word \"alp\" is attested only in a small number of glosses. It is defined by the \"Althochdeutsches W\u00f6rterbuch\" as a \"nature-god or nature-demon, equated with the Fauns of Classical mythology... regarded as eerie, ferocious beings... As the mare he messes around with women\". Accordingly, the German word \"Alpdruck\" (literally \"elf-oppression\") means \"nightmare\". There is also evidence associating elves with illness, specifically epilepsy.\nIn a similar vein, elves are in Middle High German most often associated with deceiving or bewildering people in a phrase that occurs so often it would appear to be proverbial: (\"the elves/elf are/is deceiving me\"). The same pattern holds in Early Modern German. This deception sometimes shows the seductive side apparent in English and Scandinavian material: most famously, the early thirteenth-century Heinrich von Morungen's fifth \"Minnesang\" begins \"Von den elben wirt entsehen vil manic man / S\u00f4 bin ich von gr\u00f4zer liebe ents\u00ean\" (\"full many a man is bewitched by elves / thus I too am bewitched by great love\"). \"Elbe\" was also used in this period to translate words for nymphs.\nIn later medieval prayers, Elves appear as a threatening, even demonic, force. For example, some prayers invoke God's help against nocturnal attacks by \"Alpe\". Correspondingly, in the early modern period, elves are described in north Germany doing the evil bidding of witches; Martin Luther believed his mother to have been afflicted in this way.\nAs in Old Norse, however, there are few characters identified as elves. It seems likely that in the German-speaking world, elves were to a significant extent conflated with dwarves (). Thus, some dwarves that appear in German heroic poetry have been seen as relating to elves. In particular, nineteenth-century scholars tended to think that the dwarf Alberich, whose name etymologically means \"elf-powerful,\" was influenced by early traditions of elves.\nPost-medieval folklore.\nBritain.\nFrom around the Late Middle Ages, the word \"elf\" began to be used in English as a term loosely synonymous with the French loan-word \"fairy\"; in elite art and literature, at least, it also became associated with diminutive supernatural beings like Puck, hobgoblins, Robin Goodfellow, the English and Scots brownie, and the Northumbrian English hob.\nHowever, in Scotland and parts of northern England near the Scottish border, beliefs in elves remained prominent into the nineteenth century. James VI of Scotland and Robert Kirk discussed elves seriously; elf beliefs are prominently attested in the Scottish witchcraft trials, particularly the trial of Issobel Gowdie; and related stories also appear in folktales, There is a significant corpus of ballads narrating stories about elves, such as \"Thomas the Rhymer\", where a man meets a female elf; \"Tam Lin\", \"The Elfin Knight\", and \"Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight\", in which an Elf-Knight rapes, seduces, or abducts a woman; and \"The Queen of Elfland's Nourice\", a woman is abducted to be a wet-nurse to the elf queen's baby, but promised that she might return home once the child is weaned.\nScandinavia.\nTerminology.\nIn Scandinavian folklore, many humanlike supernatural beings are attested, which might be thought of as elves and partly originate in medieval Scandinavian beliefs. However, the characteristics and names of these beings have varied widely across time and space, and they cannot be neatly categorised. These beings are sometimes known by words descended directly from the Old Norse \"\u00e1lfr\". However, in modern languages, traditional terms related to \"\u00e1lfr\" have tended to be replaced with other terms. Things are further complicated because when referring to the elves of Old Norse mythology, scholars have adopted new forms based directly on the Old Norse word \"\u00e1lfr\". The following table summarises the situation in the main modern standard languages of Scandinavia.\nAppearance and behaviour.\nThe elves of Norse mythology have survived into folklore mainly as females, living in hills and mounds of stones. The Swedish \"\u00e4lvor\" were stunningly beautiful girls who lived in the forest with an elven king.\nThe elves could be seen dancing over meadows, particularly at night and on misty mornings. They left a circle where they had danced, called \"\u00e4lvdanser\" (elf dances) or \"\u00e4lvringar\" (elf circles), and to urinate in one was thought to cause venereal diseases. Typically, elf circles were fairy rings consisting of a ring of small mushrooms, but there was also another kind of elf circle. In the words of the local historian Anne Marie Hellstr\u00f6m:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf a human watched the dance of the elves, he would discover that even though only a few hours seemed to have passed, many years had passed in the real world. Humans being invited or lured to the elf dance is a common motif transferred from older Scandinavian ballads.\nElves were not exclusively young and beautiful. In the Swedish folktale \"Little Rosa and Long Leda\", an elvish woman (\"\u00e4lvakvinna\") arrives in the end and saves the heroine, Little Rose, on the condition that the king's cattle no longer graze on her hill. She is described as a beautiful old woman and by her aspect people saw that she belonged to the \"subterraneans\".\nIn ballads.\nElves have a prominent place in several closely related ballads, which must have originated in the Middle Ages but are first attested in the early modern period. Many of these ballads are first attested in Karen Brahes Folio, a Danish manuscript from the 1570s, but they circulated widely in Scandinavia and northern Britain. They sometimes mention elves because they were learned by heart, even though that term had become archaic in everyday usage. They have therefore played a major role in transmitting traditional ideas about elves in post-medieval cultures. Indeed, some of the early modern ballads are still quite widely known, whether through school syllabuses or contemporary folk music. They, therefore, give people an unusual degree of access to ideas of elves from older traditional culture.\nThe ballads are characterised by sexual encounters between everyday people and humanlike beings referred to in at least some variants as elves (the same characters also appear as mermen, dwarves, and other kinds of supernatural beings). The elves pose a threat to the everyday community by lure people into the elves' world. The most famous example is \"Elveskud\" and its many variants (paralleled in English as \"Clerk Colvill\"), where a woman from the elf world tries to tempt a young knight to join her in dancing, or to live among the elves; in some versions he refuses, and in some he accepts, but in either case he dies, tragically. As in \"Elveskud\", sometimes the everyday person is a man and the elf a woman, as also in \"Elveh\u00f8j\" (much the same story as \"Elveskud,\" but with a happy ending), \"Herr Magnus og Bj\u00e6rgtrolden\", \"Herr T\u00f8nne af Als\u00f8\", \"Herr B\u00f8smer i elvehjem\", or the Northern British \"Thomas the Rhymer\". Sometimes the everyday person is a woman, and the elf is a man, as in the northern British \"Tam Lin\", \"The Elfin Knight\", and \"Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight\", in which the Elf-Knight bears away Isabel to murder her, or the Scandinavian \"Harpans kraft\". In \"The Queen of Elfland's Nourice\", a woman is abducted to be a wet nurse to the elf-queen's baby, but promised that she might return home once the child is weaned.\nAs causes of illness.\nIn folk stories, Scandinavian elves often play the role of disease spirits. The most common, though the also most harmless case was various irritating skin rashes, which were called \"\u00e4lvabl\u00e5st\" (elven puff) and could be cured by a forceful counter-blow (a handy pair of bellows was most useful for this purpose). \"Sk\u00e5lgropar\", a particular kind of petroglyph (pictogram on a rock) found in Scandinavia, were known in older times as \"\u00e4lvkvarnar\" (elven mills), because it was believed elves had used them. One could appease the elves by offering a treat (preferably butter) placed into an elven mill.\nIn order to protect themselves and their livestock against malevolent elves, Scandinavians could use a so-called Elf cross (\"Alfkors\", \"\u00c4lvkors\" or \"Ellakors\"), which was carved into buildings or other objects. It existed in two shapes, one was a pentagram, and it was still frequently used in early 20th-century Sweden as painted or carved onto doors, walls, and household utensils to protect against elves. The second form was an ordinary cross carved onto a round or oblong silver plate. This second kind of elf cross was worn as a pendant in a necklace, and to have sufficient magic, it had to be forged during three evenings with silver, from nine different sources of inherited silver. In some locations it also had to be on the altar of a church for three consecutive Sundays.\nModern continuations.\nIn Iceland, expressing belief in the \"hulduf\u00f3lk\" (\"hidden people\"), elves that dwell in rock formations, is still relatively common. Even when Icelanders do not explicitly express their belief, they are often reluctant to express disbelief. A 2006 and 2007 study by the University of Iceland's Faculty of Social Sciences revealed that many would not rule out the existence of elves and ghosts, a result similar to a 1974 survey by Erlendur Haraldsson. The lead researcher of the 2006\u20132007 study, Terry Gunnell, stated: \"Icelanders seem much more open to phenomena like dreaming the future, forebodings, ghosts and elves than other nations\". Whether significant numbers of Icelandic people do believe in elves or not, elves are certainly prominent in national discourses. They occur most often in oral narratives and news reporting in which they disrupt house- and road-building. In the analysis of Valdimar Tr. Hafstein, \"narratives about the insurrections of elves demonstrate supernatural sanction against development and urbanization; that is to say, the supernaturals protect and enforce religious values and traditional rural culture. The elves fend off, with more or less success, the attacks, and advances of modern technology, palpable in the bulldozer.\" Elves are also prominent, in similar roles, in contemporary Icelandic literature.\nFolk stories told in the nineteenth century about elves are still told in modern Denmark and Sweden. Still, they now feature ethnic minorities in place of elves in essentially racist discourse. In an ethnically fairly homogeneous medieval countryside, supernatural beings provided the Other through which everyday people created their identities; in cosmopolitan industrial contexts, ethnic minorities or immigrants are used in storytelling to similar effect.\nPost-medieval elite culture.\nEarly modern elite culture.\nEarly modern Europe saw the emergence for the first time of a distinctive elite culture: while the Reformation encouraged new skepticism and opposition to traditional beliefs, subsequent Romanticism encouraged the fetishisation of such beliefs by intellectual elites. The effects of this on writing about elves are most apparent in England and Germany, with developments in each country influencing the other. In Scandinavia, the Romantic movement was also prominent, and literary writing was the main context for continued use of the word \"elf,\" except in fossilised words for illnesses. However, oral traditions about beings like elves remained prominent in Scandinavia into the early twentieth century.\nElves entered early modern elite culture most clearly in the literature of Elizabethan England. Here Edmund Spenser's \"Faerie Queene\" (1590\u2013) used \"fairy\" and \"elf\" interchangeably of human-sized beings, but they are complex, imaginary and allegorical figures. Spenser also presented his own explanation of the origins of the \"Elfe\" and \"Elfin kynd\", claiming that they were created by Prometheus. Likewise, William Shakespeare, in a speech in \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1592) has an \"elf-lock\" (tangled hair) being caused by Queen Mab, who is referred to as \"the fairies' midwife\". Meanwhile, \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" promoted the idea that elves were diminutive and ethereal. The influence of Shakespeare and Michael Drayton made the use of \"elf\" and \"fairy\" for very small beings the norm, and had a lasting effect seen in fairy tales about elves, collected in the modern period.\nThe Romantic movement.\nEarly modern English notions of elves became influential in eighteenth-century Germany. The Modern German \"Elf\" (m) and \"Elfe\" (f) was introduced as a loan-word from English in the 1740s and was prominent in Christoph Martin Wieland's 1764 translation of \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\".\nAs German Romanticism got underway and writers started to seek authentic folklore, Jacob Grimm rejected \"Elf\" as a recent Anglicism, and promoted the reuse of the old form \"Elb\" (plural \"Elbe\" or \"Elben\"). In the same vein, Johann Gottfried Herder translated the Danish ballad \"Elveskud\" in his 1778 collection of folk songs, \", as \" (\"The Erl-king's Daughter\"; it appears that Herder introduced the term \"Erlk\u00f6nig\" into German through a mis-Germanisation of the Danish word for \"elf\"). This in turn inspired Goethe's poem \"Der Erlk\u00f6nig\". Goethe's poem then took on a life of its own, inspiring the Romantic concept of the Erlking, which was influential on literary images of elves from the nineteenth century on.\nIn Scandinavia too, in the nineteenth century, traditions of elves were adapted to include small, insect-winged fairies. These are often called \"elves\" (\"\u00e4lvor\" in modern Swedish, \"alfer\" in Danish, \"\u00e1lfar\" in Icelandic), although the more formal translation in Danish is \"feer\". Thus, the \"alf\" found in the fairy tale \"The Elf of the Rose\" by Danish author Hans Christian Andersen is so tiny he can have a rose blossom for home, and \"wings that reached from his shoulders to his feet\". Yet Andersen also wrote about \"elvere\" in \"The Elfin Hill\". The elves in this story are more alike those of traditional Danish folklore, who were beautiful females, living in hills and boulders, capable of dancing a man to death. Like the \"huldra\" in Norway and Sweden, they are hollow when seen from the back.\nEnglish and German literary traditions both influenced the British Victorian image of elves, which appeared in illustrations as tiny men and women with pointed ears and stocking caps. An example is Andrew Lang's fairy tale \"Princess Nobody\" (1884), illustrated by Richard Doyle, where fairies are tiny people with butterfly wings. In contrast, elves are small people with red stocking caps. These conceptions remained prominent in twentieth-century children's literature, for example Enid Blyton's The Faraway Tree series, and were influenced by German Romantic literature. Accordingly, in the Brothers Grimm fairy tale \"Die Wichtelm\u00e4nner\" (literally, \"the little men\"), the title protagonists are two tiny naked men who help a shoemaker in his work. Even though \"Wichtelm\u00e4nner\" are akin to beings such as kobolds, dwarves and brownies, the tale was translated into English by Margaret Hunt in 1884 as \"The Elves and the Shoemaker\". This shows how the meanings of \"elf\" had changed and was in itself influential: the usage is echoed, for example, in the house-elf of J. K. Rowling's Harry Potter stories. In his turn, J.\u00a0R.\u00a0R. Tolkien recommended using the older German form \"Elb\" in translations of his works, as recorded in his \"Guide to the Names in The Lord of the Rings\" (1967). \"Elb, Elben\" was consequently introduced in 1972 German translation of \"The Lord of the Rings\", repopularising the form in German.\nIn popular culture.\nChristmas elf.\nWith industrialisation and mass education, traditional folklore about elves waned; however, as the phenomenon of popular culture emerged, elves were re-imagined, in large part based on Romantic literary depictions and associated medievalism.\nAs American Christmas traditions crystallized in the nineteenth century, the 1823 poem \"A Visit from St. Nicholas\" (widely known as \"'Twas the Night before Christmas\") characterized St Nicholas himself as \"a right jolly old elf.\" However, it was his little helpers, inspired partly by folktales like \"The Elves and the Shoemaker\", who became known as \"Santa's elves\"; the processes through which this came about are not well-understood, but one key figure was a Christmas-related publication by the German-American cartoonist Thomas Nast. Thus in the US, Canada, UK, and Ireland, the modern children's folklore of Santa Claus typically includes small, nimble, green-clad elves with pointy ears, long noses, and pointy hats, as Santa's helpers. They make the toys in a workshop located in the North Pole. The role of elves as Santa's helpers has continued to be popular, as evidenced by the success of the popular Christmas movie \"Elf\".\nFantasy fiction.\nThe fantasy genre in the twentieth century grew out of nineteenth-century Romanticism, in which nineteenth-century scholars such as Andrew Lang and the Grimm brothers collected fairy stories from folklore and in some cases retold them freely.\nA pioneering work of the fantasy genre was \"The King of Elfland's Daughter\", a 1924 novel by Lord Dunsany. The Elves of Middle-earth played a central role in Tolkien's legendarium, notably \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\"; this legendarium was enormously influential on subsequent fantasy writing. Tolkien's writing had such influence that in the 1960s and afterwards, elves speaking an elvish language similar to those in Tolkien's novels became staple non-human characters in high fantasy works and in fantasy role-playing games. Tolkien also appears to be the first author to have introduced the notion that elves are immortal. Post-Tolkien fantasy elves (which feature not only in novels but also in role-playing games such as \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\") are often portrayed as being wiser and more beautiful than humans, with sharper senses and perceptions as well. They are said to be gifted in magic, mentally sharp and lovers of nature, art, and song. They are often skilled archers. A hallmark of many fantasy elves is their pointed ears.\nIn works where elves are the main characters, such as \"The Silmarillion\" or Wendy and Richard Pini's comic book series \"Elfquest\", elves exhibit a similar range of behaviour to a human cast, distinguished largely by their superhuman physical powers. However, where narratives are more human-centered, as in \"The Lord of the Rings\", elves tend to sustain their role as powerful, sometimes threatening, outsiders. Despite the obvious fictionality of fantasy novels and games, scholars have found that elves in these works continue to have a subtle role in shaping the real-life identities of their audiences. For example, elves can function to encode real-world racial others in video games, or to influence gender norms through literature.\nEquivalents in non-Germanic traditions.\nBeliefs in humanlike supernatural beings are widespread in human cultures, and many such beings may be referred to as \"elves\" in English.\nEurope.\nElfish beings appear to have been a common characteristic within Indo-European mythologies. In the Celtic-speaking regions of north-west Europe, the beings most similar to elves are generally referred to with the Gaelic term \"Aos S\u00ed\". The equivalent term in modern Welsh is \"Tylwyth Teg\". In the Romance-speaking world, beings comparable to elves are widely known by words derived from Latin \"fata\" ('fate'), which came into English as \"fairy\". This word became partly synonymous with \"elf\" by the early modern period. Other names also abound, however, such as the Sicilian \"Donas de fuera\" ('ladies from outside'), or French \"bonnes dames\" ('good ladies'). In the Finnic-speaking world, the term usually thought most closely equivalent to \"elf\" is \"haltija\" (in Finnish) or \"haldaja\" (Estonian). Meanwhile, an example of an equivalent in the Slavic-speaking world is the \"vila\" (plural \"vile\") of Serbo-Croatian (and, partly, Slovene) folklore. Elves bear some resemblances to the satyrs of Greek mythology, who were also regarded as woodland-dwelling mischief-makers.\nAsia and Oceania.\nSome scholarship draws parallels between the Arabian tradition of \"jinn\" with the elves of medieval Germanic-language cultures. Some of the comparisons are quite precise: for example, the root of the word \"jinn\" was used in medieval Arabic terms for madness and possession in similar ways to the Old English word \"ylfig\", which was derived from \"elf\" and also denoted prophetic states of mind implicitly associated with elfish possession.\nKhmer culture in Cambodia includes the \"Mrenh kongveal\", elfish beings associated with guarding animals.\nIn the animistic precolonial beliefs of the Philippines, the world can be divided into the material world and the spirit world. All objects, animate or inanimate, have a spirit called \"anito\". Non-human \"anito\" are known as \"diwata\", usually euphemistically referred to as \"dili ingon nato\" ('those unlike us'). They inhabit natural features like mountains, forests, old trees, caves, reefs, etc., as well as personify abstract concepts and natural phenomena. They are similar to elves in that they can be helpful or hateful but are usually indifferent to mortals. They can be mischievous and cause unintentional harm to humans, but they can also deliberately cause illnesses and misfortunes when disrespected or angered. Spanish colonizers equated them with elves and fairy folklore.\nOrang bunian are supernatural beings in Malaysian, Bruneian and Indonesian folklore, invisible to most humans except those with spiritual sight. While the term is often translated as \"elves\", it literally translates to \"hidden people\" or \"whistling people\". Their appearance is nearly identical to humans dressed in an ancient Southeast Asian style.\nIn M\u0101ori culture, Patupaiarehe are beings similar to European elves and fairies.\nFootnotes.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9897", "revid": "1574590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9897", "title": "Evil", "text": "Opposite or absence of good\nEvil, in a general sense, is defined as the opposite or absence of good. It can be an extremely broad concept, although in everyday usage it is often more narrowly used to talk about profound wickedness and against common good. It is generally seen as taking multiple possible forms, such as the form of personal moral evil commonly associated with the word, or impersonal natural evil (as in the case of natural disasters or illnesses), and in religious thought, the form of the demonic or supernatural/eternal. While some religions, world views, and philosophies focus on \"good versus evil\", others deny evil's existence and usefulness in describing people.\nEvil can denote profound immorality, but typically not without some basis in the understanding of the human condition, where strife and suffering (cf. Hinduism) are the true roots of evil. In certain religious contexts, evil has been described as a supernatural force. Definitions of evil vary, as does the analysis of its motives. Elements that are commonly associated with personal forms of evil involve unbalanced behavior including anger, revenge, hatred, psychological trauma, expediency, selfishness, ignorance, destruction and neglect.\nIn some forms of thought, evil is also sometimes perceived as the dualistic antagonistic binary opposite to good, in which good should prevail and evil should be defeated. In cultures with Buddhist spiritual influence, both good and evil are perceived as part of an antagonistic duality that itself must be overcome through achieving \"Nirvana\". The ethical questions regarding good and evil are subsumed into three major areas of study: meta-ethics concerning the nature of good and evil, normative ethics concerning how we ought to behave, and applied ethics concerning particular moral issues. While the term is applied to events and conditions without agency, the forms of evil addressed in this article presume one or more evildoers.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English word \"evil\" (Old English ) and its cognates such as the German and Dutch are widely considered to come from a Proto-Germanic reconstructed form of \"*ubilaz\", comparable to the Hittite \"huwapp-\" ultimately from the Proto-Indo-European form \"*wap-\" and suffixed zero-grade form \"*up-elo-\". Other later Germanic forms include Middle English , , , Old Frisian (adjective and noun), Old Saxon , Old High German , and Gothic .\nThe root meaning of the word is of obscure origin though shown to be akin to modern German \"\u00fcbel\" (noun: \"\", although the noun \"evil\" is normally translated as \"das B\u00f6se\") with the basic idea of social or religious transgression.\nChinese moral philosophy.\nAs with Buddhism, in Confucianism or Taoism there is no direct analogue to the way \"good and evil\" are opposed although reference to \"demonic influence\" is common in Chinese folk religion. Confucianism's primary concern is with correct social relationships and the behavior appropriate to the learned or superior man. Thus \"evil\" would correspond to wrong behavior. Still less does it map into Taoism, in spite of the centrality of dualism in that system, but the opposite of the cardinal virtues of Taoism, compassion, moderation, and humility can be inferred to be the analogue of evil in it.\nEuropean philosophy.\nIn response to the practices of Nazi Germany, Hannah Arendt concluded that \"the problem of evil would be the fundamental problem of postwar intellectual life in Europe\", although such a focus did not come to fruition.\nSpinoza.\nBenedict de Spinoza states\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSpinoza assumes a quasi-mathematical style and states these further propositions which he purports to prove or demonstrate from the above definitions in part IV of his \"Ethics\":\nPsychology.\nCarl Jung.\nCarl Jung, in his book \"Answer to Job\" and elsewhere, depicted evil as the dark side of God. People tend to believe evil is something external to them, because they project their shadow onto others. Jung interpreted the story of Jesus as an account of God facing his own shadow.\nPhilip Zimbardo.\nIn 2007, Philip Zimbardo suggested that people may act in evil ways as a result of a collective identity. This hypothesis, based on his previous experience from the Stanford prison experiment, was published in the book \"The Lucifer Effect: Understanding How Good People Turn Evil\".\nMilgram experiment.\nIn 1961, Stanley Milgram began an experiment to help explain how thousands of ordinary, non-deviant, people could have reconciled themselves to a role in the Holocaust. Participants were led to believe they were assisting in an unrelated experiment in which they had to inflict electric shocks on another person. The experiment unexpectedly found that most could be led to inflict the electric shocks, including shocks that would have been fatal if they had been real. The participants tended to be uncomfortable and reluctant in the role. Nearly all stopped at some point to question the experiment, but most continued after being reassured.\nA 2014 re-assessment of Milgram's work argued that the results should be interpreted with the \"engaged followership\" model: that people are not simply obeying the orders of a leader, but instead are willing to continue the experiment because of their desire to support the scientific goals of the leader and because of a lack of identification with the learner. Thomas Blass argues that the experiment explains how people can be complicit in roles such as \"the dispassionate bureaucrat who may have shipped Jews to Auschwitz with the same degree of routinization as potatoes to Bremerhaven\". However, like James Waller, he argues that it cannot explain an event like the Holocaust. Unlike the perpetrators of the Holocaust, the participants in Milgram's experiment were reassured that their actions would cause little harm and had little time to contemplate their actions.\nReligions.\nAbrahamic.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith asserts that evil is non-existent and that it is a concept reflecting lack of good, just as cold is the state of no heat, darkness is the state of no light, forgetfulness the lacking of memory, ignorance the lacking of knowledge. All of these are states of lacking and have no real existence.\nThus, evil does not exist and is relative to man. `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1, son of the founder of the religion, in Some Answered Questions states:\n\"Nevertheless a doubt occurs to the mind\u2014that is, scorpions and serpents are poisonous. Are they good or evil, for they are existing beings? Yes, a scorpion is evil in relation to man; a serpent is evil in relation to man; but in relation to themselves they are not evil, for their poison is their weapon, and by their sting they defend themselves.\"\nThus, evil is more of an intellectual concept than a true reality. Since God is good, and upon creating creation he confirmed it by saying it is Good (Genesis 1:31) evil cannot have a true reality.\nChristianity.\nChristian theology draws its concept of evil from the Old and New Testaments. The Christian Bible exercises \"the dominant influence upon ideas about God and evil in the Western world.\" In the Old Testament, evil is understood to be an opposition to God as well as something unsuitable or inferior such as the leader of the fallen angels Satan In the New Testament the Greek word \"poneros\" is used to indicate unsuitability, while \"kakos\" is used to refer to opposition to God in the human realm. Officially, the Catholic Church extracts its understanding of evil from its canonical antiquity and the Dominican theologian, Thomas Aquinas, who in \"Summa Theologica\" defines evil as the absence or privation of good. French-American theologian Henri Blocher describes evil, when viewed as a theological concept, as an \"unjustifiable reality. In common parlance, evil is 'something' that occurs in the experience that \"ought not to be\".\"\nIslam.\nThere is no concept of absolute evil in Islam, as a fundamental universal principle that is independent from and equal with good in a dualistic sense. Although the Quran mentions the biblical forbidden tree, it never refers to it as the 'tree of knowledge of good and evil'. Within Islam, it is considered essential to believe that all comes from God, whether it is perceived as good or bad by individuals; and things that are perceived as \"evil\" or \"bad\" are either natural events (natural disasters or illnesses) or caused by humanity's free will. Much more the behavior of beings with free will, then they disobey God's orders, harming others or putting themselves over God or others, is considered to be evil. Evil does not necessarily refer to evil as an ontological or moral category, but often to harm or as the intention and consequence of an action, but also to unlawful actions.\nUnproductive actions or those who do not produce benefits are also thought of as evil.\nA typical understanding of evil is reflected by Al-Ash`ari founder of Asharism. Accordingly, qualifying something as evil depends on the circumstances of the observer. An event or an action itself is neutral, but it receives its qualification by God. Since God is omnipotent and nothing can exist outside of God's power, God's will determine, whether or not something is evil.\nRabbinic Judaism.\nIn Judaism, evil is per se not part of God's creation, but comes into existence through man's bad actions. \nAncient Egyptian.\nEvil in the religion of ancient Egypt is known as \"Isfet\", \"disorder/violence\". It is the opposite of \"Maat\", \"order\", and embodied by the serpent god Apep, who routinely attempts to kill the sun god Ra and is stopped by nearly every other deity. Isfet is not a primordial force, but the consequence of free will and an individual's struggle against the non-existence embodied by Apep, as evidenced by the fact that it was born from Ra's umbilical cord instead of being recorded in the religion's creation myths.\nIndian.\nBuddhism.\nThe primal duality in Buddhism is between suffering and enlightenment, so the good vs. evil splitting has no direct analogue in it. One may infer from the general teachings of the Buddha that the catalogued causes of suffering are what correspond in this belief system to 'evil'.\nPractically this can refer to 1) the three selfish emotions\u2014desire, hate and delusion; and 2) to their expression in physical and verbal actions. Specifically, \"evil\" means whatever harms or obstructs the causes for happiness in this life, a better rebirth, liberation from samsara, and the true and complete enlightenment of a buddha (samyaksambodhi).\n\"What is evil? Killing is evil, lying is evil, slandering is evil, abuse is evil, gossip is evil: envy is evil, hatred is evil, to cling to false doctrine is evil; all these things are evil. And what is the root of evil? Desire is the root of evil, illusion is the root of evil.\" Gautama Siddhartha, the founder of Buddhism, 563\u2013483 BC.\nHinduism.\nIn Hinduism, the concept of Dharma or righteousness clearly divides the world into good and evil, and clearly explains that wars have to be waged sometimes to establish and protect Dharma, this war is called Dharmayuddha. This division of good and evil is of major importance in both the Hindu epics of Ramayana and Mahabharata. The main emphasis in Hinduism is on bad action, rather than bad people. The Hindu holy text, the Bhagavad Gita, speaks of the balance of good and evil. When this balance goes off, divine incarnations come to help to restore this balance.\nSikhism.\nIn adherence to the core principle of spiritual evolution, the Sikh idea of evil changes depending on one's position on the path to liberation. At the beginning stages of spiritual growth, good and evil may seem neatly separated. Once one's spirit evolves to the point where it sees most clearly, the idea of evil vanishes and the truth is revealed. In his writings Guru Arjan explains that, because God is the source of all things, what we believe to be evil must too come from God. And because God is ultimately a source of absolute good, nothing truly evil can originate from God.\nSikhism, like many other religions, does incorporate a list of \"vices\" from which suffering, corruption, and abject negativity arise. These are known as the Five Thieves, called such due to their propensity to cloud the mind and lead one astray from the prosecution of righteous action. These are:\nOne who gives in to the temptations of the Five Thieves is known as \"Manmukh\", or someone who lives selfishly and without virtue. Inversely, the \"Gurmukh, who thrive in their reverence toward divine knowledge, rise above vice via the practice of the high virtues of Sikhism. These are:\nQuestion of a universal definition.\nA fundamental question is whether there is a universal, transcendent definition of evil, or whether one's definition of evil is determined by one's social or cultural background. C. S. Lewis, in \"The Abolition of Man\", maintained that there are certain acts that are universally considered evil, such as rape and murder. However, the rape of women, by men, is found in every society, and there are more societies that see at least some versions of it, such as marital rape or punitive rape, as normative than there are societies that see all rape as non-normative (a crime). In nearly all societies, killing except for defense or duty is seen as murder. Yet the definition of defense and duty varies from one society to another. Social deviance is not uniformly defined across different cultures, and is not, in all circumstances, necessarily an aspect of evil.\nDefining evil is complicated by its multiple, often ambiguous, common usages: evil is used to describe the whole range of suffering, including that caused by nature, and it is also used to describe the full range of human immorality from the \"evil of genocide to the evil of malicious gossip\". It is sometimes thought of as the generic opposite of good. Marcus Singer asserts that these common connotations must be set aside as overgeneralized ideas that do not sufficiently describe the nature of evil.\nIn contemporary philosophy, there are two basic concepts of evil: a broad concept and a narrow concept. A broad concept defines evil simply as any and all pain and suffering: \"any bad state of affairs, wrongful action, or character flaw\". Yet, it is also asserted that evil cannot be correctly understood \"(as some of the utilitarians once thought) [on] a simple hedonic scale on which pleasure appears as a plus, and pain as a minus\". This is because pain is necessary for survival. Renowned orthopedist and missionary to lepers, Dr. Paul Brand explains that leprosy attacks the nerve cells that feel pain resulting in no more pain for the leper, which leads to ever increasing, often catastrophic, damage to the body of the leper. Congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP), also known as congenital analgesia, is a neurological disorder that prevents feeling pain. It \"leads to\u00a0... bone fractures, multiple scars, osteomyelitis, joint deformities, and limb amputation\u00a0... Mental retardation is common. Death from hyperpyrexia occurs within the first 3 years of life in almost 20% of the patients.\" Few with the disorder are able to live into adulthood. Evil cannot be simply defined as all pain and its connected suffering because, as Marcus Singer says: \"If something is really evil, it can't be necessary, and if it is really necessary, it can't be evil\".\nThe narrow concept of evil involves moral condemnation, therefore it is ascribed only to moral agents and their actions. This eliminates natural disasters and animal suffering from consideration as evil: according to Claudia Card, \"When not guided by moral agents, forces of nature are neither \"goods\" nor \"evils\". They just are. Their \"agency\" routinely produces consequences vital to some forms of life and lethal to others\". The narrow definition of evil \"picks out only the most morally despicable sorts of actions, characters, events, etc. \"Evil\" [in this sense]\u00a0... is the worst possible term of opprobrium imaginable\u201d. Eve Garrard suggests that evil describes \"particularly horrifying kinds of action which we feel are to be contrasted with more ordinary kinds of wrongdoing, as when for example we might say 'that action wasn't just wrong, it was positively evil'. The implication is that there is a qualitative, and not merely quantitative, difference between evil acts and other wrongful ones; evil acts are not just very bad or wrongful acts, but rather ones possessing some specially horrific quality\". In this context, the concept of evil is one element in a full nexus of moral concepts.\nPhilosophical questions.\nApproaches.\nViews on the nature of evil belong to the branch of philosophy known as ethics\u2014which in modern philosophy is subsumed into three major areas of study:\nUsefulness as a term.\nThere is debate on how useful the term \"evil\" is, since it is often associated with spirits and the devil. Some see the term as useless because they say it lacks any real ability to explain what it names. There is also real danger of the harm that being labeled \"evil\" can do when used in moral, political, and legal contexts. Those who support the usefulness of the term say there is a secular view of evil that offers plausible analyses without reference to the supernatural. Garrard and Russell argue that evil is as useful an explanation as any moral concept. Garrard adds that evil actions result from a particular kind of motivation, such as taking pleasure in the suffering of others, and this distinctive motivation provides a partial explanation even if it does not provide a complete explanation. Most theorists agree use of the term evil can be harmful but disagree over what response that requires. Some argue it is \"more dangerous to ignore evil than to try to understand it\".\nThose who support the usefulness of the term, such as Eve Garrard and David McNaughton, argue that the term evil \"captures a distinct part of our moral phenomenology, specifically, 'collect[ing] together those wrongful actions to which we have ... a response of moral horror'.\" Claudia Card asserts it is only by understanding the nature of evil that we can preserve humanitarian values and prevent evil in the future. If evils are the worst sorts of moral wrongs, social policy should focus limited energy and resources on reducing evil over other wrongs. Card asserts that by categorizing certain actions and practices as evil, we are better able to recognize and guard against responding to evil with more evil which will \"interrupt cycles of hostility generated by past evils\".\nOne school of thought holds that no \"person\" is evil and that only \"acts\" may be properly considered evil. Some theorists define an evil action simply as a kind of action an evil person performs. But just as many theorists believe that an evil character is one who is inclined toward evil acts.\nLuke Russell argues that both evil actions and evil feelings are necessary to identify a person as evil, while Daniel Haybron argues that evil feelings and evil motivations are necessary.\nAmerican psychiatrist M. Scott Peck describes evil as a kind of personal \"militant ignorance\". According to Peck, an evil person is consistently self-deceiving, deceives others, psychologically projects his or her evil onto very specific targets, hates, abuses power, and lies incessantly. Evil people are unable to think from the viewpoint of their victim. Peck considers those he calls evil to be attempting to escape and hide from their own conscience (through self-deception) and views this as being quite distinct from the apparent absence of conscience evident in sociopaths. He also considers that certain institutions may be evil, using the My Lai Massacre to illustrate. By this definition, acts of criminal and state terrorism would also be considered evil.\nNecessity.\nMartin Luther argued that there are cases where a little evil is a positive good. He wrote, \"Seek out the society of your boon companions, drink, play, talk bawdy, and amuse yourself. One must sometimes commit a sin out of hate and contempt for the Devil, so as not to give him the chance to make one scrupulous over mere nothings\u00a0... \"\nAccording to the \"realist\" schools of political philosophy, leaders should be indifferent to good or evil, taking actions based only upon advantage; this approach to politics was put forth most famously by Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, a 16th-century Florentine writer who advised tyrants that \"it is far safer to be feared than loved.\"\nThe international relations theories of realism and neorealism, sometimes called \"realpolitik\" advise politicians to explicitly ban absolute moral and ethical considerations from international politics, and to focus on self-interest, political survival, and power politics, which they hold to be more accurate in explaining a world they view as explicitly amoral and dangerous. Political realists usually justify their perspectives by stating that morals and politics should be separated as two unrelated things, as exerting authority often involves doing something not moral. Machiavelli wrote: \"there will be traits considered good that, if followed, will lead to ruin, while other traits, considered vices which if practiced achieve security and well being for the prince.\"\nAnton LaVey, founder of the Church of Satan, was a materialist and claimed that evil is actually good. He was responding to the common practice of describing sexuality or disbelief as evil, and his claim was that when the word \"evil\" is used to describe the natural pleasures and instincts of men and women or the skepticism of an inquiring mind, the things called and feared as evil are really non-evil and in fact good.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "9899", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9899", "title": "Ethnic group", "text": "Socially defined category of people who identify with each other"}
{"id": "9901", "revid": "36115585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9901", "title": "Epistle to the Hebrews", "text": "Book of the New Testament\nThe Epistle to the Hebrews () is one of the books of the New Testament.\nThe text does not mention the name of its author, but was traditionally attributed to Paul the Apostle. Most of the Ancient Greek manuscripts, the Old Syriac Peshitto and some of the Old Latin manuscripts have the epistle to the Hebrews among Paul's letters. However, doubt on Pauline authorship in the Roman Church is reported by Eusebius. Modern biblical scholarship considers its authorship unknown, written in deliberate imitation of the style of Paul, with some contending that it was authored by Priscilla and Aquila.\nScholars of Greek consider its writing to be more polished and eloquent than any other book of the New Testament, and \"the very carefully composed and studied Greek of Hebrews is not Paul's spontaneous, volatile contextual Greek\". The book has earned the reputation of being a masterpiece. It has also been described as an intricate New Testament book. Some scholars believe it was written for Jewish Christians who lived in Jerusalem. Its essential purpose was to exhort Christians to persevere in the face of persecution. At this time, certain believers were considering turning back to Judaism and to the Jewish system of law to escape being persecuted for believing Christ to be the messiah. The theme of the epistle is the teaching of the person of Christ and his role as mediator between God and humanity.\nAccording to traditional scholarship, the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, following in the footsteps of Paul, argued that Jewish Law had played a legitimate role in the past but was superseded by a New Covenant for the Gentiles (cf. Romans 7:1\u20136; Galatians 3:23\u201325; Hebrews 8, 10). However, a growing number of scholars note that the terms Gentile, Christian and Christianity are not present in the text and posit that Hebrews was written for a Jewish audience, and is best seen as a debate between Jewish followers of Jesus and mainstream Judaism. In tone, and detail, Hebrews goes beyond Paul and attempts a more complex, nuanced, and openly adversarial definition of the relationship. The epistle opens with an exaltation of Jesus as \"the radiance of God's glory, the express image of his being, and upholding all things by his powerful word\" (Hebrews 1:1\u20133). The epistle presents Jesus with the titles \"pioneer\" or \"forerunner\", \"Son\" and \"Son of God\", \"priest\" and \"high priest\". The epistle casts Jesus as both exalted Son and High Priest, a unique dual Christology.\nComposition.\nHebrews uses Old Testament quotations interpreted in light of first-century rabbinical Judaism. New Testament and Second Temple Judaism scholar Eric Mason argues that the conceptual background of the priestly Christology of the Epistle to the Hebrews closely parallels presentations of the messianic priest and Melchizedek in the Qumran scrolls. In both Hebrews and Qumran, a priestly figure is discussed in the context of a Davidic figure; in both cases a divine decree appoints the priests to their eschatological duty; both priestly figures offer an eschatological sacrifice of atonement. Although the author of Hebrews was not directly influenced by Qumran's \"Messiah of Aaron\", these and other conceptions did provide \"a precedent... to conceive Jesus similarly as a priest making atonement and eternal intercession in the heavenly sanctuary\".\nAuthorship.\nBy the end of the first century there was no consensus on the author's identity. Clement of Rome, Barnabas, Paul the Apostle, and other names were proposed. Others later suggested Luke the Evangelist, Apollos, or his teacher Priscilla as possible authors.\nIn the 3rd century, Origen wrote of the letter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the epistle entitled \"To The Hebrews\" the diction does not exhibit the characteristic roughness of speech or phraseology admitted by the Apostle [Paul] himself, the construction of the sentences is closer to the Greek usage, as anyone capable of recognising differences of style would agree. On the other hand the matter of the epistle is wonderful, and quite equal to the Apostle's acknowledged writings: the truth of this would be admitted by anyone who has read the Apostle carefully... If I were asked my personal opinion, I would say that the matter is the Apostle's but the phraseology and construction are those of someone who remembered the Apostle's teaching and wrote his own interpretation of what his master had said. So if any church regards this epistle as Paul's, it should be commended for so doing, for the primitive Church had every justification for handing it down as his. Who wrote the epistle is known to God alone: the accounts that have reached us suggest that it was either Clement, who became Bishop of Rome, or Luke, who wrote the gospel and the Acts.\nMatthew J. Thomas argues that Origen was not denying Paul's authorship of Hebrews in that quote, but that he was only meaning that Paul would have employed an amanuensis to compose the letter. He points out that in other writings and quotations of Hebrews, Origen describes Paul as the author of the letter.\nIn the 4th century, Jerome and Augustine of Hippo supported Paul's authorship: the Church largely agreed to include Hebrews as the fourteenth letter of Paul, and affirmed this authorship until the Reformation. Scholars argued that in the 13th chapter of Hebrews, Timothy is referred to as a companion. Timothy was Paul's missionary companion in the same way Jesus sent disciples out in pairs. The writer also states that he wrote the letter from \"Italy\", which also at the time fits Paul. The difference in style is explained as simply an adjustment to a distinct audience, to the Jewish Christians who were being persecuted and pressured to go back to traditional Judaism.\nMany scholars now believe that the author was one of Paul's pupils or associates, citing stylistic differences between Hebrews and the other Pauline epistles. Recent scholarship has favored the idea that the author was probably a leader of a predominantly Jewish congregation to whom they were writing.\nBecause of its anonymity, it had some trouble being accepted as part of the Christian canon, being classed with the Antilegomena. Eventually it was accepted as Scripture because of its sound theology, eloquent presentation, and other intrinsic factors. In antiquity, certain circles began to ascribe it to Paul in an attempt to provide the anonymous work with an explicit apostolic pedigree.\nThe original King James Version of the Bible titled the work \"The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews\". However, the KJV's attribution to Paul was only a guess, and is currently disputed by recent research. Its vastly different style, different theological focus, different spiritual experience and different Greek vocabulary are all believed to make Paul's authorship of Hebrews increasingly indefensible. At present, modern scholarship does not ascribe Hebrews to Paul.\nA.J. Gordon ascribes the authorship of Hebrews to Priscilla, writing that \"It is evident that the Holy Spirit made this woman Priscilla a teacher of teachers\". Later proposed by Adolf von Harnack in 1900, Harnack's reasoning won the support of prominent Bible scholars of the early twentieth century. Harnack believes the letter was written in Rome \u2013 not to the Church, but to the inner circle. In setting forth his evidence for Priscillan authorship, he finds it amazing that the name of the author was blotted out by the earliest tradition. Citing Hebrews 13, he says it was written by a person of \"high standing and apostolic teacher of equal rank with Timothy\". If Luke, Clement, Barnabas, or Apollos had written it, Harnack believes their names would not have been obliterated.\nDonald Guthrie's commentary \"The Letter to the Hebrews\" (1983) mentions Priscilla by name as a suggested author.\nBelieving the author to have been Priscilla, Ruth Hoppin posits that the name was omitted either to suppress its female authorship, or to protect the letter itself from suppression.\nAlso convinced that Priscilla was the author of Hebrews, Gilbert Bilezikian, professor of biblical studies at Wheaton College, remarks on \"the conspiracy of anonymity in the ancient church,\" and reasons: \"The lack of any firm data concerning the identity of the author in the extant writings of the church suggests a deliberate blackout more than a case of collective loss of memory.\"\nDespite some theories of Hebrews being authored by Priscilla, a majority of scholars hold that the author was presumably male, since he refers to himself using a masculine participle in 11:32: \"would fail me to tell\".\nDate.\nThe use of tabernacle terminology in Hebrews has been used to date the epistle before the destruction of the temple, the idea being that knowing about the destruction of both Jerusalem and the temple would have influenced the development of the author's overall argument. Therefore, the most probable date for its composition is the second half of the year 63 or the beginning of 64, according to the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\".\nThe text itself, for example, makes a contrast between the resurrected Christ \"in heaven\" \"who serves in the sanctuary, the true tabernacle set up by the Lord\" and the version on earth, where \"there are already priests who offer the gifts prescribed by the law. They serve at a sanctuary that is a copy and shadow of what is in heaven.\" (NIV version)\nDespite this, some scholars, such as Harold Attridge and Ellen Aitken, hold to a later date of composition, between 70 and 100 AD.\nAudience.\nScholars have suggested that Hebrews is part of an internal New Testament debate between the extreme Judaizers (who argued that non-Jews must convert to Judaism before they can receive the Holy Spirit of Jesus' New Covenant) versus the extreme antinomians (who argued that Jews must reject God's commandments and that Jewish law was no longer in effect). James and Paul represent the moderates of each faction, respectively, and Peter served as moderator.\nIt sets before the Jew the claims of Christianity \u2013 to bring the Jew to the full realization of the relation of Judaism to Christianity, to make clear that Christ has fulfilled those temporary and provisional institutions, and has thus abolished them. This view is commonly referred to as supersessionism.\nAccording to the theology of supersessionism, the church replaces Israel, and thus the church takes the place of Israel as the people of God. The dominant interpretation in modern Hebrews scholarship has been that the epistle contains an implicit supersessionist claim (that the Levitical sacrifices and the Levitical priests have been replaced/superseded by Christ's sacrifice). Per Bibliowicz, Hebrews scholars may be divided into those that are supportive-sympathetic to the epistle's theological message, those that are critical of the epistle's supersessionary message, and those attempting a middle ground.\nDue to the importance of Hebrews for the formation of future Christian attitudes toward Jews and Judaism, a distinction must be made between the author's intent and the way in which the text was interpreted by future generations. The impact of the deployment and implementation of supersession theology is difficult to convey and grasp. The implementation of this theological claim eventually led to the negation and disenfranchisement of the Jewish followers of Jesus, and later, of all Jews.\nPurpose for writing.\nThose to whom Hebrews is written seem to have begun to doubt whether Jesus could really be the Messiah for whom they were waiting, because they believed the Messiah prophesied in the Hebrew Scriptures was to come as a militant king and destroy the enemies of his people. In contrast, Jesus came as a man of no social standing who was slandered, arrested and condemned by the Jewish leaders and who suffered and was crucified by the Romans. Although he was seen resurrected, he still left the earth and his people, who now faced persecution rather than victory. The Book of Hebrews argues that the Hebrew Scriptures also foretold that the Messiah would be a priest (although of a different sort than the traditional Levitical priests) and Jesus came to fulfill this role, as a sacrificial offering to God, to atone for sins. His role of a king is yet to come, and so those who follow him should be patient and not be surprised that they suffer for now.\nSome scholars today believe the document was written to prevent apostasy. Some have interpreted apostasy to mean a number of different things, such as a group of Christians in one sect leaving for another more conservative sect, one of which the author disapproves. Some have seen apostasy as a move from the Christian assembly to pagan ritual. In light of a possibly Jewish-Christian audience, the apostasy in this sense may be in regard to Jewish Christians leaving the Christian assembly to return to the Jewish synagogue. The author writes, \"Let us hold fast to our confession\". The epistle has been viewed as a long, rhetorical argument for having confidence in the new way to God revealed in Jesus Christ.\nThe book could be argued to affirm special creation. It says that God by his Son, Jesus Christ, made the worlds. \"God [...] hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son [...] by whom also he made the worlds\". The epistle also emphasizes the importance of faith. \"Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...the Epistle opens with the solemn announcement of the superiority of the New Testament Revelation by the Son over Old Testament Revelation by the prophets. It then proves and explains from the Scriptures the superiority of this New Covenant over the Old by the comparison of the Son with the angels as mediators of the Old Covenant, with Moses and Joshua as the founders of the Old Covenant, and finally, by opposing the high-priesthood of Christ after the order of Melchisedech to the Levitical priesthood after the order of Aaron.\nStyle.\nHebrews is a very consciously \"literary\" document. The purity of its Greek was noted by Clement of Alexandria, according to Eusebius, and Origen of Alexandria asserted that every competent judge must recognize a great difference between this epistle and those of Paul.\nThe letter consists of two strands: an expositional or doctrinal strand, and a hortatory or strongly urging strand which punctuates the exposition parenthetically at key points as warnings to the readers.\nHebrews does not fit the form of a traditional Hellenistic epistle, lacking a proper prescript. Modern scholars generally believe this book was originally a sermon or homily, although possibly modified after it was delivered to include the travel plans, greetings and closing.\nHebrews contains many references to the Old Testament \u2013 specifically to the Septuagint text.\nChristology.\nThe Epistle to the Hebrews is notable for the manner in which it expresses the divine nature of Christ. As A.C. Purdy summarized for \"The Interpreter's Bible\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We may sum up our author's Christology negatively by saying that he has nothing to do with the older Hebrew messianic hopes of a coming Son of David, who would be a divinely empowered human leader to bring in the kingdom of God on earth; and that while he still employs the figure of a militant, apocalyptic king [...] who will come again [...], this is not of the essence of his thought about Christ.\nPositively, our author presents Christ as divine in nature, and solves any possible objection to a divine being who participates in human experience, especially in the experience of death, by the priestly analogy. He seems quite unconscious of the logical difficulties of his position proceeding from the assumption that Christ is both divine and human, at least human in experience although hardly in nature.\nMikeal Parsons has commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the humanity of Jesus is an important theme for Hebrews, how much more is Jesus' deity. While this theme of exaltation is asserted 'in many and various ways' we shall content ourselves by considering how the writer addresses this theme by asserting Jesus' superiority to a) angels, and b) Moses. The first chapter of Hebrews stresses the superiority of the Son to the angels. The very name 'Son' indicates superiority. This exaltation theme, in which the Son is contrasted with the angels (1:4), is expanded in the following string of OT quotations (1:5-13). While some have understood the catena as referring primarily to Christ's pre-existence, it is more likely that the verses should be understood, 'as a Christological hymn which traces the entire Christ event, including the pre-existence, earthly life, and exaltation of Christ'. The overall structure of the catena seems to point to exaltation as the underlying motif... At least it may be concluded that the superiority of the Son is demonstrated by this comparison/contrast with angels.\nPeter Rhea Jones has reminded us that 'Moses is not merely one of the figures compared unfavourably to Jesus'; but rather, 'Moses and Jesus are yoked throughout the entirety of the epistle'. Allowing that Moses is much more than a 'whipping boy' for the author, the fact remains that the figure Moses is utilized as a basis for Christology. While there are several references to Moses, only two will be needed to demonstrate Jesus' superiority. The first passage to be considered is Hebrews 3:1-6. D'Angelo and others regard the larger context of this passage (3:1-4:16) to be the superiority of Christ's message to the Law. While the comparison between Jesus and the angels is based on a number of OT citations, the comparison of Jesus and Moses turns on a single verse, Nu. 12:7. Like the angels (1:14), Moses was a servant who witnessed, as it were, to the Son. In other words, 'faithful Sonship is superior to faithful servantship'. The Son is once again exalted. The exaltation theme finds expression in a more opaque way at 11:26. Here in the famous chapter on faith in which Moses is said to count 'abuse suffered for the Christ greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt'. The portrait of Moses drawn here is that of a martyr, and a Christian martyr at that. In effect, Moses joins that great cloud of witnesses who looked to Jesus as pioneer and perfecter of faith. Once again, Christ's superiority is asserted, this time over Moses and the entire Mosaic epoch.\nIn summary, the writer [of Hebrews] stressed the Sonship of Jesus and expressed it in a three-stage Christology of pre-existence, humanity, and exaltation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOnline translations of the Epistle to the Hebrews:\nOther:"}
{"id": "9902", "revid": "642378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9902", "title": "Esther", "text": "Biblical Jewish queen of Persia and Medes\nEsther (originally Hadassah) is the eponymous heroine of the Book of Esther. In it, Ahasuerus, the king of the Achaemenid Empire, seeks a new wife after his queen, Vashti, is deposed for disobeying him. Esther is chosen to fulfill this role due to her beauty. Ahasuerus' grand vizier, Haman, is offended by Esther's cousin and guardian, Mordecai, due to his refusal to prostrate himself before Haman. Consequently, Haman plots to have all the Jewish subjects of Persia killed, and convinces Ahasuerus to permit him to do so. However, Esther foils the plan by revealing Haman's eradication plans to Ahasuerus, who then has Haman executed and grants permission to the Jews to kill their enemies instead, as royal edicts (including the order for eradication issued by Haman) cannot be revoked under Persian law.\nThe Book of Esther provides the traditional explanation for the Jewish holiday of Purim, celebrated on the date given in the story for when Haman's order was to go into effect, which is the day that the Jews killed their enemies after the plan was reversed. The book exists in two related forms: a shorter Hebrew-sourced version found in Jewish and Protestant Bibles, and a longer Greek-sourced version found in Catholic and Orthodox Bibles.\nName.\nWhen she is introduced, in Esther 2:7, she is first referred to by the Hebrew name Hadassah. This name is absent from the early Greek manuscripts, although present in the targumic texts, and was probably added to the Hebrew text in the 2nd century CE at the earliest to stress the heroine's Jewishness. The name \"Esther\" probably derives from the name of the Babylonian goddess Ishtar or from the Persian word cognate with the English word \"star\" (implying an association with Ishtar) though some scholars contend it is related to the Persian words for \"woman\" or \"myrtle\".\nNarrative.\nIn the third year of the reign of King Ahasuerus of Persia the king banishes his queen, Vashti, and seeks a new queen. Beautiful maidens gather together at the harem in the citadel of Susa under the authority of the eunuch Hegai.\nEsther, a cousin of Mordecai, was a member of the Jewish community in the Exilic Period who claimed as an ancestor Kish, a Benjamite who had been taken from Jerusalem into captivity. She was the orphaned daughter of Mordecai's uncle, another Benjamite named Abihail. Upon the king's orders, Esther is taken to the palace where Hegai prepares her to meet the king. Even as she advances to the highest position of the harem, perfumed with gold and myrrh and allocated certain foods and servants, she is under strict instructions from Mordecai, who meets with her each day, to conceal her Jewish origins. The king falls in love with her and makes her his Queen.\nFollowing Esther's coronation, Mordecai learns of an assassination plot by Bigthan and Teresh to kill King Ahasuerus. Mordecai tells Esther, who tells the king in the name of Mordecai, and he is saved. This act of great service to the king is recorded in the Annals of the Kingdom.\nAfter Mordecai saves the king's life, Haman the Agagite is made Ahasuerus' highest adviser, and orders that everyone bow down to him. When Mordecai (who had stationed himself in the street to advise Esther) refuses to bow to him, Haman pays King Ahasuerus 10,000 silver talents for the right to exterminate all of the Jews in Ahasuerus' kingdom. Haman casts lots, Purim, using supernatural means, and sees that the thirteenth day of the Month of Adar is a fortuitous day for the genocide. Using the seal of the king, in the name of the king, Haman sends an order to the provinces of the kingdom to allow the extermination of the Jews on the thirteenth of Adar. When Mordecai learns of this, he tells Esther to reveal to the king that she is Jewish and ask that he repeal the order. Esther hesitates, saying that she could be put to death if she goes to the king without being summoned; nevertheless, Mordecai urges her to try. Esther asks that the entire Jewish community fast and pray for three days before she goes to see the king; Mordecai agrees.\nOn the third day, Esther goes to the courtyard in front of the king's palace, and she is welcomed by the king, who stretches out his scepter for her to touch, and offers her anything she wants \"up to half of the kingdom\". Esther invites the king and Haman to a banquet she has prepared for the next day. She tells the king she will reveal her request at the banquet. During the banquet, the king repeats his offer again, whereupon Esther invites both the king and Haman to a banquet she is making on the following day as well.\nSeeing that he is in favor with the king and queen, Haman takes counsel from his wife and friends to build a gallows upon which to hang Mordecai; as he is in their good favors, he believes he will be granted his wish to hang Mordecai the very next day. After building the gallows, Haman goes to the palace in the middle of the night to wait for the earliest moment he can see the king.\nThat evening, the king, unable to sleep, asks that the Annals of the Kingdom be read to him so that he will become drowsy. The book miraculously opens to the page telling of Mordecai's great service, and the king asks if he had already received a reward. When his attendants answer in the negative, Ahasuerus is suddenly distracted and demands to know who is standing in the palace courtyard in the middle of the night. The attendants answer that it is Haman. Ahasuerus invites Haman into his room. Haman, instead of requesting that Mordecai be hanged, is ordered to take Mordecai through the streets of the capital on the Royal Horse wearing the royal robes. Haman is also instructed to yell, \"This is what shall be done to the man whom the king wishes to honor!\"\nAfter spending the entire day honoring Mordecai, Haman rushes to Esther's second banquet, where Ahasuerus is already waiting. Ahasuerus repeats his offer to Esther of anything \"up to half of the kingdom\". Esther tells Ahasuerus that while she appreciates the offer, she must put before him a more basic issue: she explains that there is a person plotting to kill her and her entire people, and that this person's intentions are to harm the king and the kingdom. When Ahasuerus asks who this person is, Esther points to Haman and names him. Upon hearing this, an enraged Ahasuerus goes out to the garden to calm down and consider the situation.\nWhile Ahasuerus is in the garden, Haman throws himself at Esther's feet asking for mercy. Upon returning from the garden, the king is further enraged. As it was the custom to eat on reclining couches, it appears to the king as if Haman is attacking Esther. He orders Haman to be removed from his sight. While Haman is being led out, Harvona, a civil servant, tells the king that Haman had built a gallows for Mordecai, \"who had saved the king's life\". In response, the king says \"Hang him (Haman) on it\".\nAfter Haman is put to death, Ahasuerus gives Haman's estate to Esther. Esther tells the king about Mordecai being her relative, and the king makes Mordecai his adviser. When Esther asks the king to revoke the order exterminating the Jews, the king is initially hesitant, saying that an order issued by the king cannot be repealed. Ahasuerus allows Esther and Mordecai to draft another order, with the seal of the king and in the name of the king, to allow the Jewish people to defend themselves and fight with their oppressors on the thirteenth day of Adar.\nOn the thirteenth day of Adar, the same day that Haman had set for them to be killed, the Jews defend themselves in all parts of the kingdom and rest on the fourteenth day of Adar. The fourteenth day of Adar is celebrated with the giving of charity, exchanging foodstuffs, and feasting. In Susa, the Jews of the capital were given another day to kill their oppressors; they rested and celebrated on the fifteenth day of Adar, again giving charity, exchanging foodstuffs, and feasting as well. \nThe Jews established an annual feast, the feast of Purim, in memory of their deliverance. Haman having set the date of the thirteenth of Adar to commence his campaign against the Jews, this determined the date of the festival of Purim.\nHistoricity.\nAlthough the details of the setting are entirely plausible and the story may even have some basis in actual events, there is general agreement among scholars that the book of Esther is a work of fiction. Persian kings did not marry outside of seven Persian noble families, making it unlikely that there was a Jewish queen Esther. Further, the name \"Ahasuerus\" can be translated to \"Xerxes\", as both derive from the Persian \"Khshay\u0101rsha.\" Ahasuerus as described in the Book of Esther is usually identified in modern sources to refer to Xerxes I, who ruled between 486 and 465 BCE, as it is to this monarch that the events described in Esther are thought to fit the most closely. Xerxes I's queen was Amestris, further implying the fiction of the story. \nSome scholars speculate that the story was created to justify the Jewish appropriation of an originally non-Jewish feast. The festival which the book explains is Purim, which is explained as meaning \"lot\", from the Babylonian word \"puru\". One popular theory says the festival has its origins in a historicized Babylonian myth or ritual in which Mordecai and Esther represent the Babylonian gods Marduk and Ishtar, while others trace the ritual to the Persian New Year, and scholars have surveyed other theories in their works Some scholars have defended the story as real history, but the attempt to find a historical kernel to the narrative \"is likely to be futile\".\nInterpretations.\nThe Book of Esther begins by portraying Esther as beautiful and obedient, though a relatively passive figure. Throughout the story, she evolves into a character who takes a decisive role in her own future and that of her people. According to Sidnie White Crawford, \"Esther's position in a male court mirrors that of the Jews in a Gentile world, with the threat of danger ever present below the seemingly calm surface.\" Esther is compared to Daniel in that both represent a \"type\" for Jews living in Diaspora, and hoping to live a successful life in an alien environment.\nAccording to Susan Zaeske, by virtue of the fact that Esther used only rhetoric to convince the king to save her people, the story of Esther is a \"rhetoric of exile and empowerment that, for millennia, has notably shaped the discourse of marginalized peoples such as Jews, women, and African Americans\", persuading those who have power over them.\nPersian culture.\nModern day Persian Jews are called \"Esther's Children\". A building venerated as being the Tomb of Esther and Mordechai is located in Hamadan, Iran, although the village of Kfar Bar'am in northern Israel also claims to be the burial place of Queen Esther.\nArtistic Depictions of Esther.\nThroughout history, many artists have created . Notable early portrayals include the Heilspiegel Altarpiece by Konrad Witz and \"Esther Before Ahasuerus\" by Tintoretto (1546\u201347, Royal Collection) which show Esther appearing before the king to beg mercy for the Jews, despite the punishment for appearing without being summoned being death. This scene became one of the most commonly depicted parts of the story. \nEsther's faint had not often been depicted in art before Tintoretto. It is shown in the series of \"cassone\" scenes of the \"Life of Esther\" attributed variously to Sandro Botticelli and Filippino Lippi from the 1470s. In other cassone depictions, for example by Filippino Lippi, Esther's readiness to show herself before the court is contrasted to Vashti's refusal to expose herself to the public assembly.\nEsther was regarded in Catholic theology as a typological forerunner of the Virgin Mary in her role as intercessor Her regal election parallels Mary's Assumption and as she becomes queen of Persia, Mary becomes queen of heaven; Mary's epithet as 'stella maris' parallels Esther as a 'star' and both figure as sponsors of the humble before the powerful. Contemporary viewers would likely have recognized a similarity between the faint and the common motif of the Swoon of the Virgin, seen in many depictions of the Crucifixion of Jesus. Esther's fainting became a popular subject in the Baroque painting of the following century. A notable Baroque example is \"Esther Before Ahasuerus\" by Artemisia Gentileschi.\nIn Christianity.\nEsther is commemorated as a matriarch in the Calendar of Saints of the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod on May 24.\nEsther is recognized as a saint in the Eastern Orthodox Church, commemorated on the Sunday before Christmas. \"The Septuagint edition of Esther contains six parts (totaling 107 verses) not found in the Hebrew Bible. Although these interpretations originally may have been composed in Hebrew, they survive only in Greek texts. Because the Hebrew Bible's version of Esther's story contains neither prayers nor even a single reference to God, Greek redactors apparently felt compelled to give the tale a more explicit religious orientation, alluding to \"God\" or the \"Lord\" fifty times.\" These additions to Esther in the Apocrypha were added approximately in the second or first century BCE.\nThe story of Esther is also referenced in chapter 28 of 1 Meqabyan, a book considered canonical in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9903", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9903", "title": "Entamoeba", "text": "Genus of internal parasites\nEntamoeba is a genus of Amoebozoa found as internal parasites or commensals of animals.\nIn 1875, Fedor L\u00f6sch described the first proven case of amoebic dysentery in St. Petersburg, Russia. He referred to the amoeba he observed microscopically as \"Amoeba coli\"; however, it is not clear whether he was using this as a descriptive term or intended it as a formal taxonomic name. The genus \"Entamoeba\" was defined by Casagrandi and Barbagallo for the species \"Entamoeba coli\", which is known to be a commensal organism. L\u00f6sch's organism was renamed \"Entamoeba histolytica\" by Fritz Schaudinn in 1903; he later died, in 1906, from a self-inflicted infection when studying this amoeba. For a time during the first half of the 20th century the entire genus \"Entamoeba\" was transferred to \"Endamoeba\", a genus of amoebas infecting invertebrates about which little is known. This move was reversed by the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature in the late 1950s, and \"Entamoeba\" has stayed 'stable' ever since.\nSpecies.\nSeveral species are found in humans and animals. \"Entamoeba histolytica\" is the pathogen responsible for invasive 'amoebiasis' (which includes amoebic dysentery and amoebic liver abscesses). Others such as \"Entamoeba coli\" (not to be confused with \"Escherichia coli\") and \"Entamoeba dispar\" are harmless. With the exception of \"Entamoeba gingivalis\", which lives in the mouth, and \"E. moshkovskii\", which is frequently isolated from river and lake sediments, all \"Entamoeba\" species are found in the intestines of the animals they infect. \"Entamoeba invadens\" is a species that can cause a disease similar to \"E. histolytica\" but in reptiles. In contrast to other species, \"E. invadens\" forms cysts in vitro in the absence of bacteria and is used as a model system to study this aspect of the life cycle. Many other species of \"Entamoeba\" have been described, and it is likely that many others remain to be found.\nStructure.\n\"Entamoeba\" cells are small, with a single nucleus and typically a single lobose pseudopod taking the form of a clear anterior bulge. They have a simple life cycle. The trophozoite (feeding-dividing form) is approximately 10-20 \u03bcm in diameter and feeds primarily on bacteria. It divides by simple binary fission to form two smaller daughter cells. Almost all species form cysts, the stage involved in transmission (the exception is \"Entamoeba gingivalis\"). Depending on the species, these can have one, four or eight nuclei and are variable in size; these characteristics help in species identification.\nClassification.\n\"Entamoeba\" belongs to the Archamoebae, which like many other anaerobic eukaryotes have reduced mitochondria. This group also includes \"Endolimax\" and \"Iodamoeba\", which also live in animal intestines and are similar in appearance to \"Entamoeba\", although this may partly be due to convergence. Also in this group are the free-living amoebo-flagellates of the genus \"Mastigamoeba\" and related genera. Certain other genera of symbiotic amoebae, such as \"Endamoeba\", might prove to be synonyms of \"Entamoeba\" but this is still unclear.\nCulture.\nFission.\nStudying \"Entamoeba invadens\", David Biron of the Weizmann Institute of Science and coworkers found that about one third of the cells are unable to separate unaided and recruit a neighboring amoeba (dubbed the \"midwife\") to complete the fission. He writes:\n\"When an amoeba divides, the two daughter cells stay attached by a tubular tether which remains intact unless mechanically severed. If called upon, the neighbouring amoeba midwife travels up to 200 \u03bcm towards the dividing amoeba, usually advancing in a straight trajectory with an average velocity of about 0.5 \u03bcm/s. The midwife then proceeds to rupture the connection, after which all three amoebae move on.\"\nThey also reported a similar behavior in \"Dictyostelium\".\nSince \"E. histolytica\" does not form cysts in the absence of bacteria, \"E. invadens\" has become used as a model for encystation studies as it will form cysts under axenic growth conditions, which simplifies analysis. After inducing encystation in \"E. invadens\", DNA replication increases initially and then slows down. On completion of encystation, predominantly tetra-nucleate cysts are formed along with some uni-, bi- and tri-nucleate cysts.\nDifferentiation and cell biology.\nUninucleated trophozoites convert into cysts in a process called encystation. The number of nuclei in the cyst varies from 1 to 8 among species and is one of the characteristics used to tell species apart. Of the species already mentioned, \"Entamoeba coli\" forms cysts with 8 nuclei while the others form tetra-nucleated cysts. Since \"E. histolytica\" does not form cysts \"in vitro\" in the absence of bacteria, it is not possible to study the differentiation process in detail in that species. Instead the differentiation process is studied using \"E. invadens\", a reptilian parasite that causes a very similar disease to \"E. histolytica\" and which can be induced to encyst \"in vitro\". Until recently there was no genetic transfection vector available for this organism and detailed study at the cellular level was not possible. However, recently a transfection vector was developed and the transfection conditions for \"E. invadens\" were optimised which should enhance the research possibilities at the molecular level of the differentiation process.\nMeiosis.\nIn sexually reproducing eukaryotes, homologous recombination (HR) ordinarily occurs during meiosis. The meiosis-specific recombinase, Dmc1, is required for efficient meiotic HR, and Dmc1 is expressed in \"E. histolytica\". The purified Dmc1 from \"E. histolytica\" forms presynaptic filaments and catalyzes ATP-dependent homologous DNA pairing and DNA strand exchange over at least several thousand base pairs. The DNA pairing and strand exchange reactions are enhanced by the eukaryotic meiosis-specific recombination accessory factor (heterodimer) Hop2-Mnd1. These processes are central to meiotic recombination, suggesting that \"E. histolytica\" undergoes meiosis.\nStudies of \"E. invadens\" found that, during the conversion from the tetraploid uninucleate trophozoite to the tetranucleate cyst, homologous recombination is enhanced. Expression of genes with functions related to the major steps of meiotic recombination also increased during encystations. These findings in \"E. invadens\", combined with evidence from studies of \"E. histolytica\" indicate the presence of meiosis in the \"Entamoeba\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
