{"id": "8687", "revid": "39344388", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8687", "title": "Detroit", "text": "Largest city in Michigan, United States\nDetroit ( , ) is the largest city in the U.S. state of Michigan. It is also the largest U.S. city on the United States\u2013Canada border, and the seat of government of Wayne County. The City of Detroit had a population of 639,111 at the 2020 census, making it the 27th-most populous city in the United States. The metropolitan area, known as Metro Detroit, is home to 4.3 million people, making it the second-largest in the Midwest after the Chicago metropolitan area, and the 14th-largest in the United States. Regarded as a major cultural center, Detroit is known for its contributions to music, art, architecture and design, in addition to its historical automotive background. \"Time\" named Detroit as one of the fifty World's Greatest Places of 2022 to explore.\nDetroit is a major port on the Detroit River, one of the four major straits that connect the Great Lakes system to the Saint Lawrence Seaway. The City of Detroit anchors the third-largest regional economy in the Midwest, behind Chicago and Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul, and the 16th-largest in the United States. Detroit is best known as the center of the U.S. automobile industry, and the \"Big Three\" auto manufacturers General Motors, Ford, and Stellantis North America (Chrysler) are all headquartered in Metro Detroit. As of 2007[ [update]], the Detroit metropolitan area is the number one exporting region among 310 defined metropolitan areas in the United States. The Detroit Metropolitan Airport is among the most important hub airports in the United States. Detroit and its neighboring Canadian city Windsor are connected through a highway tunnel, railway tunnel, and the Ambassador Bridge, which is the second-busiest international crossing in North America, after San Diego\u2013Tijuana. Both cities will soon be connected by a new bridge currently under construction, the Gordie Howe International Bridge, which will provide a complete freeway-to-freeway link. The new bridge is expected to be open by 2024.\nIn 1701, Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac and Alphonse de Tonty founded Fort Pontchartrain du D\u00e9troit, the future city of Detroit. During the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, it became an important industrial hub at the center of the Great Lakes region. The city's population became the fourth-largest in the nation in 1920, after only New York City, Chicago and Philadelphia, with the expansion of the auto industry in the early 20th century. As Detroit's industrialization took off, the Detroit River became the busiest commercial hub in the world. The strait carried over 65 million tons of shipping commerce through Detroit to locations all over the world each year; the freight throughput was more than three times that of New York and about four times that of London. By the 1940s, the city's population remained the fourth-largest in the country. However, due to industrial restructuring, the loss of jobs in the auto industry, and rapid suburbanization, among other reasons, Detroit entered a state of urban decay and lost considerable population from the late 20th century to the present. Since reaching a peak of 1.85\u00a0million at the 1950 census, Detroit's population has declined by more than 65 percent. In 2013, Detroit became the largest U.S. city to file for bankruptcy, which it successfully exited in December 2014, when the city government regained control of Detroit's finances.\nDetroit's diverse culture has had both local and international influence, particularly in music, with the city giving rise to the genres of Motown and techno, and playing an important role in the development of jazz, hip-hop, rock, and punk. The rapid growth of Detroit in its boom years resulted in a globally unique stock of architectural monuments and historic places. Since the 2000s, conservation efforts have managed to save many architectural pieces and achieved several large-scale revitalizations, including the restoration of several historic theaters and entertainment venues, high-rise renovations, new sports stadiums, and a riverfront revitalization project. More recently, the population of Downtown Detroit, Midtown Detroit, and various other neighborhoods have increased. An increasingly popular tourist destination, Detroit receives 16\u00a0million visitors per year. In 2015, Detroit was named a \"City of Design\" by UNESCO, the first U.S. city to receive that designation.\nToponymy.\nDetroit is named after the Detroit River, connecting Lake Huron with Lake Erie. The city's name comes from the French word meaning 'strait' as the city was situated on a narrow passage of water linking two lakes. The river was known as \u201c,\" among the French, which meant 'the strait of Lake Erie'.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nPaleo-Indian people inhabited areas near Detroit as early as 11,000 years ago including the culture referred to as the Mound-builders. By the 17th century, the region was inhabited by Huron, Odawa, Potawatomi and Iroquois peoples. The area is known by the Anishinaabe people as \"Waawiiyaataanong\", translating to 'where the water curves around'.\nThe first Europeans did not penetrate into the region and reach the straits of Detroit until French missionaries and traders worked their way around the League of the Iroquois, with whom they were at war and other Iroquoian tribes in the 1630s. The Huron and Neutral peoples held the north side of Lake Erie until the 1650s, when the Iroquois pushed both and the Erie people away from the lake and its beaver-rich feeder streams in the Beaver Wars of 1649\u20131655. By the 1670s, the war-weakened Iroquois laid claim to as far south as the Ohio River valley in northern Kentucky as hunting grounds, and had absorbed many other Iroquoian peoples after defeating them in war. For the next hundred years, virtually no British or French action was contemplated without consultation with the Iroquois or consideration of their likely response. When the French and Indian War evicted the Kingdom of France from Canada, it removed one barrier to American colonists migrating west. \nBritish negotiations with the Iroquois would both prove critical and lead to a Crown policy limiting settlements below the Great Lakes and west of the Alleghenies. Many colonial American would-be migrants resented this restraint and became supporters of the American Revolution. The 1778 raids and resultant 1779 decisive Sullivan Expedition reopened the Ohio Country to westward emigration, which began almost immediately. By 1800 white settlers were pouring westwards.\nLater settlement.\nThe city was named by French colonists, referring to the Detroit River (, meaning \"the strait of Lake Erie\"), linking Lake Huron and Lake Erie; in the historical context, the strait included the St. Clair River, Lake St. Clair and the Detroit River.\nOn July 24, 1701, the French explorer Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac, with his lieutenant\u00a0Alphonse de Tonty and along with more than a hundred other settlers, began constructing a small fort on the north bank of the Detroit River. Cadillac would later name the settlement Fort Pontchartrain du D\u00e9troit, after Louis Ph\u00e9lypeaux, comte de Pontchartrain, Minister of Marine under Louis XIV. A church was soon founded here, and the parish was known as Sainte Anne de D\u00e9troit. France offered free land to colonists to attract families to Detroit; when it reached a population of 800 in 1765, this was the largest European settlement between Montreal and New Orleans, both also French settlements, in the former colonies of New France and La Louisiane, respectively.\nBy 1773, after the addition of Anglo-American settlers, the population of Detroit was 1,400. By 1778, its population reached 2,144 and it was the third-largest city in what was known as the Province of Quebec since the British takeover of French colonies following their victory in the Seven Years' War.\nThe region's economy was based on the lucrative fur trade, in which numerous Native American people had important roles as trappers and traders. Today the flag of Detroit reflects its French colonial heritage. Descendants of the earliest French and French-Canadian settlers formed a cohesive community, who gradually were superseded as the dominant population after more Anglo-American settlers arrived in the early 19th century with American westward migration. Living along the shores of Lake St. Clair and south to Monroe and downriver suburbs, the ethnic French Canadians of Detroit, also known as Muskrat French in reference to the fur trade, remain a subculture in the region in the 21st century.\nDuring the French and Indian War (1754\u201363), the North American front of the Seven Years' War between Britain and France, British troops gained control of the settlement in 1760 and shortened its name to \"Detroit\". Several regional Native American tribes, such as the Potowatomi, Ojibwe and Huron, launched Pontiac's War in 1763, and laid siege to Fort Detroit, but failed to capture it. In defeat, France ceded its territory in North America east of the Mississippi to Britain following the war.\nFollowing the American Revolutionary War and the establishment of the United States as an independent country, Britain ceded Detroit along with other territories in the area under the Jay Treaty (1796), which established the northern border with its colony of Canada. The Great Fire of 1805 destroyed most of the Detroit settlement, which had primarily buildings made of wood. One stone fort, a river warehouse, and brick chimneys of former wooden homes were the sole structures to survive. Of the 600 Detroit residents in this area, none died in the fire.\n19th century.\nFrom 1805 to 1847, Detroit was the capital of Michigan as a territory and as a state. William Hull, the United States commander at Detroit surrendered without a fight to British troops and their Native American allies during the War of 1812 in the siege of Detroit, believing his forces were vastly outnumbered. The Battle of Frenchtown (January 18\u201323, 1813) was part of a U.S. effort to retake the city, and U.S. troops suffered their highest fatalities of any battle in the war. This battle is commemorated at River Raisin National Battlefield Park south of Detroit in Monroe County. Detroit was recaptured by the United States later that year.\nThe settlement was incorporated as a city in 1815. As the city expanded, a geometric street plan developed by Augustus B. Woodward was followed, featuring grand boulevards as in Paris.\nPrior to the American Civil War, the city's access to the Canada\u2013US border made it a key stop for refugee slaves gaining freedom in the North along the Underground Railroad. Many went across the Detroit River to Canada to escape pursuit by slave catchers. An estimated 20,000 to 30,000 African-American refugees settled in Canada. George DeBaptiste was considered to be the \"president\" of the Detroit Underground Railroad, William Lambert the \"vice president\" or \"secretary\", and Laura Haviland the \"superintendent\".\nNumerous men from Detroit volunteered to fight for the Union during the American Civil War, including the 24th Michigan Infantry Regiment. It was part of the legendary Iron Brigade, which fought with distinction and suffered 82% casualties at the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863. When the First Volunteer Infantry Regiment arrived to fortify Washington, D.C., President Abraham Lincoln is quoted as saying, \"Thank God for Michigan!\" George Armstrong Custer led the Michigan Brigade during the Civil War and called them the \"Wolverines\".\nDuring the late 19th century, wealthy industry and shipping magnates commissioned the design and construction of several Gilded Age mansions east and west of the current downtown, along the major avenues of the Woodward plan. Most notable among them was the David Whitney House at 4421 Woodward Avenue, and the grand avenue became a favored address for mansions. During this period, some referred to Detroit as the \"Paris of the West\" for its architecture, grand avenues in the Paris style, and for Washington Boulevard, recently electrified by Thomas Edison. The city had grown steadily from the 1830s with the rise of shipping, shipbuilding, and manufacturing industries. Strategically located along the Great Lakes waterway, Detroit emerged as a major port and transportation hub. \nIn 1896, a thriving carriage trade prompted Henry Ford to build his first automobile in a rented workshop on Mack Avenue. During this growth period, Detroit expanded its borders by annexing all or part of several surrounding villages and townships.\n20th century.\nIn 1903, Henry Ford founded the Ford Motor Company. Ford's manufacturing\u2014and those of automotive pioneers William C. Durant, the Dodge Brothers, Packard, and Walter Chrysler\u2014established Detroit's status in the early 20th century as the world's automotive capital. The growth of the auto industry was reflected by changes in businesses throughout the Midwest and nation, with the development of garages to service vehicles and gas stations, as well as factories for parts and tires.\nIn 1907, the Detroit River carried 67,292,504 tons of shipping commerce through Detroit to locations all over the world. For comparison, London shipped 18,727,230 tons, and New York shipped 20,390,953 tons. The river was dubbed \"the Greatest Commercial Artery on Earth\" by The Detroit News in 1908.\nWith the rapid growth of industrial workers in the auto factories, labor unions such as the American Federation of Labor and the United Auto Workers fought to organize workers to gain them better working conditions and wages. They initiated strikes and other tactics in support of improvements such as the 8-hour day/40-hour work week, increased wages, greater benefits, and improved working conditions. The labor activism during those years increased the influence of union leaders in the city such as Jimmy Hoffa of the Teamsters and Walter Reuther of the Autoworkers.\nDue to the booming auto industry, Detroit became the fourth-largest city in the nation in 1920, following New York City, Chicago and Philadelphia.\nThe prohibition of alcohol from 1920 to 1933 resulted in the Detroit River becoming a major conduit for smuggling of illegal Canadian spirits.\nDetroit, like many places in the United States, developed racial conflict and discrimination in the 20th century following the rapid demographic changes as hundreds of thousands of new workers were attracted to the industrial city; in a short period, it became the fourth-largest city in the nation. The Great Migration brought rural blacks from the South; they were outnumbered by southern whites who also migrated to the city. Immigration brought southern and eastern Europeans of Catholic and Jewish faith; these new groups competed with native-born whites for jobs and housing in the booming city.\nDetroit was one of the major Midwest cities that was a site for the dramatic urban revival of the Ku Klux Klan beginning in 1915. \"By the 1920s the city had become a stronghold of the KKK\", whose members primarily opposed Catholic and Jewish immigrants, but also practiced discrimination against Black Americans. Even after the decline of the KKK in the late 1920s, the Black Legion, a secret vigilante group, was active in the Detroit area in the 1930s. One-third of its estimated 20,000 to 30,000 members in Michigan were based in the city. It was defeated after numerous prosecutions following the kidnapping and murder in 1936 of Charles Poole, a Catholic organizer with the federal Works Progress Administration. Some 49 men of the Black Legion were convicted of numerous crimes, with many sentenced to life in prison for murder.\nIn the 1940s the world's \"first urban depressed freeway\" ever built, the Davison, was constructed in Detroit. During World War II, the government encouraged retooling of the American automobile industry in support of the Allied powers, leading to Detroit's key role in the American Arsenal of Democracy.\nJobs expanded so rapidly due to the defense buildup in World War II that 400,000 people migrated to the city from 1941 to 1943, including 50,000 blacks in the second wave of the Great Migration, and 350,000 whites, many of them from the South. Whites, including ethnic Europeans, feared black competition for jobs and scarce housing. The federal government prohibited discrimination in defense work, but when in June 1943 Packard promoted three black people to work next to whites on its assembly lines, 25,000 white workers walked off the job.\nThe 1943 Detroit race riot took place in June, three weeks after the Packard plant protest, beginning with an altercation at Belle Isle. Blacks suffered 25 deaths (of a total of 34), three-quarters of 600 wounded, and most of the losses due to property damage. Rioters moved through the city, and young whites traveled across town to attack more settled blacks in their neighborhood of Paradise Valley.\nPostwar era.\nIndustrial mergers in the 1950s, especially in the automobile sector, increased oligopoly in the American auto industry. Detroit manufacturers such as Packard and Hudson merged into other companies and eventually disappeared. At its peak population of 1,849,568, in the 1950 Census, the city was the fifth-largest in the United States, after New York City, Chicago, Philadelphia and Los Angeles.\nIn this postwar era, the auto industry continued to create opportunities for many African Americans from the South, who continued with their Great Migration to Detroit and other northern and western cities to escape the strict Jim Crow laws and racial discrimination policies of the South. Postwar Detroit was a prosperous industrial center of mass production. The auto industry comprised about 60% of all industry in the city, allowing space for a plethora of separate booming businesses including stove making, brewing, furniture building, oil refineries, pharmaceutical manufacturing, and more. The expansion of jobs created unique opportunities for black Americans, who saw novel high employment rates: there was a 103% increase in the number of blacks employed in postwar Detroit. Black Americans who immigrated to northern industrial cities from the south still faced intense racial discrimination in the employment sector. Racial discrimination kept the workforce and better jobs predominantly white, while many black Detroiters held lower-paying factory jobs. Despite changes in demographics as the city's black population expanded, Detroit's police force, fire department, and other city jobs continued to be held by predominantly white residents. This created an unbalanced racial power dynamic.\nUnequal opportunities in employment resulted in unequal housing opportunities for the majority of the black community: with overall lower incomes and facing the backlash of discriminatory housing policies, the black community was limited to lower cost, lower quality housing in the city. The surge in Detroit's black population with the Great Migration augmented the strain on housing scarcity. The liveable areas available to the black community were limited, and as a result, families often crowded together in unsanitary, unsafe, and illegal quarters. Such discrimination became increasingly evident in the policies of redlining implemented by banks and federal housing groups, which almost completely restricted the ability of blacks to improve their housing and encouraged white people to guard the racial divide that defined their neighborhoods. As a result, black people were often denied bank loans to obtain better housing, and interest rates and rents were unfairly inflated to prevent their moving into white neighborhoods. White residents and political leaders largely opposed the influx of black Detroiters to white neighborhoods, believing that their presence would lead to neighborhood deterioration (most predominantly black neighborhoods deteriorated due to local and federal governmental neglect). This perpetuated a cyclical exclusionary process that marginalized the agency of black Detroiters by trapping them in the unhealthiest, least safe areas of the city.\nAs in other major American cities in the postwar era, construction of a federally subsidized, extensive highway and freeway system around Detroit, and pent-up demand for new housing stimulated suburbanization; highways made commuting by car for higher-income residents easier. However, this construction had negative implications for many lower-income urban residents. Highways were constructed through and completely demolished neighborhoods of poor residents and black communities who had less political power to oppose them. The neighborhoods were mostly low income, considered blighted, or made up of older housing where investment had been lacking due to racial redlining, so the highways were presented as a kind of urban renewal. These neighborhoods (such as Black Bottom and Paradise Valley) were extremely important to the black communities of Detroit, providing spaces for independent black businesses and social/cultural organizations. Their destruction displaced residents with little consideration of the effects of breaking up functioning neighborhoods and businesses.\nIn 1956, Detroit's last heavily used electric streetcar line, which traveled along the length of Woodward Avenue, was removed and replaced with gas-powered buses. It was the last line of what had once been a 534-mile network of electric streetcars. In 1941, at peak times, a streetcar ran on Woodward Avenue every 60 seconds.\nAll of these changes in the area's transportation system favored low-density, auto-oriented development rather than high-density urban development. Industry also moved to the suburbs, seeking large plots of land for single-story factories. By the 21st century, the metro Detroit area had developed as one of the most sprawling job markets in the United States; combined with poor public transport, this resulted in many new jobs being beyond the reach of urban low-income workers.\nIn 1950, the city held about one-third of the state's population, anchored by its industries and workers. Over the next sixty years, the city's population declined to less than 10 percent of the state's population. During the same time period, the sprawling Detroit metropolitan area, which surrounds and includes the city, grew to contain more than half of Michigan's population. The shift of population and jobs eroded Detroit's tax base.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI have a dream this afternoon that my four little children, that my four little children will not come up in the same young days that I came up within, but they will be judged on the basis of the content of their character, not the color of their skin\u00a0... I have a dream this evening that one day we will recognize the words of Jefferson that \"all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.\" I have a dream\u00a0...\n \u2014Martin Luther King Jr. (June 1963 Speech at the Great March on Detroit)\nIn June 1963, Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. gave a major speech as part of a civil rights march in Detroit that foreshadowed his \"I Have a Dream\" speech in Washington, D.C., two months later. While the civil rights movement gained significant federal civil rights laws in 1964 and 1965, longstanding inequities resulted in confrontations between the police and inner-city black youth who wanted change.\nLongstanding tensions in Detroit culminated in the Twelfth Street riot in July 1967. Governor George W. Romney ordered the Michigan National Guard into Detroit, and President Johnson sent in U.S. Army troops. The result was 43 dead, 467 injured, over 7,200 arrests, and more than 2,000 buildings destroyed, mostly in black residential and business areas. Thousands of small businesses closed permanently or relocated to safer neighborhoods. The affected district lay in ruins for decades. According to the Chicago Tribune, it was the 3rd most costly riot in the United States.\nOn August 18, 1970, the NAACP filed suit against Michigan state officials, including Governor William Milliken, charging \"de facto\" public school segregation. The NAACP argued that although schools were not legally segregated, the city of Detroit and its surrounding counties had enacted policies to maintain racial segregation in public schools. The NAACP also suggested a direct relationship between unfair housing practices and educational segregation, as the composition of students in the schools followed segregated neighborhoods. The District Court held all levels of government accountable for the segregation in its ruling. The Sixth Circuit Court affirmed some of the decision, holding that it was the state's responsibility to integrate across the segregated metropolitan area. The U.S. Supreme Court took up the case February 27, 1974. The subsequent \"Milliken v. Bradley\" decision had nationwide influence. In a narrow decision, the US Supreme Court found schools were a subject of local control, and suburbs could not be forced to aid with the desegregation of the city's school district.\n\"Milliken was perhaps the greatest missed opportunity of that period\", said Myron Orfield, professor of law at the University of Minnesota. \"Had that gone the other way, it would have opened the door to fixing nearly all of Detroit's current problems.\" John Mogk, a professor of law and an expert in urban planning at Wayne State University in Detroit, says, \nEverybody thinks that it was the riots [in 1967] that caused the white families to leave. Some people were leaving at that time but, really, it was after Milliken that you saw mass flight to the suburbs. If the case had gone the other way, it is likely that Detroit would not have experienced the steep decline in its tax base that has occurred since then.\n1970s and decline.\nIn November 1973, the city elected Coleman Young as its first black mayor. After taking office, Young emphasized increasing racial diversity in the police department, which was predominantly white. Young also worked to improve Detroit's transportation system, but the tension between Young and his suburban counterparts over regional matters was problematic throughout his mayoral term. In 1976, the federal government offered $600\u00a0million for building a regional rapid transit system, under a single regional authority. But the inability of Detroit and its suburban neighbors to solve conflicts over transit planning resulted in the region losing the majority of funding for rapid transit.\nFollowing the failure to reach a regional agreement over the larger system, the city moved forward with construction of the elevated downtown circulator portion of the system, which became known as the Detroit People Mover.\nThe gasoline crises of 1973 and 1979 also affected Detroit and the U.S. auto industry. Buyers chose smaller, more fuel-efficient cars made by foreign makers as the price of gas rose. Efforts to revive the city were stymied by the struggles of the auto industry, as their sales and market share declined. Automakers laid off thousands of employees and closed plants in the city, further eroding the tax base. To counteract this, the city used eminent domain to build two large new auto assembly plants in the city.\nAs mayor, Young sought to revive the city by seeking to increase investment in the city's declining downtown. The Renaissance Center, a mixed-use office and retail complex, opened in 1977. This group of skyscrapers was an attempt to keep businesses in downtown. Young also gave city support to other large developments to attract middle and upper-class residents back to the city. Despite the Renaissance Center and other projects, the downtown area continued to lose businesses to the automobile-dependent suburbs. Major stores and hotels closed, and many large office buildings went vacant. Young was criticized for being too focused on downtown development and not doing enough to lower the city's high crime rate and improve city services to residents.\nHigh unemployment was compounded by middle-class flight to the suburbs, and some residents leaving the state to find work. The result for the city was a higher proportion of poor in its population, reduced tax base, depressed property values, abandoned buildings, abandoned neighborhoods, high crime rates, and a pronounced demographic imbalance.\n1980s.\nOn August 16, 1987, Northwest Airlines Flight 255 crashed near Detroit Metro airport, killing all but one of the 155 people on board, as well as two people on the ground.\n1990s &amp; 2000s.\nIn 1993, Young retired as Detroit's longest-serving mayor, deciding not to seek a sixth term. That year the city elected Dennis Archer, a former Michigan Supreme Court justice. Archer prioritized downtown development and easing tensions with Detroit's suburban neighbors. A referendum to allow casino gambling in the city passed in 1996; several temporary casino facilities opened in 1999, and permanent downtown casinos with hotels opened in 2007\u201308.\nCampus Martius, a reconfiguration of downtown's main intersection as a new park, was opened in 2004. The park has been cited as one of the best public spaces in the United States. The city's riverfront on the Detroit River has been the focus of redevelopment, following successful examples of other older industrial cities. In 2001, the first portion of the International Riverfront was completed as a part of the city's 300th-anniversary celebration.\n2010s.\nIn September 2008, Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick (who had served for six years) resigned following felony convictions. In 2013, Kilpatrick was convicted on 24 federal felony counts, including mail fraud, wire fraud, and racketeering, and was sentenced to 28 years in federal prison. The former mayor's activities cost the city an estimated $20\u00a0million.\nThe city's financial crisis resulted in Michigan taking over administrative control of its government. The state governor declared a financial emergency in March 2013, appointing Kevyn Orr as emergency manager. On July 18, 2013, Detroit became the largest U.S. city to file for bankruptcy. It was declared bankrupt by U.S. District Court on December 3, 2013, in light of the city's $18.5\u00a0billion debt and its inability to fully repay its thousands of creditors. On November 7, 2014, the city's plan for exiting bankruptcy was approved. The following month, on December 11, the city officially exited bankruptcy. The plan allowed the city to eliminate $7\u00a0billion in debt and invest $1.7\u00a0billion into improved city services.\nOne way the city obtained this money was through the Detroit Institute of Arts. Holding over 60,000 pieces of art worth billions of dollars, some saw it as the key to funding this investment. The city came up with a plan to monetize the art and sell it leading to the DIA becoming a private organization. After months of legal battles, the city finally got hundreds of millions of dollars towards funding a new Detroit.\nOne of the largest post-bankruptcy efforts to improve city services has been to work to fix the city's broken street lighting system. At one time it was estimated that 40% of lights were not working, which resulted in public safety issues and abandonment of housing. The plan called for replacing outdated high-pressure sodium lights with 65,000 LED lights. Construction began in late 2014 and finished in December 2016; Detroit is the largest U.S. city with all LED street lighting.\nIn the 2010s, several initiatives were taken by Detroit's citizens and new residents to improve the cityscape by renovating and revitalizing neighborhoods. Such projects include volunteer renovation groups and various urban gardening movements. Miles of associated parks and landscaping have been completed in recent years. In 2011, the Port Authority Passenger Terminal opened, with the riverwalk connecting Hart Plaza to the Renaissance Center.\nOne symbol of the city's decades-long decline, the Michigan Central Station, was long vacant. The city renovated it with new windows, elevators and facilities, completing the work in December 2015. In 2018, Ford Motor Company purchased the building and plans to use it for mobility testing with a potential return of train service. Several other landmark buildings have been privately renovated and adapted as condominiums, hotels, offices, or for cultural uses. Detroit was mentioned as a city of renaissance and has reversed many of the trends of the prior decades.\nThe city has also seen a rise in gentrification. In downtown, for example, the construction of Little Caesars Arena brought with it new, high class shops and restaurants up and down Woodward Avenue. Office tower and condominium construction has led to an influx of wealthy families, but also a displacement of long-time residents and culture.\nAreas outside of downtown and other recently revived areas have an average household income of about 25% less than the gentrified areas, a gap that is continuing to grow. Rents and cost of living in these gentrified areas rise every year, pushing minorities and the poor out, causing more and more racial disparity and separation in the city. In 2019, the cost of a one-bedroom loft in Rivertown reached $300,000, with a five-year sale price change of over 500% and average income rising by 18%.\n2020s.\nDetroit filed a challenge with the Census Bureau about the count in 2020. The city believes there was a significant undercount of people.\nGeography.\nMetropolitan area.\nDetroit is the center of a three-county urban area (with a population of 3,734,090 within an area of according to the 2010 United States Census), six-county metropolitan statistical area (population of 4,296,250 in an area of as of the 2010 census), and a nine-county Combined Statistical Area (population of 5.3\u00a0million within as of 2010[ [update]]).\nTopography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water. Detroit is the principal city in Metro Detroit and Southeast Michigan. It is situated in the Midwestern United States and the Great Lakes region.\nThe Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge is the only international wildlife preserve in North America, and is uniquely located in the heart of a major metropolitan area. The Refuge includes islands, coastal wetlands, marshes, shoals, and waterfront lands along of the Detroit River and Western Lake Erie shoreline.\nThe city slopes gently from the northwest to southeast on a till plain composed largely of glacial and lake clay. The most notable topographical feature in the city is the Detroit Moraine, a broad clay ridge on which the older portions of Detroit and Windsor are located, rising approximately above the river at its highest point. The highest elevation in the city is directly north of Gorham Playground on the northwest side approximately three blocks south of 8 Mile Road, at a height of . Detroit's lowest elevation is along the Detroit River, at a surface height of .\nBelle Isle Park is a island park in the Detroit River, between Detroit and Windsor, Ontario. It is connected to the mainland by the MacArthur Bridge in Detroit. Belle Isle Park contains such attractions as the James Scott Memorial Fountain, the Belle Isle Conservatory, the Detroit Yacht Club on an adjacent island, a half-mile (800 m) beach, a golf course, a nature center, monuments, and gardens. Both the Detroit and Windsor skylines can be viewed at the island's Sunset Point.\nThree road systems cross the city: the original French template, with avenues radiating from the waterfront, and true north\u2013south roads based on the Northwest Ordinance township system. The city is north of Windsor, Ontario. Detroit is the only major city along the Canada\u2013U.S. border in which one travels south in order to cross into Canada.\nDetroit has four border crossings: the Ambassador Bridge and the Detroit\u2013Windsor Tunnel provide motor vehicle thoroughfares, with the Michigan Central Railway Tunnel providing railroad access to and from Canada. The fourth border crossing is the Detroit\u2013Windsor Truck Ferry, near the Windsor Salt Mine and Zug Island. Near Zug Island, the southwest part of the city was developed over a salt mine that is below the surface. The Detroit salt mine run by the Detroit Salt Company has over of roads within.\nClimate.\nDetroit and the rest of southeastern Michigan have a hot-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfa\") which is influenced by the Great Lakes like other places in the state; the city and close-in suburbs are part of USDA Hardiness zone 6b, while the more distant northern and western suburbs generally are included in zone 6a. Winters are cold, with moderate snowfall and temperatures not rising above freezing on an average 44\u00a0days annually, while dropping to or below on an average 4.4\u00a0days a year; summers are warm to hot with temperatures exceeding on 12\u00a0days. The warm season runs from May to September. The monthly daily mean temperature ranges from in January to in July. Official temperature extremes range from on July 24, 1934, down to on January 21, 1984; the record low maximum is on January 19, 1994, while, conversely the record high minimum is on August 1, 2006, the most recent of five occurrences. A decade or two may pass between readings of or higher, which last occurred July 17, 2012. The average window for freezing temperatures is October 20 thru April 22, allowing a growing season of 180 days.\nPrecipitation is moderate and somewhat evenly distributed throughout the year, although the warmer months such as May and June average more, averaging annually, but historically ranging from in 1963 to in 2011. Snowfall, which typically falls in measurable amounts between November 15 through April 4 (occasionally in October and very rarely in May), averages per season, although historically ranging from in 1881\u201382 to in 2013\u201314. A thick snowpack is not often seen, with an average of only 27.5\u00a0days with or more of snow cover. Thunderstorms are frequent in the Detroit area. These usually occur during spring and summer.\nCityscape.\nArchitecture.\nSeen in panorama, Detroit's waterfront shows a variety of architectural styles. The post modern Neo-Gothic spires of the One Detroit Center (1993) were designed to refer to the city's Art Deco skyscrapers. Together with the Renaissance Center, these buildings form a distinctive and recognizable skyline. Examples of the Art Deco style include the Guardian Building and Penobscot Building downtown, as well as the Fisher Building and Cadillac Place in the New Center area near Wayne State University. Among the city's prominent structures are United States' largest Fox Theatre, the Detroit Opera House, and the Detroit Institute of Arts, all built in the early 20th century.\nWhile the Downtown and New Center areas contain high-rise buildings, the majority of the surrounding city consists of low-rise structures and single-family homes. Outside of the city's core, residential high-rises are found in upper-class neighborhoods such as the East Riverfront, extending toward Grosse Pointe, and the Palmer Park neighborhood just west of Woodward. The University Commons-Palmer Park district in northwest Detroit, near the University of Detroit Mercy and Marygrove College, anchors historic neighborhoods including Palmer Woods, Sherwood Forest, and the University District.\nForty-two significant structures or sites are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Neighborhoods constructed prior to World War II feature the architecture of the times, with wood-frame and brick houses in the working-class neighborhoods, larger brick homes in middle-class neighborhoods, and ornate mansions in upper-class neighborhoods such as Brush Park, Woodbridge, Indian Village, Palmer Woods, Boston-Edison, and others.\nSome of the oldest neighborhoods are along the major Woodward and East Jefferson corridors, which formed spines of the city. Some newer residential construction may also be found along the Woodward corridor and in the far west and northeast. The oldest extant neighborhoods include West Canfield and Brush Park. There have been multi-million dollar restorations of existing homes and construction of new homes and condominiums here.\nThe city has one of the United States' largest surviving collections of late 19th- and early 20th-century buildings. Architecturally significant churches and cathedrals in the city include St. Joseph's, Old St. Mary's, the Sweetest Heart of Mary, and the Cathedral of the Most Blessed Sacrament.\nThe city has substantial activity in urban design, historic preservation, and architecture. A number of downtown redevelopment projects\u2014of which Campus Martius Park is one of the most notable\u2014have revitalized parts of the city. Grand Circus Park and historic district is near the city's theater district; Ford Field, home of the Detroit Lions, and Comerica Park, home of the Detroit Tigers. Little Caesars Arena, a new home for the Detroit Red Wings and the Detroit Pistons, with attached residential, hotel, and retail use, opened on September 5, 2017. The plans for the project call for mixed-use residential on the blocks surrounding the arena and the renovation of the vacant 14-story Eddystone Hotel. It will be a part of The District Detroit, a group of places owned by Olympia Entertainment Inc., including Comerica Park and the Detroit Opera House, among others.\nThe Detroit International Riverfront includes a partially completed three-and-one-half-mile riverfront promenade with a combination of parks, residential buildings, and commercial areas. It extends from Hart Plaza to the MacArthur Bridge, which connects to Belle Isle Park, the largest island park in a U.S. city. The riverfront includes Tri-Centennial State Park and Harbor, Michigan's first urban state park. The second phase is a extension from Hart Plaza to the Ambassador Bridge for a total of of parkway from bridge to bridge. Civic planners envision the pedestrian parks will stimulate residential redevelopment of riverfront properties condemned under eminent domain.\nOther major parks include River Rouge (in the southwest side), the largest park in Detroit; Palmer (north of Highland Park) and Chene Park (on the east river downtown).\nNeighborhoods.\nDetroit has a variety of neighborhood types. The revitalized Downtown, Midtown, Corktown, New Center areas feature many historic buildings and are high density, while further out, particularly in the northeast and on the fringes, high vacancy levels are problematic, for which a number of solutions have been proposed. In 2007, Downtown Detroit was recognized as the best city neighborhood in which to retire among the United States' largest metro areas by CNNMoney editors.\nLafayette Park is a revitalized neighborhood on the city's east side, part of the Ludwig Mies van der Rohe residential district. The development was originally called the Gratiot Park. Planned by Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig Hilberseimer and Alfred Caldwell it includes a landscaped, park with no through traffic, in which these and other low-rise apartment buildings are situated. Immigrants have contributed to the city's neighborhood revitalization, especially in southwest Detroit. Southwest Detroit has experienced a thriving economy in recent years, as evidenced by new housing, increased business openings and the recently opened Mexicantown International Welcome Center.\nThe city has numerous neighborhoods consisting of vacant properties resulting in low inhabited density in those areas, stretching city services and infrastructure. These neighborhoods are concentrated in the northeast and on the city's fringes. A 2009 parcel survey found about a quarter of residential lots in the city to be undeveloped or vacant, and about 10% of the city's housing to be unoccupied. The survey also reported that most (86%) of the city's homes are in good condition with a minority (9%) in fair condition needing only minor repairs.\nTo deal with vacancy issues, the city has begun demolishing the derelict houses, razing 3,000 of the total 10,000 in 2010, but the resulting low density creates a strain on the city's infrastructure. To remedy this, a number of solutions have been proposed including resident relocation from more sparsely populated neighborhoods and converting unused space to urban agricultural use, including Hantz Woodlands, though the city expects to be in the planning stages for up to another two years.\nPublic funding and private investment have also been made with promises to rehabilitate neighborhoods. In April 2008, the city announced a $300-million stimulus plan to create jobs and revitalize neighborhoods, financed by city bonds and paid for by earmarking about 15% of the wagering tax. The city's working plans for neighborhood revitalizations include 7-Mile/Livernois, Brightmoor, East English Village, Grand River/Greenfield, North End, and Osborn. Private organizations have pledged substantial funding to the efforts. Additionally, the city has cleared a section of land for large-scale neighborhood construction, which the city is calling the \"Far Eastside Plan\". In 2011, Mayor Dave Bing announced a plan to categorize neighborhoods by their needs and prioritize the most needed services for those neighborhoods.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2020 United States Census, the city had 639,111 residents, ranking it the 27th most populous city in the United States.\nOf the large shrinking cities in the United States, Detroit has had the most dramatic decline in the population of the past 70 years (down 1,210,457) and the second-largest percentage decline (down 65.4%). While the drop in Detroit's population has been ongoing since 1950, the most dramatic period was the significant 25% decline between the 2000 and 2010 Census.\nPreviously a major population center and site of worldwide automobile manufacturing, Detroit has suffered a long economic decline produced by numerous factors. Like many industrial American cities, Detroit's peak population was in 1950, before postwar suburbanization took effect. The peak population was 1.85\u00a0million people.\nFollowing suburbanization, industrial restructuring, and loss of jobs, by the 2010 census, the city had less than 40 percent of that number, with just over 700,000 residents. The city has declined in population in each census since 1950. The population collapse has resulted in large numbers of abandoned homes and commercial buildings, and areas of the city hit hard by urban decay.\nDetroit's 639,111 residents represent 269,445 households, and 162,924 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 349,170 housing units at an average density of . Housing density has declined. The city has demolished thousands of Detroit's abandoned houses, planting some areas and in others allowing the growth of urban prairie.\nOf the 269,445 households, 34.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 21.5% were married couples living together, 31.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 39.5% were non-families, 34.0% were made up of individuals, and 3.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.59, and the average family size was 3.36.\nThere was a wide distribution of age in the city, with 31.1% under the age of 18, 9.7% from 18 to 24, 29.5% from 25 to 44, 19.3% from 45 to 64, and 10.4% 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.5 males.\nReligion.\nAccording to a 2014 study, 67% of the population of the city identified themselves as Christians, with 49% professing attendance at Protestant churches, and 16% professing Roman Catholic beliefs, while 24% claim no religious affiliation. Other religions collectively make up about 8% of the population.\nIncome and employment.\nThe loss of industrial and working-class jobs in the city has resulted in high rates of poverty and associated problems. From 2000 to 2009, the city's estimated median household income fell from $29,526 to $26,098. As of 2010[ [update]], the mean income of Detroit is below the overall U.S. average by several thousand dollars. Of every three Detroit residents, one lives in poverty. Luke Bergmann, author of \"Getting Ghost: Two Young Lives and the Struggle for the Soul of an American City\", said in 2010, \"Detroit is now one of the poorest big cities in the country\".\nIn the 2018 American Community Survey, median household income in the city was $31,283, compared with the median for Michigan of $56,697. The median income for a family was $36,842, well below the state median of $72,036. 33.4% of families had income at or below the federally defined poverty level. Out of the total population, 47.3% of those under the age of 18 and 21.0% of those 65 and older had income at or below the federally defined poverty line.\nOakland County in Metro Detroit, once rated amongst the wealthiest US counties per household, is no longer shown in the top 25 listing of \"Forbes\" magazine. But internal county statistical methods\u2014based on measuring per capita income for counties with more than one million residents\u2014show Oakland is still within the top 12, slipping from the fourth-most affluent such county in the U.S. in 2004 to 11th-most affluent in 2009. Detroit dominates Wayne County, which has an average household income of about $38,000, compared to Oakland County's $62,000.\nRace and ethnicity.\nBeginning with the rise of the automobile industry, Detroit's population increased more than sixfold during the first half of the 20th century as an influx of European, Middle Eastern (Lebanese, Assyrian/Chaldean), and Southern migrants brought their families to the city. With this economic boom following World War I, the African American population grew from a mere 6,000 in 1910 to more than 120,000 by 1930. This influx of thousands of African Americans in the 20th century became known as the Great Migration. Perhaps one of the most overt examples of neighborhood discrimination occurred in 1925 when African American physician Ossian Sweet found his home surrounded by an angry mob of his hostile white neighbors violently protesting his new move into a traditionally white neighborhood. Sweet and ten of his family members and friends were put on trial for murder as one of the mob members throwing rocks at the newly purchased house was shot and killed by someone firing out of a second-floor window. Many middle-class families experienced the same kind of hostility as they sought the security of homeownership and the potential for upward mobility.\nDetroit has a relatively large Mexican-American population. In the early 20th century, thousands of Mexicans came to Detroit to work in agricultural, automotive, and steel jobs. During the Mexican Repatriation of the 1930s many Mexicans in Detroit were willingly repatriated or forced to repatriate. By the 1940s much of the Mexican community began to settle what is now Mexicantown.\nAfter World War II, many people from Appalachia also settled in Detroit. Appalachians formed communities and their children acquired southern accents. Many Lithuanians also settled in Detroit during the World War II era, especially on the city's Southwest side in the West Vernor area, where the renovated Lithuanian Hall reopened in 2006.\nBy 1940, 80% of Detroit deeds contained restrictive covenants prohibiting African Americans from buying houses they could afford. These discriminatory tactics were successful as a majority of black people in Detroit resorted to living in all-black neighborhoods such as Black Bottom and Paradise Valley. At this time, white people still made up about 90.4% of the city's population. From the 1940s to the 1970s a second wave of black people moved to Detroit in search of employment and with the desire to escape the Jim Crow laws enforcing segregation in the south. However, they soon found themselves once again excluded from many opportunities in Detroit\u2014through violence and policy perpetuating economic discrimination (e.g., redlining). White residents attacked black homes: breaking windows, starting fires, and detonating bombs. An especially grueling result of this increasing competition between black and white people was the Riot of 1943 that had violent ramifications. This era of intolerance made it almost impossible for African Americans to be successful without access to proper housing or the economic stability to maintain their homes and the conditions of many neighborhoods began to decline. In 1948, the landmark Supreme Court case of Shelley v. Kraemer outlawed restrictive covenants and while racism in housing did not disappear, it allowed affluent black families to begin moving to traditionally white neighborhoods. Many white families with the financial ability moved to the suburbs of Detroit taking their jobs and tax dollars with them, as macrostructural processes such as \"white flight\" and \"suburbanization\" led to a complete population shift.\nThe Detroit riot of 1967 is considered to be one of the greatest racial turning points in the history of the city. The ramifications of the uprising were widespread as there were many allegations of white police brutality towards Black Americans and over $36\u00a0million of insured property was lost. Discrimination and deindustrialization in tandem with racial tensions that had been intensifying in the previous years boiled over and led to an event considered to be the most damaging in Detroit's history.\nThe population of Latinos significantly increased in the 1990s due to immigration from Jalisco. By 2010 Detroit had 48,679 Hispanics, including 36,452 Mexicans: a 70% increase from 1990. While African Americans previously comprised only 13% of Michigan's population, by 2010 they made up nearly 82% of Detroit's population. The next largest population groups were white people, at 10%, and Hispanics, at 6%. In 2001, 103,000 Jews, or about 1.9% of the population, were living in the Detroit area, in both Detroit and Ann Arbor.\nAccording to the 2010 census, segregation in Detroit has decreased in absolute and relative terms and in the first decade of the 21st century, about two-thirds of the total black population in the metropolitan area resided within the city limits of Detroit. The number of integrated neighborhoods increased from 100 in 2000 to 204 in 2010. Detroit also moved down the ranking from number one most segregated city to number four. A 2011 op-ed in \"The New York Times\" attributed the decreased segregation rating to the overall exodus from the city, cautioning that these areas may soon become more segregated. This pattern already happened in the 1970s, when apparent integration was a precursor to white flight and resegregation. Over a 60-year period, white flight occurred in the city. According to an estimate of the Michigan Metropolitan Information Center, from 2008 to 2009 the percentage of non-Hispanic White residents increased from 8.4% to 13.3%. As the city has become more gentrified, some empty nesters and many young white people have moved into the city, increasing housing values and once again forcing African Americans to move. Gentrification in Detroit has become a rather controversial issue as reinvestment will hopefully lead to economic growth and an increase in population; however, it has already forced many black families to relocate to the suburbs. Despite revitalization efforts, Detroit remains one of the most racially segregated cities in the United States. One of the implications of racial segregation, which correlates with class segregation, may correlate to overall worse health for some populations.\nAsians and Asian Americans.\nAs of 2002, of all of the municipalities in the Wayne County-Oakland County-Macomb County area, Detroit had the second-largest Asian population. As of that year, Detroit's percentage of Asians was 1%, far lower than the 13.3% of Troy. By 2000 Troy had the largest Asian American population in the tri-county area, surpassing Detroit.\nThere are four areas in Detroit with significant Asian and Asian American populations. Northeast Detroit has a population of Hmong with a smaller group of Lao people. A portion of Detroit next to eastern Hamtramck includes Bangladeshi Americans, Indian Americans, and Pakistani Americans; nearly all of the Bangladeshi population in Detroit lives in that area. Many of those residents own small businesses or work in blue-collar jobs, and the population is mostly Muslim. The area north of Downtown Detroit, including the region around the Henry Ford Hospital, the Detroit Medical Center, and Wayne State University, has transient Asian national origin residents who are university students or hospital workers. Few of them have permanent residency after schooling ends. They are mostly Chinese and Indian but the population also includes Filipinos, Koreans, and Pakistanis. In Southwest Detroit and western Detroit there are smaller, scattered Asian communities including an area in the westside adjacent to Dearborn and Redford Township that has a mostly Indian Asian population, and a community of Vietnamese and Laotians in Southwest Detroit.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], the city has one of the U.S.'s largest concentrations of Hmong Americans. In 2006, the city had about 4,000 Hmong and other Asian immigrant families. Most Hmong live east of Coleman Young Airport near Osborn High School. Hmong immigrant families generally have lower incomes than those of suburban Asian families.\nEconomy.\nSeveral major corporations are based in the city, including three Fortune 500 companies. The most heavily represented sectors are manufacturing (particularly automotive), finance, technology, and health care. The most significant companies based in Detroit include General Motors, Quicken Loans, Ally Financial, Compuware, Shinola, American Axle, Little Caesars, DTE Energy, Lowe Campbell Ewald, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, and Rossetti Architects.\nAbout 80,500 people work in downtown Detroit, comprising one-fifth of the city's employment base. Aside from the numerous Detroit-based companies listed above, downtown contains large offices for Comerica, Chrysler, Fifth Third Bank, HP Enterprise, Deloitte, PricewaterhouseCoopers, KPMG, and Ernst &amp; Young. Ford Motor Company is in the adjacent city of Dearborn.\nThousands of more employees work in Midtown, north of the central business district. Midtown's anchors are the city's largest single employer Detroit Medical Center, Wayne State University, and the Henry Ford Health System in New Center. Midtown is also home to watchmaker Shinola and an array of small and startup companies. New Center bases TechTown, a research and business incubator hub that is part of the WSU system. Like downtown, Corktown Is experiencing growth with the new Ford Corktown Campus under development.\nMidtown also has a fast-growing retailing and restaurant scene.\nA number of the city's downtown employers are relatively new, as there has been a marked trend of companies moving from satellite suburbs around Metropolitan Detroit into the downtown core. Compuware completed its world headquarters in downtown in 2003. OnStar, Blue Cross Blue Shield, and HP Enterprise Services are at the Renaissance Center. PricewaterhouseCoopers Plaza offices are adjacent to Ford Field, and Ernst &amp; Young completed its office building at One Kennedy Square in 2006. Perhaps most prominently, in 2010, Quicken Loans, one of the largest mortgage lenders, relocated its world headquarters and 4,000 employees to downtown Detroit, consolidating its suburban offices. In July 2012, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office opened its Elijah J. McCoy Satellite Office in the Rivertown/Warehouse District as its first location outside Washington, D.C.'s metropolitan area.\nIn April 2014, the United States Department of Labor reported the city's unemployment rate at 14.5%.\nThe city of Detroit and other public\u2013private partnerships have attempted to catalyze the region's growth by facilitating the building and historical rehabilitation of residential high-rises in the downtown, creating a zone that offers many business tax incentives, creating recreational spaces such as the Detroit RiverWalk, Campus Martius Park, Dequindre Cut Greenway, and Green Alleys in Midtown. The city itself has cleared sections of land while retaining a number of historically significant vacant buildings in order to spur redevelopment; even though it has struggled with finances, the city issued bonds in 2008 to provide funding for ongoing work to demolish blighted properties. Two years earlier, downtown reported $1.3\u00a0billion in restorations and new developments which increased the number of construction jobs in the city. In the decade prior to 2006, downtown gained more than $15\u00a0billion in new investment from private and public sectors.\nDespite the city's recent financial issues, many developers remain unfazed by Detroit's problems. Midtown is one of the most successful areas within Detroit to have a residential occupancy rate of 96%. Numerous developments have been recently completed or are in various stages of construction. These include the $82\u00a0million reconstruction of downtown's David Whitney Building (now an Aloft Hotel and luxury residences), the Woodward Garden Block Development in Midtown, the residential conversion of the David Broderick Tower in downtown, the rehabilitation of the Book Cadillac Hotel (now a Westin and luxury condos) and Fort Shelby Hotel (now Doubletree) also in downtown, and various smaller projects.\nDowntown's population of young professionals is growing and retail is expanding. A study in 2007 found out that Downtown's new residents are predominantly young professionals (57% are ages 25 to 34, 45% have bachelor's degrees, and 34% have a master's or professional degree), a trend which has hastened over the last decade. Since 2006, $9\u00a0billion has been invested in downtown and surrounding neighborhoods; $5.2\u00a0billion of which has come in 2013 and 2014. Construction activity, particularly rehabilitation of historic downtown buildings, has increased markedly. The number of vacant downtown buildings has dropped from nearly 50 to around 13.\nOn July 25, 2013, Meijer, a midwestern retail chain, opened its first supercenter store in Detroit; this was a $20\u00a0million, 190,000-square-foot store in the northern portion of the city and it also is the centerpiece of a new $72\u00a0million shopping center named Gateway Marketplace. On June 11, 2015, Meijer opened its second supercenter store in the city. On June 26, 2019, JPMorgan Chase announced plans to invest $50\u00a0million more in affordable housing, job training and entrepreneurship by the end of 2022, growing its investment to $200\u00a0million.\nArts and culture.\nIn the central portions of Detroit, the population of young professionals, artists, and other transplants is growing and retail is expanding. This dynamic is luring additional new residents, and former residents returning from other cities, to the city's Downtown along with the revitalized Midtown and New Center areas.\nA desire to be closer to the urban scene has also attracted some young professionals to reside in inner ring suburbs such as Ferndale and Royal Oak, Michigan. Detroit's proximity to Windsor, Ontario, provides for views and nightlife, along with Ontario's minimum drinking age of 19. A 2011 study by Walk Score recognized Detroit for its above average walkability among large U.S. cities. About two-thirds of suburban residents occasionally dine and attend cultural events or take in professional games in the city of Detroit.\nNicknames.\nKnown as the world's automotive center, \"Detroit\" is a metonym for that industry. Detroit's auto industry, some of which was converted to wartime defense production, was an important element of the American \"Arsenal of Democracy\" supporting the Allied powers during World War II. It is an important source of popular music legacies celebrated by the city's two familiar nicknames, the \"Motor City\" and \"Motown\". Other nicknames arose in the 20th century, including \"City of Champions\", beginning in the 1930s for its successes in individual and team sport; \"The D\"; \"Hockeytown\" (a trademark owned by the city's NHL club, the Red Wings); \"Rock City\" (after the Kiss song \"Detroit Rock City\"); and \"The 313\" (its telephone area code).\nMusic.\nLive music has been a prominent feature of Detroit's nightlife since the late 1940s, bringing the city recognition under the nickname \"Motown\". The metropolitan area has many nationally prominent live music venues. Concerts hosted by Live Nation perform throughout the Detroit area. Large concerts are held at DTE Energy Music Theatre. The city's theater venue circuit is the United States' second largest and hosts Broadway performances.\nThe city of Detroit has a rich musical heritage and has contributed to a number of different genres over the decades leading into the new millennium. Important music events in the city include the Detroit International Jazz Festival, the Detroit Electronic Music Festival, the Motor City Music Conference (MC2), the Urban Organic Music Conference, the Concert of Colors, and the hip-hop Summer Jamz festival.\nIn the 1940s, Detroit blues artist John Lee Hooker became a long-term resident in the city's southwest Delray neighborhood. Hooker, among other important blues musicians, migrated from his home in Mississippi, bringing the Delta blues to northern cities like Detroit. Hooker recorded for Fortune Records, the biggest pre-Motown blues/soul label. During the 1950s, the city became a center for jazz, with stars performing in the Black Bottom neighborhood. Prominent emerging jazz musicians included trumpeter Donald Byrd, who attended Cass Tech and performed with Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers early in his career, and saxophonist Pepper Adams, who enjoyed a solo career and accompanied Byrd on several albums. The Graystone International Jazz Museum documents jazz in Detroit.\nOther prominent Motor City R&amp;B stars in the 1950s and early 1960s were Nolan Strong, Andre Williams and Nathaniel Mayer \u2013 who all scored local and national hits on the Fortune Records label. According to Smokey Robinson, Strong was a primary influence on his voice as a teenager. The Fortune label, a family-operated label on Third Avenue in Detroit, was owned by the husband-and-wife team of Jack Brown and Devora Brown. Fortune, which also released country, gospel and rockabilly LPs and 45s, laid the groundwork for Motown, which became Detroit's most legendary record label.\nBerry Gordy, Jr. founded Motown Records, which rose to prominence during the 1960s and early 1970s with acts such as Stevie Wonder, The Temptations, The Four Tops, Smokey Robinson &amp; The Miracles, Diana Ross &amp; The Supremes, the Jackson 5, Martha and the Vandellas, The Spinners, Gladys Knight &amp; the Pips, The Marvelettes, The Elgins, The Monitors, The Velvelettes and Marvin Gaye. Artists were backed by in-house vocalists The Andantes and The Funk Brothers, the Motown house band that was featured in Paul Justman's 2002 documentary film \"Standing in the Shadows of Motown\", based on Allan Slutsky's book of the same name.\nThe Motown Sound played an important role in the crossover appeal with popular music, since it was the first African American\u2013owned record label to primarily feature African-American artists. Gordy moved Motown to Los Angeles in 1972 to pursue film production, but the company has since returned to Detroit. Aretha Franklin, another Detroit R&amp;B star, carried the Motown Sound; however, she did not record with Berry's Motown label.\nLocal artists and bands rose to prominence in the 1960s and '70s, including the MC5, Glenn Frey, The Stooges, Bob Seger, Amboy Dukes featuring Ted Nugent, Mitch Ryder and The Detroit Wheels, Rare Earth, Alice Cooper, and Suzi Quatro. The group Kiss emphasized the city's connection with rock in the song \"Detroit Rock City\" and the movie produced in 1999. In the 1980s, Detroit was an important center of the hardcore punk rock underground with many nationally known bands coming out of the city and its suburbs, such as The Necros, The Meatmen, and Negative Approach.\nIn the 1990s and the new millennium, the city has produced a number of influential hip hop artists, including Eminem, the hip-hop artist with the highest cumulative sales, his rap group D12, hip-hop rapper and producer Royce da 5'9\", hip-hop producer Denaun Porter, hip-hop producer J Dilla, rapper and musician Kid Rock and rappers Big Sean and Danny Brown. The band Sponge toured and produced music. The city also has an active garage rock scene that has generated national attention with acts such as The White Stripes, The Von Bondies, The Detroit Cobras, The Dirtbombs, Electric Six, and The Hard Lessons.\nDetroit is cited as the birthplace of techno music in the early 1980s. The city also lends its name to an early and pioneering genre of electronic dance music, \"Detroit techno\". Featuring science fiction imagery and robotic themes, its futuristic style was greatly influenced by the geography of Detroit's urban decline and its industrial past. Prominent Detroit techno artists include Juan Atkins, Derrick May, Kevin Saunderson, and Jeff Mills. The Detroit Electronic Music Festival, now known as Movement, occurs annually in late May on Memorial Day Weekend, and takes place in Hart Plaza. In the early years (2000\u20132002), this was a landmark event, boasting over a million estimated attendees annually, coming from all over the world to celebrate techno music in the city of its birth.\nEntertainment and performing arts.\nMajor theaters in Detroit include the Fox Theatre (5,174 seats), Music Hall Center for the Performing Arts (1,770 seats), the Gem Theatre (451 seats), Masonic Temple Theatre (4,404 seats), the Detroit Opera House (2,765 seats), the Fisher Theatre (2,089 seats), The Fillmore Detroit (2,200 seats), Saint Andrew's Hall, the Majestic Theater, and Orchestra Hall (2,286 seats), which hosts the renowned Detroit Symphony Orchestra. The Nederlander Organization, the largest controller of Broadway productions in New York City, originated with the purchase of the Detroit Opera House in 1922 by the Nederlander family.\nMotown Motion Picture Studios with produces movies in Detroit and the surrounding area based at the Pontiac Centerpoint Business Campus for a film industry expected to employ over 4,000 people in the metro area.\nTourism.\nBecause of its unique culture, distinctive architecture, and revitalization and urban renewal efforts in the 21st century, Detroit has enjoyed increased prominence as a tourist destination in recent years. \"The New York Times\" listed Detroit as the ninth-best destination in its list of \"52 Places to Go in 2017\", while travel guide publisher \"Lonely Planet\" named Detroit the second-best city in the world to visit in 2018.\nMany of the area's prominent museums are in the historic cultural center neighborhood around Wayne State University and the College for Creative Studies. These museums include the Detroit Institute of Arts, the Detroit Historical Museum, Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, the Detroit Science Center, as well as the main branch of the Detroit Public Library. Other cultural highlights include Motown Historical Museum, the Ford Piquette Avenue Plant museum, the Pewabic Pottery studio and school, the Tuskegee Airmen Museum, Fort Wayne, the Dossin Great Lakes Museum, the Museum of Contemporary Art Detroit (MOCAD), the Contemporary Art Institute of Detroit (CAID), and the Belle Isle Conservatory.\nIn 2010, the G.R. N'Namdi Gallery opened in a complex in Midtown. Important history of America and the Detroit area are exhibited at The Henry Ford in Dearborn, the United States' largest indoor-outdoor museum complex. The Detroit Historical Society provides information about tours of area churches, skyscrapers, and mansions. Inside Detroit, meanwhile, hosts tours, educational programming, and a downtown welcome center. Other sites of interest are the Detroit Zoo in Royal Oak, the Cranbrook Art Museum in Bloomfield Hills, the Anna Scripps Whitcomb Conservatory on Belle Isle, and Walter P. Chrysler Museum in Auburn Hills.\nThe city's Greektown and three downtown casino resort hotels serve as part of an entertainment hub. The Eastern Market farmer's distribution center is the largest open-air flowerbed market in the United States and has more than 150 foods and specialty businesses. On Saturdays, about 45,000 people shop the city's historic Eastern Market. The Midtown and the New Center area are centered on Wayne State University and Henry Ford Hospital. Midtown has about 50,000 residents and attracts millions of visitors each year to its museums and cultural centers; for example, the Detroit Festival of the Arts in Midtown draws about 350,000 people.\nAnnual summer events include the Electronic Music Festival, International Jazz Festival, the Woodward Dream Cruise, the African World Festival, the country music Hoedown, Noel Night, and Dally in the Alley. Within downtown, Campus Martius Park hosts large events, including the annual Motown Winter Blast. As the world's traditional automotive center, the city hosts the North American International Auto Show. Held since 1924, America's Thanksgiving Parade is one of the nation's largest. River Days, a five-day summer festival on the International Riverfront lead up to the Windsor\u2013Detroit International Freedom Festival fireworks, which draw super sized-crowds ranging from hundreds of thousands to over three million people.\nAn important civic sculpture in Detroit is \"The Spirit of Detroit\" by Marshall Fredericks at the Coleman Young Municipal Center. The image is often used as a symbol of Detroit and the statue itself is occasionally dressed in sports jerseys to celebrate when a Detroit team is doing well. A memorial to Joe Louis at the intersection of Jefferson and Woodward Avenues was dedicated on October 1, 1986. The sculpture, commissioned by \"Sports Illustrated\" and executed by Robert Graham, is a long arm with a fisted hand suspended by a pyramidal framework.\nArtist Tyree Guyton created the controversial street art exhibit known as the Heidelberg Project in 1986, using found objects including cars, clothing and shoes found in the neighborhood near and on Heidelberg Street on the near East Side of Detroit.\n\"Time\" named Detroit as one of the fifty World's Greatest Places of 2022 to explore.\nSports.\nDetroit is one of 13 U.S. metropolitan areas that are home to professional teams representing the four major sports in North America. Since 2017, all of these teams play in the city limits of Detroit itself, a distinction shared with only three other U.S. cities. Detroit is the only U.S. city to have its four major sports teams play within its downtown district.\nThere are three active major sports venues in the city: Comerica Park (home of the Major League Baseball team Detroit Tigers), Ford Field (home of the NFL's Detroit Lions), and Little Caesars Arena (home of the NHL's Detroit Red Wings and the NBA's Detroit Pistons). A 1996 marketing campaign promoted the nickname \"Hockeytown\".\nThe Detroit Tigers have won four World Series titles (1935, 1945, 1968, and 1984). The Detroit Red Wings have won 11 Stanley Cups (1935\u201336, 1936\u201337, 1942\u201343, 1949\u201350, 1951\u201352, 1953\u201354, 1954\u201355, 1996\u201397, 1997\u201398, 2001\u201302, 2007\u201308) (the most by an American NHL franchise). The Detroit Lions have won 4 NFL titles (1935, 1952, 1953, 1957) . The Detroit Pistons have won three NBA titles (1989, 1990, 2004). With the Pistons' first of three NBA titles in 1989, the city of Detroit has won titles in all four of the major professional sports leagues. Two new downtown stadiums for the Detroit Tigers and Detroit Lions opened in 2000 and 2002, respectively, returning the Lions to the city proper.\nIn college sports, Detroit's central location within the Mid-American Conference has made it a frequent site for the league's championship events. While the MAC Basketball Tournament moved permanently to Cleveland starting in 2000, the MAC Football Championship Game has been played at Ford Field in Detroit since 2004, and annually attracts 25,000 to 30,000 fans. The University of Detroit Mercy has an NCAA Division I program, and Wayne State University has both NCAA Division I and II programs. The NCAA football Quick Lane Bowl is held at Ford Field each December.\nDetroit's professional soccer team is Detroit City FC. Founded in 2012 as a semi-professional soccer club, the team now plays professional soccer in the USL Championship (USLC). Nicknamed, \"Le Rouge\", the club are two-time champions of NISA since joining in 2020. They play their home matches in Keyworth Stadium, which is located in the Detroit enclave of Hamtramck.\nThe city hosted the 2005 MLB All-Star Game, 2006 Super Bowl XL, both the 2006 and 2012 World Series, WrestleMania 23 in 2007, and the NCAA Final Four in April 2009. \nThe city hosted the Detroit Indy Grand Prix on Belle Isle Park from 1989 to 2001, 2007 to 2008, and 2012 and beyond. In 2007, open-wheel racing returned to Belle Isle with both Indy Racing League and American Le Mans Series Racing. From 1982 to 1988, Detroit held the Detroit Grand Prix, at the Detroit street circuit.\nDetroit is one of eight American cities to have won titles in all four major leagues (MLB, NFL, NHL and NBA), though of the eight it is the only one to have not won a Super Bowl title (all of the Lions' titles came prior to the start of the Super Bowl era). In the years following the mid-1930s, Detroit was referred to as the \"City of Champions\" after the Tigers, Lions, and Red Wings captured the three major professional sports championships in existence at the time in a seven-month period of time (the Tigers won the World Series in October 1935; the Lions won the NFL championship in December 1935; the Red Wings won the Stanley Cup in April 1936). In 1932, Eddie \"The Midnight Express\" Tolan from Detroit won the 100- and 200-meter races and two gold medals at the 1932 Summer Olympics. Joe Louis won the heavyweight championship of the world in 1937.\nDetroit has made the most bids to host the Summer Olympics without ever being awarded the games, with seven unsuccessful bids for the 1944, 1952, 1956, 1960, 1964, 1968, and 1972 summer games.\nGovernment.\nThe city is governed pursuant to the \"home rule Charter of the City of Detroit\". The government of Detroit is run by a mayor, the nine-member Detroit City Council, the eleven-member Board of Police Commissioners, and a clerk. All of these officers are elected on a nonpartisan ballot, with the exception of four of the police commissioners, who are appointed by the mayor. Detroit has a \"strong mayoral\" system, with the mayor approving departmental appointments. The council approves budgets, but the mayor is not obligated to adhere to any earmarking. The city clerk supervises elections and is formally charged with the maintenance of municipal records. City ordinances and substantially large contracts must be approved by the council. The \"Detroit City Code\" is the codification of Detroit's local ordinances.\nThe city clerk supervises elections and is formally charged with the maintenance of municipal records. Municipal elections for mayor, city council and city clerk are held at four-year intervals, in the year after presidential elections. Following a November 2009 referendum, seven council members will be elected from districts beginning in 2013 while two will continue to be elected at-large.\nDetroit's courts are state-administered and elections are nonpartisan. The Probate Court for Wayne County is in the Coleman A. Young Municipal Center in downtown Detroit. The Circuit Court is across Gratiot Avenue in the Frank Murphy Hall of Justice, in downtown Detroit. The city is home to the Thirty-Sixth District Court, as well as the First District of the Michigan Court of Appeals and the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan. The city provides law enforcement through the Detroit Police Department and emergency services through the Detroit Fire Department.\nPolitics.\nBeginning with its incorporation in 1802, Detroit has had a total of 74 mayors. Detroit's last mayor from the Republican Party was Louis Miriani, who served from 1957 to 1962. In 1973, the city elected its first black mayor, Coleman Young. Despite development efforts, his combative style during his five terms in office was not well received by many suburban residents. Mayor Dennis Archer, a former Michigan Supreme Court Justice, refocused the city's attention on redevelopment with a plan to permit three casinos downtown. By 2008, three major casino resort hotels established operations in the city.\nIn 2000, the city requested an investigation by the United States Justice Department into the Detroit Police Department which was concluded in 2003 over allegations regarding its use of force and civil rights violations. The city proceeded with a major reorganization of the Detroit Police Department.\nIn 2013, felony bribery charges were brought against seven building inspectors. In 2016, further corruption charges were brought against 12 principals, a former school superintendent and supply vendor for a $12\u00a0million kickback scheme. However, law professor Peter Henning argues Detroit's corruption is not unusual for a city its size, especially when compared with Chicago.\nDetroit is sometimes referred to as a sanctuary city because it has \"anti-profiling ordinances that generally prohibit local police from asking about the immigration status of people who are not suspected of any crime\".\nThe city in recent years has been a stronghold for the Democratic Party, with around 94% of votes in the city going to Joe Biden, the Democratic candidate in the 2020 Presidential election.\nPublic finances.\nDetroit's protracted decline has resulted in severe urban decay, with thousands of empty buildings around the city, referred to as greyfield. Some parts of Detroit are so sparsely populated the city has difficulty providing municipal services. The city has demolished abandoned homes and buildings, planting grass and trees, and considered removing street lighting from large portions of the city, in order to encourage the small population in certain areas to move to more populated areas. Roughly half of the owners of Detroit's 305,000 properties failed to pay their 2011 tax bills, resulting in about $246\u00a0million in taxes and fees going uncollected, nearly half of which was due to Detroit. The rest of the money would have been earmarked for Wayne County, Detroit Public Schools, and the library system.\nIn March 2013, Governor Rick Snyder declared a financial emergency in the city, stating the city had a $327\u00a0million budget deficit and faced more than $14\u00a0billion in long-term debt. It has been making ends meet on a month-to-month basis with the help of bond money held in a state escrow account and has instituted mandatory unpaid days off for many city workers. Those troubles, along with underfunded city services, such as police and fire departments, and ineffective turnaround plans from Mayor Bing and the City Council led the state of Michigan to appoint an emergency manager for Detroit on March 14, 2013. On June 14, 2013, Detroit defaulted on $2.5\u00a0billion of debt by withholding $39.7\u00a0million in interest payments, while Emergency Manager Kevyn Orr met with bondholders and other creditors in an attempt to restructure the city's $18.5\u00a0billion debt and avoid bankruptcy. On July 18, 2013, the City of Detroit filed for Chapter 9 bankruptcy protection. It was declared bankrupt by U.S. judge Stephen Rhodes on December 3, with its $18.5\u00a0billion debt; he said in accepting the city's contention it is broke and negotiations with its thousands of creditors were infeasible. The city levies an income tax of 2.4 percent on residents and 1.2 percent on nonresidents.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nDetroit is home to several institutions of higher learning including Wayne State University, a national research university with medical and law schools in the Midtown area offering hundreds of academic degrees and programs. The University of Detroit Mercy, in Northwest Detroit in the University District, is a prominent Roman Catholic co-educational university affiliated with the Society of Jesus (the Jesuits) and the Sisters of Mercy. The University of Detroit Mercy offers more than a hundred academic degrees and programs of study including business, dentistry, law, engineering, architecture, nursing and allied health professions. The University of Detroit Mercy School of Law is Downtown across from the Renaissance Center.\nGrand Valley State University's Detroit Center host workshops, seminars, professional development, and other large gatherings in the building. Located in the heart of downtown next to Comerica Park and the Detroit Athletic Club, the center has become a key component for educational activity in the city.\nSacred Heart Major Seminary, founded in 1919, is affiliated with Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, \"Angelicum\" in Rome and offers pontifical degrees as well as civil undergraduate and graduate degrees. Sacred Heart Major Seminary offers a variety of academic programs for both clerical and lay students. Other institutions in the city include the College for Creative Studies and Wayne County Community College. Marygrove College was a Catholic institution formerly based in Detroit before it closed in 2019. In June 2009, the Michigan State University College of Osteopathic Medicine which is based in East Lansing opened a satellite campus at the Detroit Medical Center. The University of Michigan was established in 1817 in Detroit and later moved to Ann Arbor in 1837.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nAs of 2016[ [update]] many K-12 students in Detroit frequently change schools, with some children having been enrolled in seven schools before finishing their K-12 careers. There is a concentration of senior high schools and charter schools in the Downtown Detroit area, which had wealthier residents and more gentrification relative to other parts of Detroit: Downtown, northwest Detroit, and northeast Detroit have 1,894, 3,742, and 6,018 students of high school age each, respectively, while they have 11, three, and two high schools each, respectively.\nAs of 2016[ [update]] because of the lack of public transportation and the lack of school bus services, many Detroit families have to rely on themselves to transport children to school.\nPublic schools and charter schools.\nWith about 66,000 public school students (2011\u201312), the Detroit Public Schools (DPS) district is the largest school district in Michigan. Detroit has an additional 56,000 charter school students for a combined enrollment of about 122,000 students. As of 2009[ [update]] there are about as many students in charter schools as there are in district schools. As of 2016[ [update]] DPS continues to have the majority of the special education pupils. In addition, some Detroit students, as of 2016, attend public schools in other municipalities.\nIn 1999, the Michigan Legislature removed the locally elected board of education amid allegations of mismanagement and replaced it with a reform board appointed by the mayor and governor. The elected board of education was re-established following a city referendum in 2005. The first election of the new 11-member board of education occurred on November 8, 2005.\nDue to growing Detroit charter schools enrollment as well as a continued exodus of population, the city planned to close many public schools. State officials report a 68% graduation rate for Detroit's public schools adjusted for those who change schools. Traditional public and charter school students in the city have performed poorly on standardized tests. Circa 2009 and 2011, while Detroit traditional public schools scored a record low on national tests, the publicly funded charter schools did even worse than the traditional public schools. As of 2016[ [update]] there were 30,000 excess openings in Detroit traditional public and charter schools, bearing in mind the number of K-12-aged children in the city. In 2016, Kate Zernike of \"The New York Times\" stated school performance did not improve despite the proliferation of charters, describing the situation as \"lots of choice, with no good choice\".\nDetroit public schools students scored the lowest on tests of reading and writing of all major cities in the United States in 2015. Among eighth-graders, only 27% showed basic proficiency in math and 44% in reading. Nearly half of Detroit's adults are functionally illiterate.\nPrivate schools.\nDetroit is served by various private schools, as well as parochial Roman Catholic schools operated by the Archdiocese of Detroit. As of 2013[ [update]] there are four Catholic grade schools and three Catholic high schools in the City of Detroit, with all of them in the city's west side. The Archdiocese of Detroit lists a number of primary and secondary schools in the metro area as Catholic education has emigrated to the suburbs. Of the three Catholic high schools in the city, two are operated by the Society of Jesus and the third is co-sponsored by the Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary and the Congregation of St. Basil.\nIn the 1964\u20131965 school year there were about 110 Catholic grade schools in Detroit, Hamtramck, and Highland Park and 55 Catholic high schools in those three cities. The Catholic school population in Detroit has decreased due to the increase of charter schools, increasing tuition at Catholic schools, the small number of African-American Catholics, White Catholics moving to suburbs, and the decreased number of teaching nuns.\nMedia.\nThe \"Detroit Free Press\" and \"The Detroit News\" are the major daily newspapers, both broadsheet publications published together under a joint operating agreement called the Detroit Newspaper Partnership. Media philanthropy includes the \"Detroit Free Press\" high school journalism program and the Old Newsboys' Goodfellow Fund of Detroit. In March 2009, the two newspapers reduced home delivery to three days a week, print reduced newsstand issues of the papers on non-delivery days and focus resources on Internet-based news delivery. The \"Metro Times\", founded in 1980, is a weekly publication, covering news, arts &amp; entertainment.\nAlso founded in 1935 and based in Detroit, the \"Michigan Chronicle\" is one of the oldest and most respected African-American weekly newspapers in America, covering politics, entertainment, sports and community events. The Detroit television market is the 11th largest in the United States; according to estimates that do not include audiences in large areas of Ontario, Canada (Windsor and its surrounding area on broadcast and cable TV, as well as several other cable markets in Ontario, such as the city of Ottawa) which receive and watch Detroit television stations.\nDetroit has the 11th largest radio market in the United States, though this ranking does not take into account Canadian audiences. Nearby Canadian stations such as Windsor's CKLW (whose jingles formerly proclaimed \"CKLW-the Motor City\") are popular in Detroit.\nCrime.\nDetroit has gained notoriety for its high amount of crime, having struggled with it for decades. The number of homicides in 1974 was 714. \nCrime has since decreased and, in 2014, the murder rate was 43.4 per 100,000, lower than in St. Louis.\nThe city's downtown typically has lower crime than national and state averages. According to a 2007 analysis, Detroit officials note about 65 to 70 percent of homicides in the city were drug related, with the rate of unsolved murders roughly 70%.\nAlthough the rate of violent crime dropped 11% in 2008, violent crime in Detroit has not declined as much as the national average from 2007 to 2011. The violent crime rate is one of the highest in the United States. Neighborhoodscout.com reported a crime rate of 62.18 per 1,000 residents for property crimes, and 16.73 per 1,000 for violent crimes (compared to national figures of 32 per 1,000 for property crimes and 5 per 1,000 for violent crime in 2008).\nIn 2012, crime in the city was among the reasons for more expensive car insurance.\nAbout half of all murders in Michigan in 2015 occurred in Detroit. Annual statistics released by the Detroit Police Department for 2016 indicate that while the city's overall crime rate declined that year, the murder rate rose from 2015. In 2016 there were 302 homicides in Detroit, a 2.37% increase in the number of murder victims from the preceding year.\nAreas of the city adjacent to the Detroit River are also patrolled by the United States Border Patrol.\nInfrastructure.\nHealth systems.\nWithin the city of Detroit, there are over a dozen major hospitals, which include the Detroit Medical Center (DMC), Henry Ford Health System, St. John Health System, and the John D. Dingell VA Medical Center. The DMC, a regional Level I trauma center, consists of Detroit Receiving Hospital and University Health Center, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Harper University Hospital, Hutzel Women's Hospital, Kresge Eye Institute, Rehabilitation Institute of Michigan, Sinai-Grace Hospital, and the Karmanos Cancer Institute. The DMC has more than 2,000 licensed beds and 3,000 affiliated physicians. It is the largest private employer in the City of Detroit. The center is staffed by physicians from the Wayne State University School of Medicine, the largest single-campus medical school in the United States, and the United States' fourth largest medical school overall.\nDetroit Medical Center formally became a part of Vanguard Health Systems on December 30, 2010, as a for-profit corporation. Vanguard has agreed to invest nearly $1.5 B in the Detroit Medical Center complex, which will include $417 M to retire debts, at least $350 M in capital expenditures and an additional $500 M for new capital investment. Vanguard has agreed to assume all debts and pension obligations. The metro area has many other hospitals including William Beaumont Hospital, St. Joseph's, and University of Michigan Medical Center.\nIn 2011, Detroit Medical Center and Henry Ford Health System substantially increased investments in medical research facilities and hospitals in the city's Midtown and New Center.\nIn 2012, two major construction projects were begun in New Center. The Henry Ford Health System started the first phase of a $500\u00a0million, 300-acre revitalization project, with the construction of a new $30\u00a0million, 275,000-square-foot, \"Medical Distribution Center\" for Cardinal Health, Inc. and Wayne State University started construction on a new $93\u00a0million, 207,000-square-foot, Integrative Biosciences Center (IBio). As many as 500 researchers and staff will work out of the IBio Center.\nTransportation.\nWith its proximity to Canada and its facilities, ports, major highways, rail connections and international airports, Detroit is an important transportation hub. The city has three international border crossings, the Ambassador Bridge, Detroit\u2013Windsor Tunnel and Michigan Central Railway Tunnel, linking Detroit to Windsor, Ontario. The Ambassador Bridge is the single busiest border crossing in North America, carrying 27% of the total trade between the U.S. and Canada.\nOn February 18, 2015, Canadian Transport Minister Lisa Raitt announced Canada has agreed to pay the entire cost to build a $250\u00a0million U.S. Customs plaza adjacent to the planned new Detroit\u2013Windsor bridge, now the Gordie Howe International Bridge. Canada had already planned to pay for 95% of the bridge, which will cost $2.1\u00a0billion, and is expected to open in 2024. \"This allows Canada and Michigan to move the project forward immediately to its next steps which include further design work and property acquisition on the U.S. side of the border\", Raitt said in a statement issued after she spoke in the House of Commons.\nTransit systems.\nMass transit in the region is provided by bus services. The Detroit Department of Transportation (DDOT) provides service within city limits up to the outer edges of the city. From there, the Suburban Mobility Authority for Regional Transportation (SMART) provides service to the suburbs and the city regionally with local routes and SMART's FAST service. FAST is a new service provided by SMART which offers limited stops along major corridors throughout the Detroit metropolitan area connecting the suburbs to downtown. The new high-frequency service travels along three of Detroit's busiest corridors, Gratiot, Woodward, and Michigan, and only stops at designated FAST stops. Cross border service between the downtown areas of Windsor and Detroit is provided by Transit Windsor via the Tunnel Bus.\nAn elevated rail system known as the People Mover, completed in 1987, provides daily service around a loop downtown. The QLINE serves as a link between the Detroit People Mover and Detroit Amtrak station via Woodward Avenue. The SEMCOG Commuter Rail line will extend from Detroit's New Center, connecting to Ann Arbor via Dearborn, Wayne, and Ypsilanti when it is opened.\nThe Regional Transit Authority (RTA) was established by an act of the Michigan legislature in December 2012 to oversee and coordinate all existing regional mass transit operations, and to develop new transit services in the region. The RTA's first project was the introduction of RelfeX, a limited-stop, cross-county bus service connecting downtown and midtown Detroit with Oakland county via Woodward avenue.\nAmtrak provides service to Detroit, operating its \"Wolverine\" service between Chicago and Pontiac. The Amtrak station is in New Center north of downtown. The \"J. W. Westcott II\", which delivers mail to lake freighters on the Detroit River, is a floating post office.\nCar ownership.\nThe city of Detroit has a higher than average percentage of households without a car. In 2016, 24.7 percent of Detroit households lacked a car, much higher than the national average of 8.7. Detroit averaged 1.15 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nFreight railroads.\nFreight railroad operations in the city of Detroit are provided by Canadian National Railway, Canadian Pacific Railway, Conrail Shared Assets, CSX Transportation and Norfolk Southern Railway, each of which have local yards within the city. Detroit is also served by the Delray Connecting Railroad and Detroit Connecting Railroad shortlines.\nAirports.\nDetroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport (DTW), the principal airport serving Detroit, is in nearby Romulus. DTW is a primary hub for Delta Air Lines (following its acquisition of Northwest Airlines), and a secondary hub for Spirit Airlines. The airport is connected to Downtown Detroit by the Suburban Mobility Authority for Regional Transportation (SMART) FAST Michigan route.\nColeman A. Young International Airport (DET), previously called Detroit City Airport, is on Detroit's northeast side; the airport now maintains only charter service and general aviation. Willow Run Airport, in far-western Wayne County near Ypsilanti, is a general aviation and cargo airport.\nFreeways.\nMetro Detroit has an extensive toll-free network of freeways administered by the Michigan Department of Transportation. Four major Interstate Highways surround the city. Detroit is connected via Interstate\u00a075 (I-75) and I-96 to Kings Highway 401 and to major Southern Ontario cities such as London, Ontario and the Greater Toronto Area. I-75 (Chrysler and Fisher freeways) is the region's main north\u2013south route, serving Flint, Pontiac, Troy, and Detroit, before continuing south (as the Detroit\u2013Toledo and Seaway Freeways) to serve many of the communities along the shore of Lake Erie.\nI-94 (Edsel Ford Freeway) runs east\u2013west through Detroit and serves Ann Arbor to the west (where it continues to Chicago) and Port Huron to the northeast. The stretch of the I-94 freeway from Ypsilanti to Detroit was one of America's earlier limited-access highways. Henry Ford built it to link the factories at Willow Run and Dearborn during World War II. A portion was known as the Willow Run Expressway. The I-96 freeway runs northwest\u2013southeast through Livingston, Oakland and Wayne counties and (as the Jeffries Freeway through Wayne County) has its eastern terminus in downtown Detroit.\nI-275 runs north\u2013south from I-75 in the south to the junction of I-96 and I-696 in the north, providing a bypass through the western suburbs of Detroit. I-375 is a short spur route in downtown Detroit, an extension of the Chrysler Freeway. I-696 (Reuther Freeway) runs east\u2013west from the junction of I-96 and I-275, providing a route through the northern suburbs of Detroit. Taken together, I-275 and I-696 form a semicircle around Detroit. Michigan state highways designated with the letter M serve to connect major freeways.\nFloating post office.\nDetroit has a floating post office, the \"J. W. Westcott II\", which serves lake freighters along the Detroit River. Its ZIP Code is 48222. The ZIP Code is used exclusively for the \"J. W. Westcott II\", which makes is the only floating ZIP Code in the United States. It has a land-based office at 12 24th Street, just south of the Ambassador Bridge. The J.W. Westcott Company was established in 1874 by Captain John Ward Westcott as a maritime reporting agency to inform other vessels about port conditions, and the \"J. W. Westcott II\" vessel began service in 1949 and is still in operation today.\nSister cities.\nDetroit's sister cities include the following:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8688", "revid": "1159850981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8688", "title": "Deccan Traps", "text": "Large igneous province located on the Deccan Plateau\nThe Deccan Traps is a large igneous province of west-central India (17\u201324\u00b0N, 73\u201374\u00b0E). It is one of the largest volcanic features on Earth, taking the form of a large shield volcano. It consists of numerous layers of solidified flood basalt that together are more than about thick, cover an area of about , and have a volume of about . Originally, the Deccan Traps may have covered about , with a correspondingly larger original volume. This volume overlies the Archean age Indian Shield, which is likely the lithology the province passed through during eruption. The province is commonly divided into four subprovinces: the main Deccan, the Malwa Plateau, the Mandla Lobe, and the Saurashtran Plateau.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"trap\" has been used in geology since 1785\u20131795 for such rock formations. It is derived from the Swedish word for stairs () and refers to the step-like hills forming the landscape of the region. The name Deccan has Sanskrit origins meaning \"southern\".\nHistory.\nThe Deccan Traps began forming 66.25\u00a0million years ago, at the end of the Cretaceous period, although it is possible that some of the oldest material may underlie younger material. The bulk of the volcanic eruption occurred at the Western Ghats between 66 and 65 million years ago when lava began to extrude through fissures in the crust known as fissure eruptions. Determining the exact age for Deccan rock is difficult due to a number of limitations, one being that the transition between eruption events may be separated by only a few thousand years and the resolution of dating methods used is not able to pinpoint these events. In this way, determining the rate of magma emplacement is also difficult to constrain. This series of eruptions may have lasted for less than 30,000\u00a0years.\nThe original area covered by the lava flows is estimated to have been as large as , approximately half the size of modern India. The Deccan Traps region was reduced to its current size by erosion and plate tectonics; the present area of directly observable lava flows is around .\nThe Deccan Traps are segmented into three stratigraphic units: the Upper, Middle, and Lower traps. While it was previously interpreted that these groups represented their own key points in the sequence of events in Deccan extrusion, it is now more widely accepted that these horizons relate more closely to paleo topography and distance from the eruption site.\nEffect on mass extinctions and climate.\nThe release of volcanic gases, particularly sulfur dioxide, during the formation of the traps may have contributed to climate change. An average drop in temperature of about was recorded during this period.\nBecause of its magnitude, scientists have speculated that the gases released during the formation of the Deccan Traps played a major role in the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene (K\u2013Pg) extinction event (also known as the Cretaceous\u2013Tertiary or K\u2013T extinction). It has been theorized that sudden cooling due to sulfurous volcanic gases released by the formation of the traps and toxic gas emissions may have contributed significantly to the K\u2013Pg mass extinction. However, the current consensus among the scientific community is that the extinction was primarily triggered by the Chicxulub impact event in North America, which would have produced a sunlight-blocking dust cloud that killed much of the plant life and reduced global temperature (this cooling is called an impact winter).\nWork published in 2014 by geologist Gerta Keller and others on the timing of the Deccan volcanism suggests the extinction may have been caused by both the volcanism and the impact event. This was followed by a similar study in 2015, both of which consider the hypothesis that the impact exacerbated or induced the Deccan volcanism, since the events occurred approximately at antipodes.\nHowever, the impact theory is still the best supported and has been determined by various reviews to be the consensus view.\nA more recent discovery appears to demonstrate the scope of the destruction from the impact alone, however. In a March 2019 article in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, an international team of twelve scientists revealed the contents of the Tanis fossil site discovered near Bowman, North Dakota, that appeared to show a devastating mass destruction of an ancient lake and its inhabitants at the time of the Chicxulub impact. In the paper, the group reports that the geology of the site is strewn with fossilized trees and remains of fish and other animals. The lead researcher, Robert A. DePalma of the University of Kansas, was quoted in the New York Times as stating that \"You would be blind to miss the carcasses sticking out... It is impossible to miss when you see the outcrop\". Evidence correlating this find to the Chicxulub impact included tektites bearing \"the unique chemical signature of other tektites associated with the Chicxulub event\" found in the gills of fish fossils and embedded in amber, an iridium-rich top layer that is considered another signature of the event, and an atypical lack of evidence for scavenging perhaps suggesting that there were few survivors. The exact mechanism of the site's destruction has been debated as either an impact-caused tsunami or lake and river seiche activity triggered by post-impact earthquakes, though there has yet been no firm conclusion upon which researchers have settled.\nPetrology.\nWithin the Deccan Traps at least 95% of the lavas are tholeiitic basalts. Major mineral constituents are olivine, pyroxenes, and plagioclase, as well as certain Fe-Ti-rich oxides. These magmas are &lt;7% MgO. Many of these minerals are observed however, as highly altered forms. Other rock types present include: alkali basalt, nephelinite, lamprophyre, and carbonatite.\nMantle xenoliths have been described from Kachchh (northwestern India) and elsewhere in the western Deccan and contain spinel lherzolite and pyroxenite constituents.\nWhile the Deccan traps have been categorized in many different ways including the three different stratigraphic groups, geochemically the province can be split into as many as eleven different formations. Many of the petrologic differences in these units are a product of varying degrees of crustal contamination.\nFossils.\nThe Deccan Traps are famous for the beds of fossils that have been found between layers of lava. Particularly well known species include the frog \"Oxyglossus pusillus\" (Owen) of the Eocene of India and the toothed frog \"Indobatrachus\", an early lineage of modern frogs, which is now placed in the Australian family Myobatrachidae. The Infratrappean Beds (Lameta Formation) and Intertrappean Beds also contain fossil freshwater molluscs.\nTheories of formation.\nIt is postulated that the Deccan Traps eruption was associated with a deep mantle plume. High 3He/4He ratios of the main pulse of the eruption are often seen in magmas with mantle plume origin. The area of long-term eruption (the hotspot), known as the R\u00e9union hotspot, is suspected of both causing the Deccan Traps eruption and opening the rift that separated the Mascarene Plateau from India. Regional crustal thinning supports the theory of this rifting event and likely encouraged the rise of the plume in this area. Seafloor spreading at the boundary between the Indian and African Plates subsequently pushed India north over the plume, which now lies under R\u00e9union island in the Indian Ocean, southwest of India. The mantle plume model has, however, been challenged.\nData continues to emerge that supports the plume model. The motion of the Indian tectonic plate and the eruptive history of the Deccan traps show strong correlations. Based on data from marine magnetic profiles, a pulse of unusually rapid plate motion began at the same time as the first pulse of Deccan flood basalts, which is dated at 67\u00a0million years ago. The spreading rate rapidly increased and reached a maximum at the same time as the peak basaltic eruptions. The spreading rate then dropped off, with the decrease occurring around 63\u00a0million years ago, by which time the main phase of Deccan volcanism ended. This correlation is seen as driven by plume dynamics.\nThe motions of the Indian and African plates have also been shown to be coupled, the common element being the position of these plates relative to the location of the R\u00e9union plume head. The onset of accelerated motion of India coincides with a large slowing of the rate of counterclockwise rotation of Africa. The close correlations between the plate motions suggest that they were both driven by the force of the R\u00e9union plume.\nWhen comparing the Na8, Fe8, and Si8 contents of the Deccan to other major igneous provinces, the Deccan appears to have undergone the greatest degree of melting suggesting a deep plume origin. Olivine appears to have fractionated at near-Moho depths with additional fractionation of gabbro ~6\u00a0km below the surface. Features such as widespread faulting, frequent diking events, high heat flux, and positive gravity anomalies suggest that the extrusive phase of the Deccan Traps is associated with the existence of a triple junction which may have existed during the Late Cretaceous, having been caused by a deep mantle plume. Not all of these diking events are attributed to large-scale contributions to the overall flow volume. It can be difficult, however, to locate the largest dikes as they are often located towards the west coast and are therefore believed to currently reside under water.\nSuggested link to impact events.\nChicxulub crater.\nThere is some evidence to link the Deccan Traps eruption to the contemporaneous asteroid impact that created the nearly antipodal Chicxulub crater in the Mexican state of Yucat\u00e1n. Although the Deccan Traps began erupting well before the impact, argon\u2013argon dating suggests that the impact may have caused an increase in permeability that allowed magma to reach the surface and produced the most voluminous flows, accounting for around 70% of the volume. The combination of the asteroid impact and the resulting increase in eruptive volume may have been responsible for the mass extinctions that occurred at the time that separates the Cretaceous and Paleogene periods, known as the K\u2013Pg boundary.\nShiva crater.\nA geological structure that exists in the sea floor off the west coast of India has been suggested as a possible impact crater, in this context called the Shiva crater. It was also dated approximately 66\u00a0million years ago, potentially matching the Deccan traps. The researchers claiming that this feature is an impact crater suggest that the impact may have been the triggering event for the Deccan Traps as well as contributing to the acceleration of the Indian plate in the early Paleogene. However, the current consensus in the Earth science community is that this feature is unlikely to be an actual impact crater.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8690", "revid": "25320877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8690", "title": "Don't ask, don't tell", "text": "Former policy on gay people serving in the US military\n\"Don't ask, don't tell\" (DADT) was the official United States policy on military service of non-heterosexual people, instituted during the Clinton administration. The policy was issued under Department of Defense Directive 1304.26 on December 21, 1993, and was in effect from February 28, 1994, until September 20, 2011. The policy prohibited military personnel from discriminating against or harassing closeted homosexual or bisexual service members or applicants, while barring openly gay, lesbian, or bisexual persons from military service. This relaxation of legal restrictions on service by gays and lesbians in the armed forces was mandated by Public Law 103\u2013160 (Title 10 of the United States Code \u00a7654), which was signed November 30, 1993. The policy prohibited people who \"demonstrate a propensity or intent to engage in homosexual acts\" from serving in the armed forces of the United States, because their presence \"would create an unacceptable risk to the high standards of morale, good order and discipline, and unit cohesion that are the essence of military capability\".\nThe act prohibited any non-heterosexual person from disclosing their sexual orientation or from speaking about any same-sex relationships, including marriages or other familial attributes, while serving in the United States armed forces. The act specified that service members who disclose that they are homosexual or engage in homosexual conduct should be separated (discharged) except when a service member's conduct was \"for the purpose of avoiding or terminating military service\" or when it \"would not be in the best interest of the armed forces\". Since DADT ended in 2011, persons who are openly homosexual and bisexual have been able to serve.\nThe \"don't ask\" section of the DADT policy specified that superiors should not initiate an investigation of a service member's orientation without witnessing disallowed behaviors. However, evidence of homosexual behavior deemed credible could be used to initiate an investigation. Unauthorized investigations and harassment of suspected servicemen and women led to an expansion of the policy to \"don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue, don't harass\".\nBeginning in the early 2000s, several legal challenges to DADT were filed, and legislation to repeal DADT was enacted in December 2010, specifying that the policy would remain in place until the President, the Secretary of Defense, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff certified that repeal would not harm military readiness, followed by a 60-day waiting period. A July 6, 2011, ruling from a federal appeals court barred further enforcement of the U.S. military's ban on openly gay service members. President Barack Obama, Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen sent that certification to Congress on July 22, 2011, which set the end of DADT to September 20, 2011.\nEven with DADT repealed, the legal definition of marriage as being one man and one woman under the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) meant that, although same-sex partners could get married, their marriage was not recognized by the federal government. This barred partners from access to the same benefits afforded to heterosexual couples such as base access, health care, and United States military pay, including family separation allowance and Basic Allowance for Housing with dependents. The Department of Defense attempted to open some of the benefits that were not restricted by DOMA, but the Supreme Court decision in \"United States v. Windsor\" (2013) made these efforts unnecessary.\nBackground.\nEngaging in homosexual activity had been grounds for discharge from the American military since the Revolutionary War. Policies based on sexual orientation appeared as the United States prepared to enter World War II. When the military added psychiatric screening to its induction process, it included homosexuality as a disqualifying trait, then seen as a form of psychopathology. When the army issued revised mobilization regulations in 1942, it distinguished \"homosexual\" recruits from \"normal\" recruits for the first time. Before the buildup to the war, gay service members were court-martialed, imprisoned, and dishonorably discharged; but in wartime, commanding officers found it difficult to convene court-martial boards of commissioned officers and the administrative blue discharge became the military's standard method for handling gay and lesbian personnel. In 1944, a new policy directive decreed that homosexuals were to be committed to military hospitals, examined by psychiatrists, and discharged under Regulation 615\u2013360, section 8.\nIn 1947, blue discharges were discontinued and two new classifications were created: \"general\" and \"undesirable\". Under such a system, a serviceman or woman found to be gay but who had not committed any sexual acts while in service would tend to receive an undesirable discharge. Those found guilty of engaging in sexual conduct were usually dishonorably discharged. A 1957 U.S. Navy study known as the Crittenden Report dismissed the charge that homosexuals constitute a security risk, but nonetheless did not advocate for an end to anti-gay discrimination in the navy on the basis that \"The service should not move ahead of civilian society nor attempt to set substantially different standards in attitude or action with respect to homosexual offenders.\" It remained secret until 1976. Fannie Mae Clackum was the first service member to successfully appeal such a discharge, winning eight years of back pay from the US Court of Claims in 1960.\nFrom the 1950s through the Vietnam War, some notable gay service members avoided discharges despite pre-screening efforts, and when personnel shortages occurred, homosexuals were allowed to serve.\nThe gay and lesbian rights movement in the 1970s and 1980s raised the issue by publicizing several noteworthy dismissals of gay service members. Air Force TSgt Leonard Matlovich, the first service member to purposely out himself to challenge the ban, appeared on the cover of \"Time\" in 1975. In 1982 the Department of Defense issued a policy stating that, \"Homosexuality is incompatible with military service.\" It cited the military's need \"to maintain discipline, good order, and morale\" and \"to prevent breaches of security\". In 1988, in response to a campaign against lesbians at the Marines' Parris Island Depot, activists launched the Gay and Lesbian Military Freedom Project (MFP) to advocate for an end to the exclusion of gays and lesbians from the armed forces. In 1989, reports commissioned by the Personnel Security Research and Education Center (PERSEREC), an arm of the Pentagon, were discovered in the process of Joseph Steffan's lawsuit fighting his forced resignation from the U.S. Naval Academy. One report said that \"having a same-gender or an opposite-gender orientation is unrelated to job performance in the same way as is being left- or right-handed.\" Other lawsuits fighting discharges highlighted the service record of service members like Tracy Thorne and Margarethe (Grethe) Cammermeyer. The MFP began lobbying Congress in 1990, and in 1991 Senator Brock Adams (D-Washington) and Rep. Barbara Boxer introduced the Military Freedom Act, legislation to end the ban completely. Adams and Rep. Pat Schroeder (D-Colorado) re-introduced it the next year. In July 1991, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, in the context of the outing of his press aide Pete Williams, dismissed the idea that gays posed a security risk as \"a bit of an old chestnut\" in testimony before the House Budget Committee. In response to his comment, several major newspapers endorsed ending the ban, including \"USA Today\", the \"Los Angeles Times\", and the \"Detroit Free Press\". In June 1992, the General Accounting Office released a report that members of Congress had requested two years earlier estimating the costs associated with the ban on gays and lesbians in the military at $27\u00a0million annually.\nDuring the 1992 U.S. presidential election campaign, the civil rights of gays and lesbians, particularly their open service in the military, attracted some press attention, and all candidates for the Democratic presidential nomination supported ending the ban on military service by gays and lesbians, but the Republicans did not make a political issue of that position. In an August cover letter to all his senior officers, General Carl Mundy Jr., Commandant of the Marine Corps, praised a position paper authored by a Marine Corps chaplain that said that \"In the unique, intensely close environment of the military, homosexual conduct can threaten the lives, including the physical (e.g. AIDS) and psychological well-being of others\". Mundy called it \"extremely insightful\" and said it offered \"a sound basis for discussion of the issue\". The murder of gay U.S. Navy petty officer Allen R. Schindler Jr. on October 27, 1992, brought calls from advocates of allowing open service by gays and lesbians for prompt action from the incoming Clinton administration.\nOrigin.\nThe policy was introduced as a compromise measure in 1993 by President Bill Clinton who campaigned in 1992 on the promise to allow all citizens to serve in the military regardless of sexual orientation. Commander Craig Quigley, a Navy spokesman, expressed the opposition of many in the military at the time when he said, \"Homosexuals are notoriously promiscuous\" and that in shared shower situations, heterosexuals would have an \"uncomfortable feeling of someone watching\".\nDuring the 1993 policy debate, the National Defense Research Institute prepared a study for the Office of the Secretary of Defense published as \"Sexual Orientation and U.S. Military Personnel Policy: Options and Assessment\". It concluded that \"circumstances could exist under which the ban on homosexuals could be lifted with little or no adverse consequences for recruitment and retention\" if the policy were implemented with care, principally because many factors contribute to individual enlistment and re-enlistment decisions. On May 5, 1993, Gregory M. Herek, associate research psychologist at the University of California at Davis and an authority on public attitudes toward lesbians and gay men, testified before the House Armed Services Committee on behalf of several professional associations. He stated, \"The research data show that there is nothing about lesbians and gay men that makes them inherently unfit for military service, and there is nothing about heterosexuals that makes them inherently unable to work and live with gay people in close quarters.\" Herek added, \"The assumption that heterosexuals cannot overcome their prejudices toward gay people is a mistaken one.\"\nIn Congress, Democratic Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia and Chair of the Senate Armed Services Committee led the contingent that favored maintaining the absolute ban on gays. Reformers were led by Democratic Congressman Barney Frank of Massachusetts, who favored modification (but ultimately voted for the defense authorization bill with the gay ban language), and 1964 Republican presidential nominee Barry Goldwater, a former Senator and a retired Major General, who argued on behalf of allowing service by open gays and lesbians but was not allowed to appear before the Committee by Nunn. In a June 1993 \"Washington Post\" opinion piece, Goldwater wrote: \"You don't have to be straight to shoot straight\".\nCongress rushed to enact the existing gay ban policy into federal law, outflanking Clinton's planned repeal effort. Clinton called for legislation to overturn the ban, but encountered intense opposition from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, members of Congress, and portions of the public. DADT emerged as a compromise policy. Congress included text in the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994 (passed in 1993) requiring the military to abide by regulations essentially identical to the 1982 absolute ban policy. The Clinton administration on December 21, 1993, issued Defense Directive 1304.26, which directed that military applicants were not to be asked about their sexual orientation. This policy is now known as \"Don't Ask, Don't Tell\". The phrase was coined by Charles Moskos, a military sociologist.\nIn accordance with the December 21, 1993, Department of Defense Directive 1332.14, it was legal policy (10 U.S.C. \u00a7 654) that homosexuality was incompatible with military service and that persons who engaged in homosexual acts or stated that they are homosexual or bisexual were to be discharged. The Uniform Code of Military Justice, passed by Congress in 1950 and signed by President Harry S Truman, established the policies and procedures for discharging service members.\nThe full name of the policy at the time was \"Don't Ask, Don't Tell, Don't Pursue\". The \"Don't Ask\" provision mandated that military or appointed officials not ask about or require members to reveal their sexual orientation. The \"Don't Tell\" stated that a member may be discharged for claiming to be a homosexual or bisexual or making a statement indicating a tendency towards or intent to engage in homosexual activities. The \"Don't Pursue\" established what was minimally required for an investigation to be initiated. A \"Don't Harass\" provision was added to the policy later. It ensured that the military would not allow harassment or violence against service members for any reason.\nThe Servicemembers Legal Defense Network was founded in 1993 to advocate an end to discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in the U.S. Armed Forces.\nCourt challenges.\nDADT was upheld by five federal Courts of Appeal. The Supreme Court, in \"Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic and Institutional Rights, Inc.\" (2006), unanimously held that the federal government could constitutionally withhold funding from universities, no matter what their nondiscrimination policies might be, for refusing to give military recruiters access to school resources. An association of law schools had argued that allowing military recruiting at their institutions compromised their ability to exercise their free speech rights in opposition to discrimination based on sexual orientation as represented by DADT.\n\"McVeigh v. Cohen\".\nIn January 1998, Senior Chief Petty Officer Timothy R. McVeigh (not to be confused with convicted Oklahoma City bomber, Timothy J. McVeigh) won a preliminary injunction from a U.S. district court that prevented his discharge from the U.S. Navy for \"homosexual conduct\" after 17 years of service. His lawsuit did not challenge the DADT policy but asked the court to hold the military accountable for adhering to the policy's particulars. The Navy had investigated McVeigh's sexual orientation based on his AOL email account name and user profile. District Judge Stanley Sporkin ruled in \"McVeigh v. Cohen\" that the Navy had violated its own DADT guidelines: \"Suggestions of sexual orientation in a private, anonymous email account did not give the Navy a sufficient reason to investigate to determine whether to commence discharge proceedings.\" He called the Navy's investigation \"a search and destroy mission\" against McVeigh. The case also attracted attention because a navy paralegal had misrepresented himself when querying AOL for information about McVeigh's account. Frank Rich linked the two issues: \"McVeigh is as clear-cut a victim of a witch hunt as could be imagined, and that witch hunt could expand exponentially if the military wants to add on-line fishing to its invasion of service members' privacy.\" AOL apologized to McVeigh and paid him damages. McVeigh reached a settlement with the Navy that paid his legal expenses and allowed him to retire with full benefits in July. \"The New York Times\" called Sporkin's ruling \"a victory for gay rights, with implications for the millions of people who use computer on-line services\".\n\"Witt v. Department of the Air Force\".\nIn April 2006, Margaret Witt, a major in the United States Air Force who was being investigated for homosexuality, filed suit in the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington seeking declaratory and injunctive relief on the grounds that DADT violates substantive due process, the Equal Protection Clause, and procedural due process. In July 2007 the Secretary of the Air Force ordered her honorable discharge. Dismissed by the district court, the case was heard on appeal, and the Ninth Circuit issued its ruling on May 21, 2008. Its decision in \"Witt v. Department of the Air Force\" reinstated Witt's substantive-due-process and procedural-due-process claims and affirmed the dismissal of her Equal Protection claim. The Ninth Circuit, analyzing the Supreme Court decision in \"Lawrence v. Texas\" (2003), determined that DADT had to be subjected to heightened scrutiny, meaning that there must be an \"important\" governmental interest at issue, that DADT must \"significantly\" further the governmental interest, and that there can be no less intrusive way for the government to advance that interest.\nThe Obama administration declined to appeal, allowing a May 3, 2009, deadline to pass, leaving \"Witt\" as binding on the entire Ninth Circuit, and returning the case to the District Court. On September 24, 2010, District Judge Ronald B. Leighton ruled that Witt's constitutional rights had been violated by her discharge and that she must be reinstated to the Air Force.\nThe government filed an appeal with the Ninth Circuit on November 23, but did not attempt to have the trial court's ruling stayed pending the outcome. In a settlement announced on May 10, 2011, the Air Force agreed to drop its appeal and remove Witt's discharge from her military record. She will retire with full benefits.\n\"Log Cabin Republicans v. United States of America\".\nIn 2010, a lawsuit filed in 2004 by the Log Cabin Republicans (LCR), the nation's largest Republican gay organization, went to trial. Challenging the constitutionality of DADT, the plaintiffs stated that the policy violates the rights of gay military members to free speech, due process and open association. The government argued that DADT was necessary to advance a legitimate governmental interest. Plaintiffs introduced statements by President Barack Obama, from prepared remarks, that DADT \"doesn't contribute to our national security\", \"weakens our national security\", and that reversal is \"essential for our national security\". According to plaintiffs, these statements alone satisfied their burden of proof on the due process claims.\nOn September 9, 2010, Judge Virginia A. Phillips ruled in \"Log Cabin Republicans v. United States of America\" that the ban on service by openly gay service members was an unconstitutional violation of the First and Fifth Amendments. On October 12, 2010, she granted an immediate worldwide injunction prohibiting the Department of Defense from enforcing the \"Don't Ask Don't Tell\" policy and ordered the military to suspend and discontinue any investigation or discharge, separation, or other proceedings based on it. The Department of Justice appealed her decision and requested a stay of her injunction, which Phillips denied but which the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals granted on October 20\nand stayed pending appeal on November 1. The U.S. Supreme Court refused to overrule the stay.\nDistrict Court neither anticipated questions of\nconstitutional law nor formulated a rule broader than is required by the facts. The\nconstitutional issues regarding DADT are well-defined, and the District Court\nfocused specifically on the relevant inquiry of whether the statute impermissibly\ninfringed upon substantive due process rights with regard to a protected area of\nindividual liberty. Engaging in a careful and detailed review of the facts presented\nto it at trial, the District Court properly concluded that the Government put forward\nno persuasive evidence to demonstrate that the statute is a valid exercise of\ncongressional authority to legislate in the realm of protected liberty interests. See\nLog Cabin, 716 F. Supp. 2d at 923. Hypothetical questions were neither presented\nnor answered in reaching this decision.\nOn October 19, 2010, military recruiters were told they could accept openly gay applicants. On October 20, 2010, Lt. Daniel Choi, an openly gay man honorably discharged under DADT, re-enlisted in the U.S. Army.\nFollowing the passage of the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010, the Justice Department asked the Ninth Circuit to suspend LCR's suit in light of the legislative repeal. LCR opposed the request, noting that gay personnel were still subject to discharge. On January 28, 2011, the Court denied the Justice Department's request. The Obama administration responded by requesting that the policy be allowed to stay in place while they completed the process of assuring that its end would not impact combat readiness. On March 28, the LCR filed a brief asking that the court deny the administration's request.\nIn 2011, while waiting for certification, several service members were discharged under DADT at their own insistence, until July 6 when a three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals re-instated Judge Phillips' injunction barring further enforcement of the U.S. military's ban on openly gay service members. On July 11, the appeals court asked the DOJ to inform the court if it intended to proceed with its appeal. On July 14, the Justice Department filed a motion \"to avoid short-circuiting the repeal process established by Congress during the final stages of the implementation of the repeal\". and warning of \"significant immediate harms on the government\". On July 15, the Ninth Circuit restored most of the DADT policy, but continued to prohibit the government from discharging or investigating openly gay personnel. Following the implementation of DADT's repeal, a panel of three judges of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals vacated the Phillips ruling.\nDebate.\nFollowing the July 1999 murder of Army Pfc. Barry Winchell, apparently motivated by anti-gay bias, President Clinton issued an executive order modifying the Uniform Code of Military Justice to permit evidence of a hate crime to be admitted during the sentencing phase of a trial. In December, Secretary of Defense William Cohen ordered a review of DADT to determine if the policy's anti-gay harassment component was being observed. When that review found anti-gay sentiments were widely expressed and tolerated in the military, the DOD adopted a new anti-harassment policy in July 2000, though its effectiveness was disputed. On December 7, 1999, Hillary Clinton told an audience of gay supporters that \"Gays and lesbians already serve with distinction in our nation's armed forces and should not face discrimination. Fitness to serve should be based on an individual's conduct, not their sexual orientation.\" Later that month, retired General Carl E. Mundy Jr. defended the implementation of DADT against what he called the \"politicization\" of the issue by both Clintons. He cited discharge statistics for the Marines for the past five years that showed 75% were based on \"voluntary admission of homosexuality\" and 49% occurred during the first six months of service, when new recruits were most likely to reevaluate their decision to enlist. He also argued against any change in the policy, writing in the \"New York Times\": \"Conduct that is widely rejected by a majority of Americans can undermine the trust that is essential to creating and maintaining the sense of unity that is critical to the success of a military organization operating under the very different and difficult demands of combat.\" The conviction of Winchell's murderer, according to the \"New York Times\", \"galvanized opposition\" to DADT, an issue that had \"largely vanished from public debate\". Opponents of the policy focused on punishing harassment in the military rather than the policy itself, which Senator Chuck Hagel defended on December 25: \"The U.S. armed forces aren't some social experiment.\"\nThe principal candidates for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2000, Al Gore and Bill Bradley, both endorsed military service by open gays and lesbians, provoking opposition from high-ranking retired military officers, notably the recently retired commandant of the Marine Corps, General Charles C. Krulak. He and others objected to Gore's statement that he would use support for ending DADT as a \"litmus test\" when considering candidates for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The 2000 Democratic Party platform was silent on the issue, while the Republican Party platform that year said: \"We affirm that homosexuality is incompatible with military service.\" Following the election of George W. Bush in 2000, observers expected him to avoid any changes to DADT, since his nominee for Secretary of State Colin Powell had participated in its creation.\nIn February 2004, members of the British Armed Forces, Lt Rolf Kurth and Lt Cdr Craig Jones, along with Aaron Belkin, Director of the Center for the Study of Sexual Minorities in the Military met with members of Congress and spoke at the National Defense University. They spoke about their experience of the current situation in the UK. The UK lifted the gay ban on members serving in their forces in 2000.\nIn July 2004, the American Psychological Association issued a statement that DADT \"discriminates on the basis of sexual orientation\" and that \"Empirical evidence fails to show that sexual orientation is germane to any aspect of military effectiveness including unit cohesion, morale, recruitment and retention.\" It said that the U.S. military's track record overcoming past racial and gender discrimination demonstrated its ability to integrate groups previously excluded. The Republican Party platform that year reiterated its support for the policy\u2014\"We affirm traditional military culture, and we affirm that homosexuality is incompatible with military service.\"\u2014while the Democratic Party maintained its silence.\nIn February 2005, the Government Accountability Office released estimates of the cost of DADT. It reported at least $95.4\u00a0million in recruiting costs and at least $95.1\u00a0million for training replacements for the 9,488 troops discharged from 1994 through 2003, while noting that the true figures might be higher. In September, as part of its campaign to demonstrate that the military allowed open homosexuals to serve when its workforce requirements were greatest, the Center for the Study of Sexual Minorities in the Military (now the Palm Center) reported that army regulations allowed the active-duty deployment of Army Reservists and National Guard troops who claim to be or who are accused of being gay. A U.S. Army Forces Command spokesperson said the regulation was intended to prevent Reservists and National Guard members from pretending to be gay to escape combat. Advocates of ending DADT repeatedly publicized discharges of highly trained gay and lesbian personnel, especially those in positions with critical shortages, including fifty-nine Arabic speakers and nine Persian speakers. Elaine Donnelly, president of the Center for Military Readiness, later argued that the military's failure to ask about sexual orientation at recruitment was the cause of the discharges: [Y]ou could reduce this number to zero or near zero if the Department of Defense dropped Don't Ask, Don't Tell.\u00a0... We should not be training people who are not eligible to be in the Armed Forces.\"\nIn February 2006, a University of California Blue Ribbon Commission that included Lawrence Korb, a former assistant defense secretary during the Reagan administration, William Perry, Secretary of Defense in the Clinton administration, and professors from the United States Military Academy released their assessment of the GAO's analysis of the cost of DADT released a year earlier. The commission report stated that the GAO did not take into account the value the military lost from the departures. They said that that total cost was closer to $363\u00a0million, including $14.3\u00a0million for \"separation travel\" following a service member's discharge, $17.8\u00a0million for training officers, $252.4\u00a0million for training enlistees, and $79.3\u00a0million in recruiting costs.\nIn 2006, Soulforce, a national LGBT rights organization, organized its Right to Serve Campaign, in which gay men and lesbians in several cities attempted to enlist in the Armed Forces or National Guard. Donnelly of the Center for Military Readiness stated in September: \"I think the people involved here do not have the best interests of the military at heart. They never have. They are promoting an agenda to normalize homosexuality in America using the military as a battering ram to promote that broader agenda.\" She said that \"pro-homosexual activists\u00a0... are creating media events all over the country and even internationally.\"\nIn 2006, a speaking tour of gay former service members, organized by SLDN, Log Cabin Republicans, and Meehan, visited 18 colleges and universities. Patrick Guerriero, executive director of Log Cabin, thought the repeal movement was gaining \"new traction\" but \"Ultimately\", said, \"we think it's going to take a Republican with strong military credentials to make a shift in the policy.\" Elaine Donnelly called such efforts \"a big P.R. campaign\" and said that \"The law is there to protect good order and discipline in the military, and it's not going to change.\"\nIn December 2006, Zogby International released the results of a poll of military personnel conducted in October 2006 that found that 26% favored allowing gays and lesbians to serve openly in the military, 37% were opposed, while 37% expressed no preference or were unsure. Of respondents who had experience with gay people in their unit, 6% said their presence had a positive impact on their personal morale, 66% said no impact, and 28% said negative impact. Regarding overall unit morale, 3% said positive impact, 64% no impact, and 27% negative impact.\nRetired Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General John Shalikashvili and former Senator and Secretary of Defense William Cohen opposed the policy in January 2007: \"I now believe that if gay men and lesbians served openly in the United States military, they would not undermine the efficacy of the armed forces\" Shalikashvili wrote. \"Our military has been stretched thin by our deployments in the Middle East, and we must welcome the service of any American who is willing and able to do the job.\" Shalikashvili cited the recent \"Zogby poll of more than 500 service members returning from Afghanistan and Iraq, three-quarters of whom said they were comfortable interacting with gay people. The debate took a different turn in March when General Peter Pace, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the editorial board of the \"Chicago Tribune\" he supported DADT because \"homosexual acts between two individuals are immoral and\u00a0... we should not condone immoral acts.\" His remarks became, according to the \"Tribune\", \"a huge news story on radio, television and the Internet during the day and showed how sensitive the Pentagon's policy has become.\" Senator John Warner, who backed DADT, said \"I respectfully, but strongly, disagree with the chairman's view that homosexuality is immoral\", and Pace expressed regret for expressing his personal views and said that DADT \"does not make a judgment about the morality of individual acts.\" Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, then in the early stages of his campaign for the 2008 Republican presidential nomination, defended DADT:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I first heard [the phrase], I thought it sounded silly and I just dismissed it and said, well, that can't possibly work. Well, I sure was wrong. It has worked. It's been in place now for over a decade. The military says it's working and they don't want to change it\u00a0... and they're the people closest to the front. We're in the middle of a conflict right now. I would not change it.\nThat summer, after U.S. Senator Larry Craig was arrested for lewd conduct in a men's restroom, conservative commentator Michael Medved argued that any liberalization of DADT would \"compromise restroom integrity and security\". He wrote: \"The national shudder of discomfort and queasiness associated with any introduction of homosexual eroticism into public men's rooms should make us more determined than ever to resist the injection of those lurid attitudes into the even more explosive situation of the U.S. military.\"\nIn November 2007, 28 retired generals and admirals urged Congress to repeal the policy, citing evidence that 65,000 gay men and women were serving in the armed forces and that there were over a million gay veterans. On November 17, 2008, 104 retired generals and admirals signed a similar statement. In December, SLDN arranged for \"60 Minutes\" to interview Darren Manzella, an Army medic who served in Iraq after coming out to his unit.\nOn May 4, 2008, while Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen addressed the graduating cadets at West Point, a cadet asked what would happen if the next administration were supportive of legislation allowing gays to serve openly. Mullen responded, \"Congress, and not the military, is responsible for DADT.\" Previously, during his Senate confirmation hearing in 2007, Mullen told lawmakers, \"I really think it is for the American people to come forward, really through this body, to both debate that policy and make changes, if that's appropriate.\" He went on to say, \"I'd love to have Congress make its own decisions\" with respect to considering repeal.\nIn May 2009, when a committee of military law experts at the Palm Center, an anti-DADT research institute, concluded that the President could issue an Executive Order to suspend homosexual conduct discharges, Obama rejected that option and said he wanted Congress to change the law.\nOn July 5, 2009, Colin Powell told CNN that the policy was \"correct for the time\" but that \"sixteen years have now gone by, and I think a lot has changed with respect to attitudes within our country, and therefore I think this is a policy and a law that should be reviewed.\" Interviewed for the same broadcast, Mullen said the policy would continue to be implemented until the law was repealed, and that his advice was to \"move in a measured way.\u00a0... At a time when we're fighting two conflicts there is a great deal of pressure on our forces and their families.\" In September, \"Joint Force Quarterly\" published an article by an Air Force colonel that disputed the argument that unit cohesion is compromised by the presence of openly gay personnel.\nIn October 2009, the Commission on Military Justice, known as the Cox Commission, repeated its 2001 recommendation that Article 125 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, which bans sodomy, be repealed, noting that \"most acts of consensual sodomy committed by consenting military personnel are not prosecuted, creating a perception that prosecution of this sexual behavior is arbitrary.\"\nIn January 2010, the White House and congressional officials started work on repealing the ban by inserting language into the 2011 defense authorization bill. During Obama's State of the Union Address on January 27, 2010, he said that he would work with Congress and the military to enact a repeal of the gay ban law and for the first time set a timetable for repeal.\nAt a February 2, 2010, congressional hearing, Senator John McCain read from a letter signed by \"over one thousand former general and flag officers\". It said: \"We firmly believe that this law, which Congress passed to protect good order, discipline and morale in the unique environment of the armed forces, deserves continued support.\" The signature campaign had been organized by Elaine Donnelly of the Center for Military Readiness, a longtime supporter of a traditional all-male and all-heterosexual military. Servicemembers United, a veterans group opposed to DADT, issued a report critical of the letter's legitimacy. They said that among those signing the letter were officers who had no knowledge of their inclusion or who had refused to be included, and even one instance of a general's widow who signed her husband's name to the letter though he had died before the survey was published. The average age of the officers whose names were listed as signing the letter was 74, the oldest was 98, and Servicemembers United noted that \"only a small fraction of these officers have even served in the military during the 'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' period, much less in the 21st century military.\"\nThe Center for American Progress issued a report in March 2010 that said a smooth implementation of an end to DADT required eight specified changes to the military's internal regulations. On March 25, 2010, Defense Secretary Gates announced new rules mandating that only flag officers could initiate discharge proceedings and imposing more stringent rules of evidence on discharge proceedings.\nRepeal.\nThe underlying justifications for DADT had been subjected to increasing suspicion and outright rejection by the early 21st century. Mounting evidence obtained from the integration efforts of foreign militaries, surveys of U.S. military personnel, and studies conducted by the DoD\u00a0gave credence to the view that the presence of open homosexuals within the military would not be detrimental at all to the armed forces. A DoD study conducted at the behest of Secretary of Defense Robert Gates in 2010 supports this most.\nThe DoD working group conducting the study considered the impact that lifting the ban would have on unit cohesion and effectiveness, good order and discipline, and military morale. The study included a survey that revealed significant differences between respondents who believed they had served with homosexual troops and those who did not believe they had. In analyzing such data, the DoD working group concluded that it was actually generalized perceptions of homosexual troops that led to the perceived unrest that would occur without DADT. Ultimately, the study deemed the overall risk to military effectiveness of lifting the ban to be low. Citing the ability of the armed forces to adjust to the previous integration of African-Americans and women, the DoD study asserted that the United States military could adjust as had it before in history without an impending serious effect.\nIn March 2005, Rep. Martin T. Meehan introduced the Military Readiness Enhancement Act in the House. It aimed \"to amend title 10, United States Code, to enhance the readiness of the Armed Forces by replacing the current policy concerning homosexuality in the Armed Forces, referred to as 'Don't ask, don't tell,' with a policy of nondiscrimination on the basis of sexual orientation\". As of 2006, it had 105 Democrats and 4 Republicans as co-sponsors. He introduced the bill again in 2007 and 2009.\nDuring the 2008 U.S. presidential election campaign, Senator Barack Obama advocated a full repeal of the laws barring gays and lesbians from serving in the military. Nineteen days after his election, Obama's advisers announced that plans to repeal the policy might be delayed until 2010, because Obama \"first wants to confer with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and his new political appointees at the Pentagon to reach a consensus, and then present legislation to Congress\". As president he advocated a policy change to allow gay personnel to serve openly in the armed forces, stating that the U.S. government has spent millions of dollars replacing troops expelled from the military, including language experts fluent in Arabic, because of DADT. On the eve of the National Equality March in Washington, D.C., October 10, 2009, Obama stated in a speech before the Human Rights Campaign that he would end the ban, but he offered no timetable. Obama said in his 2010 State of the Union Address: \"This year, I will work with Congress and our military to finally repeal the law that denies gay Americans the right to serve the country they love because of who they are.\" This statement was quickly followed up by Defense Secretary Robert Gates and Joint Chiefs chairman Michael Mullen voicing their support for a repeal of DADT.\nDon't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010.\nDemocrats in both houses of Congress first attempted to end DADT by amending the Defense Authorization Act. On May 27, 2010, on a 234\u2013194 vote, the U.S. House of Representatives approved the Murphy amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2011. It provided for repeal of the DADT policy and created a process for lifting the policy, including a U.S. Department of Defense study and certification by key officials that the change in policy would not harm military readiness followed by a waiting period of 60 days. The amended defense bill passed the House on May 28, 2010. On September 21, 2010, John McCain led a successful filibuster against the debate on the Defense Authorization Act, in which 56 Senators voted to end debate, four short of the 60 votes required. Some advocates for repeal, including the Palm Center, OutServe, and Knights Out, opposed any attempt to block the passage of NDAA if it failed to include DADT repeal language. The Human Rights Campaign, the Center for American Progress, Servicemembers United and SLDN refused to concede that possibility.\nThe American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) filed a lawsuit, \"Collins v. United States\", against the Department of Defense in November 2010 seeking full compensation for those discharged under the policy.\nOn November 30, 2010, the Joint Chiefs of Staff released the \"Don't Ask, Don't Tell\" Comprehensive Review Working Group (CRWG) report authored by Jeh C. Johnson, General Counsel of the Department of Defense, and Army General Carter F. Ham. It outlined a path to the implementation of repeal of DADT. The report indicated that there was a low risk of service disruptions due to repealing the ban, provided time was provided for proper implementation and training. It included the results of a survey of 115,000 active-duty and reserve service members. Across all service branches, 30 percent thought that integrating gays into the military would have negative consequences. In the Marine Corps and combat specialties, the percentage with that negative assessment ranged from 40 to 60 percent. The CRWG also said that 69 percent of all those surveyed believed they had already worked with a gay or lesbian and of those, 92 percent reported that the impact of that person's presence was positive or neutral. The same day, in response to the CRWG, 30 professors and scholars, most from military institutions, issued a joint statement saying that the CRWG \"echoes more than 20 studies, including studies by military researchers, all of which reach the same conclusion: allowing gays and lesbians to serve openly will not harm the military\u00a0... We hope that our collective statement underscores that the debate about the evidence is now officially over\". The Family Research Council's president, Tony Perkins, interpreted the CRWG data differently, writing that it \"reveals that 40 percent of Marines and 25 percent of the Army could leave\".\nGates encouraged Congress to act quickly to repeal the law so that the military could carefully adjust rather than face a court decision requiring it to lift the policy immediately. The United States Senate held two days of hearings on December 2 and 3, 2010, to consider the CRWG report. Defense Secretary Robert Gates, Joint Chiefs chairman Michael Mullen urged immediate repeal. The heads of the Marine Corps, Army, and Navy all advised against immediate repeal and expressed varied views on its eventual repeal. Oliver North, writing in \"National Review\" the next week, said that Gates' testimony showed \"a deeply misguided commitment to political correctness\". He interpreted the CRWG's data as indicating a high risk that large numbers of resignations would follow the repeal of DADT. Service members, especially combat troops, he wrote, \"deserve better than to be treated like lab rats in Mr. Obama's radical social experiment\".\nOn December 9, 2010, another filibuster prevented debate on the Defense Authorization Act. In response to that vote, Senators Joe Lieberman and Susan Collins introduced a bill that included the policy-related portions of the Defense Authorization Act that they considered more likely to pass as a stand-alone bill. It passed the House on a vote of 250 to 175 on December 15, 2010. On December 18, 2010, the Senate voted to end debate on its version of the bill by a cloture vote of 63\u201333. The final Senate vote was held later that same day, with the measure passing by a vote of 65\u201331.\nU.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates released a statement following the vote indicating that the planning for implementation of a policy repeal would begin right away and would continue until Gates certified that conditions were met for orderly repeal of the policy. President Obama signed the repeal into law on December 22, 2010.\nImplementation of repeal.\nThe repeal act established a process for ending the DADT policy. The President, the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were required to certify in writing that they had reviewed the Pentagon's report on the effects of DADT repeal, that the appropriate regulations had been reviewed and drafted, and that implementation of repeal regulations \"is consistent with the standards of military readiness, military effectiveness, unit cohesion, and recruiting and retention of the Armed Forces\". Once certification was given, DADT would be lifted after a 60-day waiting period.\nRepresentative Duncan D. Hunter announced plans in January 2011 to introduce a bill designed to delay the end of DADT. His proposed legislation required all of the chiefs of the armed services to submit the certification at the time required only of the President, Defense Secretary and Joint Chiefs chairman. In April, Perkins of the Family Research Council argued that the Pentagon was misrepresenting its own survey data and that hearings by the House Armed Services Committee, now under Republican control, could persuade Obama to withhold certification. Congressional efforts to prevent the change in policy from going into effect continued into May and June 2011.\nOn January 29, 2011, Pentagon officials stated that the training process to prepare troops for the end of DADT would begin in February and would proceed quickly, though they suggested that it might not be completed in 2011. On the same day, the DOD announced it would not offer any additional compensation to service members who had been discharged under DADT, who received half of the separation pay other honorably discharged service members received.\nIn May 2011, the U.S. Army reprimanded three colonels for performing a skit in March 2011 at a function at Yongsan Garrison, South Korea, that mocked the repeal.\nIn May 2011, revelations that an April Navy memo relating to its DADT training guidelines contemplated allowing same-sex weddings in base chapels and allowing chaplains to officiate if they so chose resulted in a letter of protest from 63 Republican congressman, citing the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) as controlling the use of federal property. Tony Perkins of the Family Research Council said the guidelines \"make it even more uncomfortable for men and women of faith to perform their duties\". A Pentagon spokesperson replied that DOMA \"does not limit the type of religious ceremonies a chaplain may perform in a chapel on a military installation\", and a Navy spokesperson said that \"A chaplain can conduct a same-sex ceremony if it is in the tenets of his faith\". A few days later the Navy rescinded its earlier instructions \"pending additional legal and policy review and interdepartmental coordination\".\nWhile waiting for certification, several service members were discharged at their own insistence until a July 6 ruling from a federal appeals court barred further enforcement of the U.S. military's ban on openly gay service members, which the military promptly did.\nAnticipating the lifting of DADT, some active duty service members wearing civilian clothes marched in San Diego's gay pride parade on July 16. The DOD noted that participation \"does not constitute a declaration of sexual orientation\".\nPresident Obama, Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta, and Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, sent the certification required by the Repeal Act to Congress on July 22, 2011, setting the end of DADT for September 20, 2011. A Pentagon spokesman said that service members discharged under DADT would be able to re-apply to rejoin the military then.\nAt the end of August 2011, the DOD approved the distribution of the magazine produced by OutServe, an organization of gay and lesbian service members, at Army and Air Force base exchanges beginning with the September 20 issue, coinciding with the end of DADT.\nOn September 20, Air Force officials announced that 22 Air Force Instructions were \"updated as a result of the repeal of DADT\". On September 30, 2011, the Department of Defense modified regulations to reflect the repeal by deleting \"homosexual conduct\" as a ground for administrative separation.\nDay of repeal and aftermath.\nOn the eve of repeal, US Air Force 1st Lt. Josh Seefried, one of the founders of OutServe, an organization of LGBT troops, revealed his identity after two years of hiding behind a pseudonym. Senior Airman Randy Phillips, after conducting a social media campaign seeking encouragement coming out and already out to his military co-workers, came out to his father on the evening of September 19. When the video of their conversation he posted on YouTube went viral, it made him, in one journalist's estimation, \"the poster boy for the DADT repeal\". The moment the repeal took effect at midnight on September 19, US Navy Lt. Gary C. Ross married his same-sex partner of eleven and a half years, Dan Swezy, making them the first same-sex military couple to legally marry in the United States. Retired Rear Adm. Alan M. Steinman became the highest-ranking person to come out immediately following the end of DADT. HBO produced a World of Wonder documentary, \"The Strange History of Don't Ask, Don't Tell\", and premiered it on September 20. \"Variety\" called it \"an unapologetic piece of liberal advocacy\" and \"a testament to what formidable opponents ignorance and prejudice can be\". Discharge proceedings on the grounds of homosexuality, some begun years earlier, came to an end.\nIn the weeks that followed, a series of firsts attracted press attention to the impact of the repeal. The Marine Corps were the first branch of the armed services to recruit from the LGBTQ community. Reservist Jeremy Johnson became the first person discharged under DADT to re-enlist. Jase Daniels became the first to return to active duty, re-joining the Navy as a third class petty officer. On December 2, Air Force intelligence officer Ginger Wallace became the first open LGBT service member to have a same-sex partner participate in the \"pinning-on\" ceremony that marked her promotion to colonel. On December 23, after 80 days at sea, US Navy Petty Officer 2nd Class Marissa Gaeta won the right to the traditional \"first kiss\" upon returning to port and shared it with her same-sex partner. On January 20, 2012, U.S. service members deployed to Bagram, Afghanistan, produced a video in support of the It Gets Better Project, which aims to support LGBT at-risk youth. Widespread news coverage continued even months after the repeal date, when a photograph of Marine Sgt. Brandon Morgan kissing his partner at a February 22, 2012, homecoming celebration on Marine Corps Base Hawaii went viral. When asked for a comment, a spokesperson for the Marine Corps said: \"It's your typical homecoming photo.\"\nOn September 30, 2011, Under Secretary of Defense Clifford Stanley announced the DOD's policy that military chaplains are allowed to perform same-sex marriages \"on or off a military installation\" where local law permits them. His memo noted that \"a chaplain is not required to participate in or officiate a private ceremony if doing so would be in variance with the tenets of his or her religion\" and \"a military chaplain's participation in a private ceremony does not constitute an endorsement of the ceremony by DoD\". Some religious groups announced that their chaplains would not participate in such weddings, including an organization of evangelical Protestants, the Chaplain Alliance for Religious Liberty and Roman Catholics led by Archbishop Timothy Broglio of the Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA.\nIn late October 2011, speaking at the Air Force Academy, Colonel Gary Packard, leader of the team that drafted the DOD's repeal implementation plan, said: \"The best quote I've heard so far is, 'Well, some people's Facebook status changed, but that was about it.'\" In late November, discussing the repeal of DADT and its implementation, Marine General James F. Amos said \"I'm very pleased with how it has gone\" and called it a \"non-event\". He said his earlier public opposition was appropriate based on ongoing combat operations and the negative assessment of the policy given by 56% of combat troops under his command in the Department of Defense's November 2010 survey. A Defense Department spokesperson said implementation of repeal occurred without incident and added: \"We attribute this success to our comprehensive pre-repeal training program, combined with the continued close monitoring and enforcement of standards by our military leaders at all levels.\"\nIn December 2011, Congress considered two DADT-related amendments in the course of work on the National Defense Authorization Act for 2012. The Senate approved 97\u20133, an amendment removing the prohibition on sodomy found in Article 125 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice as recommended by the Comprehensive Review Working Group (CRWG) a year earlier. The House approved an amendment banning same-sex marriages from being performed at military bases or by military employees, including chaplains and other employees of the military when \"acting in an official capacity\". Neither amendment appeared in the final legislation.\nIn July 2012, the Department of Defense granted permission for military personnel to wear their uniforms while participating in the San Diego Pride Parade. This was the first time that U.S. military personnel were permitted to wear their service uniforms in such a parade.\nMarking the first anniversary of the passage of the Repeal Act, television news networks reported no incidents in the three months since DADT ended. One aired video of a social gathering for gay service members at a base in Afghanistan. Another reported on the experience of lesbian and gay troops, including some rejection after coming out to colleagues.\nThe Palm Center, a think tank that studies issues of sexuality and the military, released a study in September 2012 that found no negative consequences, nor any effect on military effectiveness from DADT repeal. This study began six months following repeal and concluded at the one year mark. The study included surveys of 553 generals and admirals who had opposed repeal, experts who supported DADT, and more than 60 heterosexual, gay, lesbian and bisexual active duty service personnel.\nOn January 7, 2013, the ACLU reached a settlement with the federal government in \"Collins v. United States\". It provided for the payment of full separation pay to service members discharged under DADT since November 10, 2004, who had previously been granted only half that.\n2012 presidential campaign issue.\nSeveral candidates for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination called for the restoration of DADT, including Michele Bachmann, Rick Perry, and Rick Santorum. Newt Gingrich called for an extensive review of DADT's repeal.\nRon Paul, having voted for the Repeal Act, maintained his support for allowing military service by open homosexuals. Herman Cain called the issue \"a distraction\" and opposed reinstating DADT. Mitt Romney said that the winding down of military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan obviated his opposition to the repeal and said he was not proposing any change to policy.\nOn September 22, 2011, the audience at a Republican candidates' debate booed a U.S. soldier posted in Iraq who asked a question via video about the repeal of DADT, and none of the candidates noticed or responded to the crowd's behavior. Two days later, Obama commented on the incident while addressing a dinner of the Human Rights Campaign: \"You want to be commander in chief? You can start by standing up for the men and women who wear the uniform of the United States, even when it's not politically convenient\".\nIn June 2012, Rep. Howard McKeon, Republican chair of the House Armed Services Committee, said he considered the repeal of DADT a settled issue, and that if Romney became president he would not advocate its reinstatement, though others in his party might.\n2021 benefits restoration.\nIn September 2021, on the 10th anniversary of the Don't Ask, Don't Tell repeal, President Joe Biden announced that the Veterans Administration would start providing benefits for service members who received other-than-honorable discharges (before DADT was enacted and while it was in effect) because of their sexual orientation.\nViews of the policy.\nPublic opinion.\nIn 1993, \"Time\" reported that 44% of those polled supported openly gay service members, and in 1994, a CNN poll indicated 53% of Americans believed gays and lesbians should be permitted to serve openly.\nAccording to a December 2010 \"Washington Post\"\u2013ABC News poll, 77% of Americans said gays and lesbians who publicly disclose their sexual orientation should be able to serve in the military. That number showed little change from polls over the previous two years, but represented the highest level of support in a Post-ABC poll. The support also cut across partisan and ideological lines, with majorities of Democrats (86%), Republicans (74%), independents (74%), liberals (92%), conservatives (67%), white evangelical Protestants (70%) and non-religious (84%) in favor of homosexuals serving openly.\nA November 2010 survey by the Pew Research Center found that 58% of the U.S. public favored allowing gays and lesbians to serve openly in the military, while less than half as many (27%) were opposed. According to a November 2010 CNN/Opinion Research Corporation poll, 72% of adult Americans favored permitting people who are openly gay or lesbian to serve in the military, while 23% opposed it. \"The main difference between the CNN poll and the Pew poll is in the number of respondents who told pollsters that they didn't have an opinion on this topic \u2013 16 percent in the Pew poll compared to only five percent in the CNN survey\", said CNN Polling Director Keating Holland. \"The two polls report virtually the same number who say they oppose gays serving openly in the military, which suggests that there are some people who favor that change in policy but for some reason were reluctant to admit that to the Pew interviewers. That happens occasionally on topics where moral issues and equal-treatment issues intersect.\"\nA February 2010 Quinnipiac University Polling Institute national poll showed 57% of American voters favored gays serving openly, compared to 36% opposed, while 66% said not allowing openly gay personnel to serve is discrimination, compared to 31% who did not see it as discrimination. A CBS News/\"New York Times\" national poll done at the same time showed 58% of Americans favored gays serving openly, compared to 28% opposed.\nChaplains and religious groups.\nChaplain groups and religious organizations took various positions on DADT. Some felt that the policy needed to be withdrawn to make the military more inclusive. The Southern Baptist Convention battled the repeal of DADT, warning that their endorsements for chaplains might be withdrawn if the repeal took place. They took the position that allowing gay men and women to serve in the military without restriction would have a negative impact on the ability of chaplains who think homosexuality is a sin to speak freely regarding their religious beliefs. The Roman Catholic Church called for the retention of the policy, but had no plans to withdraw its priests from serving as military chaplains. Sixty-five retired chaplains signed a letter opposing repeal, stating that repeal would make it impossible for chaplains whose faith teaches that same-sex behavior is immoral to minister to military service members. Other religious organizations and agencies called the repeal of the policy a \"non-event\" or \"non-issue\" for chaplains, claiming that chaplains have always supported military service personnel, whether or not they agree with all their actions or beliefs.\nDischarges under DADT.\nAfter the policy was introduced in 1993, the military discharged over 13,000 troops from the military under DADT. The number of discharges per fiscal year under DADT dropped sharply after the September 11 attacks and remained comparatively low through to the repeal. Discharges exceeded 600 every year until 2009.\nState-based gay and lesbian military veteran laws.\nIn November 2019, both Rhode Island and New York State signed into law and implemented restoring military benefits to gay and lesbian military veterans. An estimated approximately 100,000 individuals were affected by the \"don't ask don't tell policy\" (since it was repealed in September 2011).\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8691", "revid": "1160279483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8691", "title": "Divination", "text": "Attempt to gain insight into a question or situation\nDivination (from Latin \"divinare\", 'to foresee, to foretell, to predict, to prophesy') is the attempt to gain insight into a question or situation by way of an occultic, standardized process or ritual. Used in various forms throughout history, diviners ascertain their interpretations of how a querent should proceed by reading signs, events, or omens, or through alleged contact or interaction with a supernatural agency.\nDivination can be seen as a systematic method with which to organize what appears to be disjointed, random facets of existence such that they provide insight into a problem at hand. If a distinction is to be made between divination and fortune-telling, divination has a more formal or ritualistic element and often contains a more social character, usually in a religious context, as seen in traditional African medicine. Fortune-telling, on the other hand, is a more everyday practice for personal purposes. Particular divination methods vary by culture and religion.\nDivination has long been criticized. In the modern era, it has been dismissed by the scientific community and skeptics as being superstitious; experiments do not support the idea that divination techniques can actually predict the future more reliably or precisely than would be possible without it. In antiquity it was attacked by philosophers such as the Academic skeptic Cicero in \"De Divinatione\" and the Pyrrhonist Sextus Empiricus in \"Against the Astrologers\". The satirist Lucian devoted an essay to Alexander the false prophet.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe Oracle of Amun at the Siwa Oasis was made famous when Alexander the Great visited it after conquering Egypt from Persia in 332 BC.\n or can be interpreted as categorically forbidding divination. However, some would claim that divination is indeed practiced in the Bible, such as in Exodus 28, when the Urim and Thummim are mentioned. Some would also say that Gideon also practiced divination, though when he uses a piece of fleece or wool in , he is not attempting to predict the outcome of an important battle; rather, he is communicating with God. Communicating with God through prayer may in some cases be considered divination; both are open, typically two-way conversations with God. In addition, the method of \"casting lots\" used in and to divide the conquered lands of Canaan between the twelve tribes is not seen by some as divination, but as done at the behest of God ().\nOracles and Greek divination.\nBoth oracles and seers in ancient Greece practiced divination. Oracles were the conduits for the gods on earth; their prophecies were understood to be the will of the gods verbatim. Because of the high demand for oracle consultations and the oracles\u2019 limited work schedule, they were not the main source of divination for the ancient Greeks. That role fell to the seers ().\nSeers were not in direct contact with the gods; instead, they were interpreters of signs provided by the gods. Seers used many methods to explicate the will of the gods including extispicy, bird signs, etc. They were more numerous than the oracles and did not keep a limited schedule; thus, they were highly valued by all Greeks, not just those with the capacity to travel to Delphi or other such distant sites.\nThe disadvantage of seers was that only direct yes-or-no questions could be answered. Oracles could answer more generalized questions, and seers often had to perform several sacrifices in order to get the most consistent answer. For example, if a general wanted to know if the omens were proper for him to advance on the enemy, he would ask his seer both that question and if it were better for him to remain on the defensive. If the seer gave consistent answers, the advice was considered valid.\nDuring battle, generals would frequently ask seers at both the campground (a process called the \"hiera\") and at the battlefield (called the \"sphagia\"). The hiera entailed the seer slaughtering a sheep and examining its liver for answers regarding a more generic question; the sphagia involved killing a young female goat by slitting its throat and noting the animal's last movements and blood flow. The battlefield sacrifice only occurred when two armies prepared for battle against each other. Neither force would advance until the seer revealed appropriate omens.\nBecause the seers had such power over influential individuals in ancient Greece, many were skeptical of the accuracy and honesty of the seers. The degree to which seers were honest depends entirely on the individual seers. Despite the doubt surrounding individual seers, the craft as a whole was well regarded and trusted by the Greeks, and the Stoics accounted for the validity of divination in their physics.\nMiddle Ages and Early Modern period.\nThe divination method of casting lots (Cleromancy) was used by the remaining eleven disciples of Jesus in to select a replacement for Judas Iscariot. Therefore, divination was arguably an accepted practice in the early church. However, divination became viewed as a pagan practice by Christian emperors during ancient Rome.\nIn 692 the Quinisext Council, also known as the \"Council in Trullo\" in the Eastern Orthodox Church, passed canons to eliminate pagan and divination practices. Fortune-telling and other forms of divination were widespread through the Middle Ages. In the constitution of 1572 and public regulations of 1661 of the Electorate of Saxony, capital punishment was used on those predicting the future. Laws forbidding divination practice continue to this day. The Waldensians sect were accused of practicing divination.\nSm\u00e5land is famous for \u00c5rsg\u00e5ng, a practice which occurred until the early 19th century in some parts of Sm\u00e5land. Generally occurring on Christmas and New Year's Eve, it is a practice in which one would fast and keep themselves away from light in a room until midnight to then complete a set of complex events to interpret symbols encountered throughout the journey to foresee the coming year.\nIn Islam, astrology (\"\u2018ilm ahkam al-nujum\"), the most widespread divinatory science, is the study of how celestial entities could be applied to the daily lives of people on earth. It is important to emphasize the practical nature of divinatory sciences because people from all socioeconomic levels and pedigrees sought the advice of astrologers to make important decisions in their lives. Astronomy was made a distinct science by intellectuals who did not agree with the former, although distinction may not have been made in daily practice, where astrology was technically outlawed and only tolerated if it was employed in public. Astrologers, trained as scientists and astronomers, were able to interpret the celestial forces that ruled the \"sub-lunar\" to predict a variety of information from lunar phases and drought to times of prayer and the foundation of cities. The courtly sanction and elite patronage of Muslim rulers benefited astrologers\u2019 intellectual statues.\nThe \u201cscience of the sand\u201d (\"\u2018ilm al-raml\"), otherwise translated as geomancy, is \u201cbased on the interpretation of figures traced on sand or other surface known as tetragrams.\u201d It is a good example of Islamic divination at a popular level. The core principle that meaning derives from a unique occupied position is identical to the core principle of astrology.\nLike astronomy, geomancy used deduction and computation to uncover significant prophecies as opposed to omens (\"\u2018ilm al-fa\u2019l\"), which were process of \u201creading\u201d visible random events to decipher the invisible realities from which they originated. It was upheld by prophetic tradition and relied almost exclusively on text, specifically the Qur\u2019an (which carried a table for guidance) and poetry, as a development of bibliomancy. The practice culminated in the appearance of the illustrated \u201cBooks of Omens\u201d (\"Falnama\") in the early 16th century, an embodiment of the apocalyptic fears as the end of the millennium in the Islamic calendar approached.\nDream interpretation, or oneiromancy \"(\u2018ilm ta\u2019bir al-ru\u2019ya\"), is more specific to Islam than other divinatory science, largely because of the Qur\u2019an\u2019s emphasis on the predictive dreams of Abraham, Yusuf, and Muhammad. The important delineation within the practice lies between \u201cincoherent dreams\u201d and \u201csound dreams,\u201d which were \u201ca part of prophecy\u201d or heavenly message. Dream interpretation was always tied to Islamic religious texts, providing a moral compass to those seeking advice. The practitioner needed to be skilled enough to apply the individual dream to general precedent while appraising the singular circumstances.\nThe power of text held significant weight in the \"science of letters\" \"(\u2018ilm al-huruf\"), the foundational principle being \"God created the world through His speech.\" The science began with the concept of language, specifically Arabic, as the expression of \"the essence of what it signifies.\" Once the believer understood this, while remaining obedient to God\u2019s will, they could uncover the essence and divine truth of the objects inscribed with Arabic like amulets and talismans through the study of the letters of the Qur\u2019an with alphanumeric computations.\nIn Islamic practice in Senegal and Gambia, just like many other West African countries, diviners and religious leaders and healers were interchangeable because Islam was closely related with esoteric practices (like divination), which were responsible for the regional spread of Islam. As scholars learned esoteric sciences, they joined local non-Islamic aristocratic courts, who quickly aligned divination and amulets with the \"proof of the power of Islamic religion.\" So strong was the idea of esoteric knowledge in West African Islam, diviners and magicians uneducated in Islamic texts and Arabic bore the same titles as those who did.\nFrom the beginning of Islam, there \"was (and is) still a vigorous debate about whether or not such [divinatory] practices were actually permissible under Islam,\u201d with some scholars like Abu-Hamid al Ghazili (d. 1111) objecting to the science of divination because he believed it bore too much similarity to pagan practices of invoking spiritual entities that were not God. Other scholars justified esoteric sciences by comparing a practitioner to \"a physician trying to heal the sick with the help of the same natural principles.\"\nMesoamerica.\nDivination was a central component of ancient Mesoamerican religious life. Many Aztec gods, including central creator gods, were described as diviners and were closely associated with sorcery. Tezcatlipoca is the patron of sorcerers and practitioners of magic. His name means \"smoking mirror,\" a reference to a device used for divinatory scrying. In the Mayan \"Popol Vuh\", the creator gods Xmucane and Xpiacoc perform divinatory hand casting during the creation of people. The Aztec \"Codex Borbonicus\" shows the original human couple, Oxomoco and Cipactonal, engaged in divining with kernels of maize. This primordial pair is associated with the ritual calendar, and the Aztecs considered them to be the first diviners.\nEvery civilization that developed in pre-Columbian Mexico, from the Olmecs to the Aztecs, practiced divination in daily life, both public and private. Scrying through the use of reflective water surfaces, mirrors, or the casting of lots were among the most widespread forms of divinatory practice. Visions derived from hallucinogens were another important form of divination, and are still widely used among contemporary diviners of Mexico. Among the more common hallucinogenic plants used in divination are morning glory, jimson weed, and peyote.\nContemporary divination in Asia.\nIndia and Nepal.\nTheyyam or \"theiyam\" in Malayalam - a south Indian language - is the process by which a devotee invites a Hindu god or goddess to use his or her body as a medium or channel and answer other devotees' questions. The same is called \"arulvaakku\" or \"arulvaak\" in Tamil, another south Indian language - Adhiparasakthi Siddhar Peetam is famous for arulvakku in Tamil Nadu. The people in and around Mangalore in Karnataka call the same, Buta Kola, \"paathri\" or \"darshin\"; in other parts of Karnataka, it is known by various names such as, \"prashnaavali\", \"vaagdaana\", \"asei\", \"aashirvachana\" and so on. In Nepal it is known as, \"Devta ka dhaamee\" or \"jhaakri\".\nIn English, the closest translation for these is, \"oracle.\" The Dalai Lama, who lives in exile in northern India, still consults an oracle known as the \"Nechung Oracle\", which is considered the official state oracle of the government of Tibet. The Dalai Lama has according to centuries-old custom, consulted the Nechung Oracle during the new year festivities of Losar.\nJapan.\nAlthough Japan retains a history of traditional and local methods of divination, such as \"onmy\u014dd\u014d\", contemporary divination in Japan, called \"uranai\", derives from outside sources. Contemporary methods of divination in Japan include both Western and Chinese astrology, geomancy or feng shui, tarot cards, I Ching (Book of Changes) divination, and physiognomy (methods of reading the body to identify traits).\nIn Japan, divination methods include Futomani from the Shinto tradition.\nPersonality types.\nPersonality typing as a form of divination has been prevalent in Japan since the 1980s. Various methods exist for divining personality type. Each attempt to reveal glimpses of an individual's destiny, productive and inhibiting traits, future parenting techniques, and compatibility in marriage. Personality type is increasingly important for young Japanese, who consider personality the driving factor of compatibility, given the ongoing marriage drought and birth rate decline in Japan.\nAn import to Japan, Chinese zodiac signs based on the birth year in 12 year cycles (rat, ox, tiger, hare, dragon, snake, horse, sheep, monkey, cock, dog, and boar) are frequently combined with other forms of divination, such as so-called 'celestial types' based on the planets (Saturn, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Mercury, or Uranus). Personality can also be divined using cardinal directions, the four elements (water, earth, fire, air), and yin-yang. Names can also lend important personality information under name classification which asserts that names bearing certain Japanese vowel sounds (a, i, u, e, o) share common characteristics. Numerology, which utilizes methods of divining 'birth numbers' from significant numbers such as birth date, may also reveal character traits of individuals.\nIndividuals can also assess their own and others' personalities according to physical characteristics. Blood type remains a popular form of divination from physiology. Stemming from Western influences, body reading or \"ninsou\", determines personality traits based on body measurements. The face is the most commonly analyzed feature, with eye size, pupil shape, mouth shape, and eyebrow shape representing the most important traits. An upturned mouth may be cheerful, and a triangle eyebrow may indicate that someone is strong-willed.\nMethods of assessment in daily life may include self-taken measurements or quizzes. As such, magazines targeted at women in their early-to-mid twenties feature the highest concentration of personality assessment guides. There are approximately 144 different women's magazines, known as \"nihon zashi koukoku kyoukai\", published in Japan aimed at this audience.\nJapanese tarot.\nThe adaptation of the Western divination method of tarot cards into Japanese culture presents a particularly unique example of contemporary divination as this adaptation mingles with Japan's robust visual culture. Japanese tarot cards are created by professional artists, advertisers, and fans of tarot. One tarot card collector claimed to have accumulated more than 1,500 Japan-made decks of tarot cards.\nJapanese tarot cards fall into diverse categories such as:\nThe images on tarot cards may come from images from Japanese popular culture, such as characters from manga and anime including Hello Kitty, or may feature cultural symbols. Tarot cards may adapt the images of Japanese historical figures, such as high priestess Himiko (170\u2013248CE) or imperial court wizard Abe no Seimei (921\u20131005CE) . Still others may feature images of cultural displacement, such as English knights, pentagrams, the Jewish Torah, or invented glyphs. The introduction of such cards began by the 1930s and reached prominence 1970s. Japanese tarot cards were originally created by men, often based on the Rider-Waite-Smith tarot published by the Rider Company in London in 1909. Since, the practice of Japanese tarot has become overwhelmingly feminine and intertwined with kawaii culture. Referring to the cuteness of tarot cards, Japanese model Kuromiya Niina was quoted as saying \"because the images are cute, even holding them is enjoyable.\" While these differences exist, Japanese tarot cards function similarly to their Western counterparts. Cards are shuffled and cut into piles then used to forecast the future, for spiritual reflection, or as a tool for self-understanding.\nTaiwan.\nA common act of divination in Taiwan is called the Poe. \u201cThe Poe\u201d translated to English means \u201cmoon boards\u201d. It consists of two wood or bamboo blocks cut into the shape of a crescent moon. The one edge is rounded while the other is flat; the two are mirror images. Both crescents are held out in one's palms and while kneeling, they are raised to the forehead level. Once in this position, the blocks are dropped and the future can be understood depending on their landing. If both fall flat side up or both fall rounded side up, that can be taken as a failure of the deity to agree. If the blocks land one rounded and one flat, the deity indicates \"Yes\", or positive. \u201cLaughing poe\u201d is when rounded sides land down and they rock before coming to a standstill. \u201cNegative poe\u201d is when the flat sides fall downward and abruptly stop; this indicates \"No\". When there is a positive fall, it is called \u201cSacred poe\u201d, although the negative falls are not usually taken seriously. As the blocks are being dropped the question is said in a murmur, and if the answer is yes, the blocks are dropped again. To make sure the answer is definitely a yes, the blocks must fall in a \u201cyes\u201d position three times in a row.\nA more serious type of divination is the Ki\u014d-\u00e1. There is a small wooden chair, and around the sides of the chair are small pieces of wood that can move up and down in their sockets, this causes a clicking sounds when the chair is moved in any way. Two men hold this chair by its legs before an altar, while the incense is being burned, and the deity is invited to descend onto the chair. It is seen that it is in the chair by an onset of motion. Eventually, the chair crashes onto a table prepared with wood chips and burlap. The characters on the table are then traced and these are said to be written by the deity who possessed the chair, these characters are then interpreted for the devotees.\nContemporary divination in Africa.\nDivination is widespread throughout Africa. Among many examples it is one of the central tenets of Serer religion in Senegal. Only those who have been initiated as Saltigues (the Serer high priests and priestesses) can divine the future. These are the \"hereditary rain priests\" whose role is both religious and medicinal.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8693", "revid": "18707019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8693", "title": "Diets of Nuremberg", "text": "Assembly of princes or estates in Nuremberg in the 17c\nThe Diets of Nuremberg, also called the Imperial Diets of Nuremberg, took place at different times between the Middle Ages and the 17th century.\nThe first Diet of Nuremberg, in 1211, elected the future emperor Frederick II of Hohenstaufen as German king.\nAt the Diet of 1356 the Emperor Charles IV issued the Golden Bull of 1356, which required each Holy Roman Emperor to summon the first Imperial Diet after his election at Nuremberg. Apart from that, a number of other diets were held there.\nImportant to Protestantism were the Diets of 1522 (\"First Diet of Nuremberg\"), 1524 (\"Second Diet of Nuremberg\") and 1532 (\"Third Diet of Nuremberg\").\nThe 1522 Diet of Nuremberg.\nThis Diet has become known mostly for the reaction of the papacy to the decision made on Luther at the Diet of Worms the previous year. The new pope, Adrian VI, sent his nuncio Francesco Chieregati to the Diet, to insist both that the Edict of Worms be executed and that action be taken promptly against Luther. This demand, however, was coupled with a promise of thorough reform in the Roman hierarchy, frankly admitting the partial guilt of the Vatican in the decline of the Church.\nIn the recess drafted on 9 February 1523, however, the German princes rejected this appeal. Using Adrian's admissions, they declared that they could not have it appear 'as though they wished to oppress evangelical truth and assist unchristian and evil abuses.'\nThe 1524 Diet of Nuremberg.\nThis Diet generally took the same line as the previous one. The Estates reiterated their decision from the previous Diet. The Cardinal-legate, Campeggio, who was present, showed his disgust at the behaviour of the Estates. On 18 April, the Estates decided to call 'a general gathering of the German nation', to meet at Speyer the following year and to decide what would be done until the meeting of the general council of the Church which they demanded. This resulted in the Diet of Speyer (1526), which in turn was followed by the Diet of Speyer (1529). The latter included the Protestation at Speyer."}
{"id": "8695", "revid": "388090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8695", "title": "Dr. Strangelove", "text": "1964 film directed by Stanley Kubrick\nDr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb, known simply and more commonly as Dr. Strangelove, is a 1964 black comedy film directed, co-written, and produced by Stanley Kubrick and starring Peter Sellers in three roles, including the title character. The film also stars George C. Scott with Sterling Hayden, Keenan Wynn, Slim Pickens, and Tracy Reed. The film, which satirizes the Cold War fears of a nuclear conflict between the Soviet Union and the United States, is loosely based on the thriller novel \"Red Alert\" (1958) by Peter George, who also co-wrote the screenplay with Kubrick and Terry Southern.\nThe story concerns an unhinged United States Air Force general who orders a pre-emptive nuclear attack on the Soviet Union. It separately follows the President of the United States, his advisors, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and a Royal Air Force exchange officer as they attempt to prevent the crew of a B-52 (who were following orders from the general) from bombing the Soviet Union and starting a nuclear war.\nThe film is often considered one of the best comedies ever made, as well as one of the greatest films of all time. In 1998, the American Film Institute ranked it twenty-sixth in its list of the best American movies (in the 2007 edition, the film ranked thirty-ninth), and in 2000, it was listed as number three on its list of the funniest American films. In 1989, the United States Library of Congress included \"Dr. Strangelove\" as one of the first 25 films selected for preservation in the National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nUnited States Air Force Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper is commander of Burpelson Air Force Base, which houses the 843rd Bomb Wing, flying B-52 bombers armed with hydrogen bombs. The planes are on airborne alert two hours from their targets inside the USSR.\nGeneral Ripper orders his executive officer, Group Captain Lionel Mandrake (an exchange officer from the Royal Air Force), to put the base on alert, confiscate all privately owned radios from base personnel and issue \"Wing Attack Plan R\" to the patrolling bombers. All the aircraft commence attack flights on the USSR and set their radios to allow communications only through their CRM 114 discriminators, which are designed to accept only communications preceded by a secret three-letter code known only to General Ripper. Happening upon a radio that had been missed earlier and hearing normal civilian broadcasting, Mandrake realizes that no attack order has been issued by the Pentagon and tries to stop Ripper, who locks them both in his office. Ripper tells Mandrake that he believes the Soviets have been fluoridating American water supplies to pollute the \"precious bodily fluids\" of Americans. Mandrake realizes Ripper has become insane.\nIn the War Room at the Pentagon, General Buck Turgidson briefs President Merkin Muffley and other officers about how \"Plan R\" enables a senior officer to launch a retaliatory nuclear attack on the Soviets if all superiors have been killed in a first strike on the United States. Trying every CRM code combination to issue a recall order would require two days, so Muffley orders the U.S. Army to storm the base and arrest General Ripper. Turgidson, noting the slim odds of recalling the planes in time, then proposes that Muffley not only let the attack proceed but send reinforcements. According to an unofficial study, this would result in \"modest and acceptable civilian casualties\" from the \"badly damaged and uncoordinated\" Soviet military remaining after the initial attack. Muffley rejects Turgidson's recommendation and instead brings Soviet ambassador Alexei de Sadeski into the War Room to telephone Soviet Premier Dimitri Kissov on the \"hotline\". Muffley warns the Premier of the impending attack and offers to reveal the targets, flight plans and defensive systems of the bombers so that the Soviets can protect themselves.\nAfter a heated discussion with the Premier, the ambassador informs President Muffley that the Soviet Union created a doomsday machine as a nuclear deterrent; it consists of many buried bombs jacketed with \"cobalt\u2013thorium G\", which are set to detonate automatically should any nuclear attack strike the country. The resulting nuclear fallout would then engulf the planet for 93 years, rendering the Earth's surface uninhabitable. The device cannot be deactivated, as it is programmed to explode if any such attempt is made. The President's wheelchair-using scientific advisor, German former Nazi Dr. Strangelove, points out that such a doomsday machine would only be an effective deterrent if everyone knew about it; de Sadeski replies that the Soviet Premier had planned to reveal its existence to the world the following week at the Party Congress.\nU.S. Army troops arrive at Burpelson and battle with the garrison. After General Ripper commits suicide, Mandrake identifies Ripper's CRM code from doodles on his desk blotter and relays it to the Pentagon. Using the code, Strategic Air Command successfully recalls all of the bombers except for one, commanded by Major T. J. \"King\" Kong, due to the radio equipment being damaged by a Soviet SAM. The Soviets hunt the bomber, but Kong flies below radar and switches targets due to dwindling fuel. As the plane approaches the new target, a Soviet ICBM site, the crew is unable to open the damaged bomb bay doors. Kong enters the bay and repairs the electrical wiring while straddling an H-bomb, whereupon the doors open and the bomb is dropped. Kong joyously hoots and waves his cowboy hat as he rides the falling bomb to his death.\nBack in the War Room, Dr. Strangelove recommends that the President gather several hundred thousand people to live in deep underground mines where the radiation will not penetrate. He suggests a 10:1 female-to-male ratio for a breeding program to repopulate the Earth once the radiation has subsided, a plan which gathers enthusiastic support from everyone. Worried that the Soviets will do the same, Turgidson warns about a \"mineshaft gap\" while de Sadeski secretly photographs the War Room. Dr. Strangelove declares he has a plan, then suddenly rises from his wheelchair and exclaims, \"Mein F\u00fchrer, I can walk!\" The film ends with a montage of nuclear explosions, accompanied by Vera Lynn's rendition of the song \"We'll Meet Again\".\nCast.\nPeter Sellers's multiple roles.\nColumbia Pictures agreed to finance the film if Peter Sellers played at least four major roles. The condition stemmed from the studio's opinion that much of the success of Kubrick's previous film \"Lolita\" (1962) was based on Sellers's performance in which his single character assumes a number of identities. Sellers had also played three roles in \"The Mouse That Roared\" (1959). Kubrick accepted the demand, later saying that \"such crass and grotesque stipulations are the \"sine qua non\" of the motion-picture business.\"\nSellers ended up playing three of the four roles written for him. He had been expected to play Air Force Major T. J. \"King\" Kong, the B-52 aircraft commander, but from the beginning Sellers was reluctant. He felt his workload was too heavy and he worried he would not properly portray the character's Texan English accent. Kubrick pleaded with him and he asked the screenwriter Terry Southern (who had been raised in Texas) to record a tape with Kong's lines spoken in the correct accent, which he practiced using Southern's tapes. But after the start of shooting in the aircraft Sellers sprained his ankle and could no longer work in the cramped aircraft mockup.\nSellers improvised much of his dialogue, with Kubrick incorporating the ad-libs into the written screenplay so that the improvised lines became part of the canonical screenplay, a practice known as retroscripting. \nGroup Captain Lionel Mandrake.\nAccording to film critic Alexander Walker, the author of biographies of both Sellers and Kubrick, the role of Group Captain Lionel Mandrake was the easiest of the three for Sellers to play, since he was aided by his experience of mimicking his superiors while serving in the RAF during World War II. There is also a heavy resemblance to Sellers' friend and occasional co-star Terry-Thomas and the prosthetic-limbed RAF flying ace Sir Douglas Bader.\nPresident Merkin Muffley.\nFor his performance as President Merkin Muffley, Sellers assumed a Midwestern American English accent. Sellers drew inspiration for the role from Adlai Stevenson, a former Illinois governor who was the Democratic candidate for the 1952 and 1956 presidential elections and the U.N. ambassador during the Cuban Missile Crisis.\nIn early takes, Sellers simulated cold symptoms to emphasize the character's apparent weakness. That caused frequent laughter among the film crew, ruining several takes. Kubrick ultimately found this comic portrayal inappropriate, feeling that Muffley should be a serious character. In later takes Sellers played the role straight, though the President's cold is still evident in several scenes.\nDr. Strangelove.\nDr. Strangelove is a scientist and former Nazi, suggesting Operation Paperclip, the US effort to recruit top German technical talent at the end of World War II. He serves as President Muffley's scientific adviser in the War Room. When General Turgidson wonders aloud to Mr. Staines (Jack Creley), what kind of name \"Strangelove\" is, possibly a \"Kraut name\", Staines responds that Strangelove's original German surname was \"Merkw\u00fcrdigliebe\" (\"Strange love\" in German) and that \"he changed it when he became a citizen\". Strangelove accidentally addresses the president as \"Mein F\u00fchrer\" twice in the film. Dr. Strangelove did not appear in the book \"Red Alert\".\nThe character is an amalgamation of RAND Corporation strategist Herman Kahn, rocket scientist Wernher von Braun (a central figure in Nazi Germany's rocket development program recruited to the US after the war), and Edward Teller, the \"father of the hydrogen bomb\". Rumors claimed that the character was based on Henry Kissinger, but Kubrick and Sellers denied this; Sellers said: \"Strangelove was never modeled after Kissinger\u2014that's a popular misconception. It was always Wernher von Braun.\" Furthermore, Henry Kissinger points out in his memoirs that at the time of the writing of \"Dr. Strangelove\", he was a little-known academic.\nThe wheelchair-using Strangelove furthers a Kubrick trope of the menacing, seated antagonist, first depicted in \"Lolita\" through the character \"Dr. Zaempf\". Strangelove's accent was influenced by that of Austrian-American photographer Weegee, who worked for Kubrick as a special photographic effects consultant. Strangelove's appearance echoes the mad scientist archetype as seen in the character Rotwang in Fritz Lang's film \"Metropolis\" (1927). Sellers's Strangelove takes from Rotwang the single black gloved hand (which, in Rotwang's case is mechanical, because of a lab accident), the wild hair and, most important, his ability to avoid being controlled by political power. According to Alexander Walker, Sellers improvised Dr. Strangelove's lapse into the Nazi salute, borrowing one of Kubrick's black leather gloves for the uncontrollable hand that makes the gesture. Dr. Strangelove apparently has alien hand syndrome. Kubrick wore the gloves on the set to avoid being burned when handling hot lights, and Sellers, recognizing the potential connection to Lang's work, found them to be menacing.\nSlim Pickens as Major T. J. \"King\" Kong.\nSlim Pickens, an established character actor and veteran of many Western films, was eventually chosen to replace Sellers as Major Kong after Sellers' injury. Terry Southern's biographer, Lee Hill, said the part was originally written with John Wayne in mind, and that Wayne was offered the role after Sellers was injured, but he immediately turned it down. Dan Blocker of the \"Bonanza\" western television series was approached to play the part, but according to Southern, Blocker's agent rejected the script as being \"too pinko\". Kubrick then recruited Pickens, whom he knew from his brief involvement in a Marlon Brando western film project that was eventually filmed as \"One-Eyed Jacks\".\nHis fellow actor James Earl Jones recalls, \"He was Major Kong on and off the set\u2014he didn't change a thing\u2014his temperament, his language, his behavior.\" Pickens was not told that the movie was a black comedy, and he was only given the script for scenes he was in, to get him to play it \"straight\".\nKubrick's biographer John Baxter explained, in the documentary \"Inside the Making of Dr. Strangelove\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As it turns out, Slim Pickens had never left the United States. He had to hurry and get his first passport. He arrived on the set, and somebody said, \"Gosh, he's arrived in costume!\", not realizing that that's how he always dressed\u00a0... with the cowboy hat and the fringed jacket and the cowboy boots\u2014and that he wasn't putting on the character\u2014that's the way he talked.\nPickens, who had previously played only supporting and character roles, said that his appearance as Maj. Kong greatly improved his career. He later commented, \"After \"Dr. Strangelove\", my salary jumped five times, and assistant directors started saying 'Hey, Slim' instead of 'Hey, you'.\"\nGeorge C. Scott as General Buck Turgidson.\nGeorge C. Scott played the role of General Buck Turgidson, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In this capacity General Turgidson was the nation's highest-ranking military officer and the principal military advisor to the President and the National Security Council. He is seen during most of the movie advising President Muffley on the best steps to take in order to stop the fleet of B-52 Stratofortresses that was deployed by Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper to drop nuclear bombs on Soviet soil.\nAccording to James Earl Jones, Kubrick tricked Scott into playing the role of Gen. Turgidson in a much more outlandish manner than Scott was comfortable doing. Kubrick talked Scott into doing absurd \"practice\" takes, which Kubrick told Scott would never be used, as a way to warm up for the \"real\" takes. Kubrick used these takes rather than the more restrained ones in the final film, causing Scott to swear never to work with Kubrick again.\nDuring the filming, Kubrick and Scott had different opinions regarding certain scenes, but Kubrick obtained Scott's compliance largely by beating him at chess, which they played frequently on the set.\nProduction.\nNovel and screenplay.\nStanley Kubrick started with nothing but a vague idea to make a thriller about a nuclear accident that built on the widespread Cold War fear for survival. While doing research, Kubrick gradually became aware of the subtle and paradoxical \"balance of terror\" between nuclear powers. At Kubrick's request, Alastair Buchan (the head of the Institute for Strategic Studies) recommended the thriller novel \"Red Alert\" by Peter George. Kubrick was impressed with the book, which had also been praised by game theorist and future Nobel Prize in Economics winner Thomas Schelling in an article written for the \"Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists\" and reprinted in \"The Observer\", and immediately bought the film rights. In 2006, Schelling wrote that conversations between Kubrick, Schelling, and George in late 1960 about a treatment of \"Red Alert\" updated with intercontinental missiles eventually led to the making of the film.\nIn collaboration with George, Kubrick started writing a screenplay based on the book. While writing the screenplay, they benefited from some brief consultations with Schelling and later, Herman Kahn. In following the tone of the book, Kubrick originally intended to film the story as a serious drama. However, he began to see comedy inherent in the idea of mutual assured destruction as he wrote the first draft. He later said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My idea of doing it as a nightmare comedy came in the early weeks of working on the screenplay. I found that in trying to put meat on the bones and to imagine the scenes fully, one had to keep leaving out of it things which were either absurd or paradoxical, in order to keep it from being funny; and these things seemed to be close to the heart of the scenes in question.\nAmong the titles that Kubrick considered for the film were \"Dr. Doomsday or: How to Start World War III Without Even Trying\", \"Dr. Strangelove's Secret Uses of Uranus\", and \"Wonderful Bomb\". After deciding to make the film a black comedy, Kubrick brought in Terry Southern as a co-writer in late 1962. The choice was influenced by reading Southern's comic novel \"The Magic Christian\", which Kubrick had received as a gift from Peter Sellers, and which itself became a Sellers film in 1969. Southern made important contributions to the film, but his role led to a rift between Kubrick and Peter George; after \"Life\" magazine published a photo-essay on Southern in August 1964 which implied that Southern had been the script's principal author\u2014a misperception neither Kubrick nor Southern did much to dispel\u2014 George wrote a letter to the magazine, published in its September 1964 issue, in which he pointed out that he had both written the film's source novel and collaborated on various incarnations of the script over a period of ten months, whereas \"Southern was briefly employed ... to do some additional rewriting for Kubrick and myself and fittingly received a screenplay credit in third place behind Mr. Kubrick and myself.\"\nSets and filming.\n\"Dr. Strangelove\" was filmed at Shepperton Studios, near London, as Sellers was in the middle of a divorce at the time and unable to leave England. The sets occupied three main sound stages: the Pentagon War Room, the B-52 Stratofortress bomber and the last one containing both the motel room and General Ripper's office and outside corridor. The studio's buildings were also used as the Air Force base exterior. The film's set design was done by Ken Adam, the production designer of several \"James Bond\" films (at the time he had already worked on \"Dr. No\"). The black and white cinematography was by Gilbert Taylor, and the film was edited by Anthony Harvey and an uncredited Kubrick. The original musical score for the film was composed by Laurie Johnson and the special effects were by Wally Veevers. The opening theme is an instrumental version of \"Try a Little Tenderness.\" The theme of the chorus from the bomb run scene is a modification of \"When Johnny Comes Marching Home.\" Sellers and Kubrick got along well during the film's production and shared a love of photography.\nFor the War Room, Ken Adam first designed a two-level set which Kubrick initially liked, only to decide later that it was not what he wanted. Adam next began work on the design that was used in the film, an expressionist set that was compared with \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\" and Fritz Lang's \"Metropolis\". It was an enormous concrete room ( long and wide, with a -high ceiling) suggesting a bomb shelter, with a triangular shape (based on Kubrick's idea that this particular shape would prove the most resistant against an explosion). One side of the room was covered with gigantic strategic maps reflecting in a shiny black floor inspired by dance scenes in Fred Astaire films. In the middle of the room there was a large circular table lit from above by a circle of lamps, suggesting a poker table. Kubrick insisted that the table would be covered with green baize (although this could not be seen in the black and white film) to reinforce the actors' impression that they are playing 'a game of poker for the fate of the world.' Kubrick asked Adam to build the set ceiling in concrete to force the director of photography to use only the on-set lights from the circle of lamps. Moreover, each lamp in the circle of lights was carefully placed and tested until Kubrick was happy with the result.\nLacking cooperation from the Pentagon in the making of the film, the set designers reconstructed the aircraft cockpit to the best of their ability by comparing the cockpit of a B-29 Superfortress and a single photograph of the cockpit of a B-52 and relating this to the geometry of the B-52's fuselage. The B-52 was state-of-the-art in the 1960s, and its cockpit was off-limits to the film crew. When some United States Air Force personnel were invited to view the reconstructed B-52 cockpit, they said that \"it was absolutely correct, even to the little black box which was the CRM.\" It was so accurate that Kubrick was concerned about whether Adam's team had carried out all its research legally.\nIn several shots of the B-52 flying over the polar ice en route to Russia, the shadow of the actual camera plane, a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress, is visible on the icecap below. The B-52 was a scale model composited into the Arctic footage, which was sped up to create a sense of jet speed. Home movie footage included in \"Inside the Making of Dr. Strangelove\" on the 2001 Special Edition DVD release of the film shows clips of the B-17 with a cursive \"Dr. Strangelove\" painted over the rear entry hatch on the right side of the fuselage.\nIn 1967, some of the flying footage from \"Dr. Strangelove\" was re-used in The Beatles' television film \"Magical Mystery Tour\". As told by editor Roy Benson in the BBC Radio Documentary \"Celluloid Beatles\", the production team of \"Magical Mystery Tour\" lacked footage to cover the sequence for the song \"Flying.\" Benson had access to the aerial footage filmed for the B-52 sequences of \"Dr. Strangelove\", which was stored at Shepperton Studios. The use of the footage prompted Kubrick to call Benson to complain.\n\"Fail Safe\".\n\"Red Alert\" author Peter George collaborated on the screenplay with Kubrick and satirist Terry Southern. \"Red Alert\" was more solemn than its film version, and it did not include the character Dr. Strangelove, though the main plot and technical elements were quite similar. A novelization of the actual film, rather than a reprint of the original novel, was published by Peter George, based on an early draft in which the narrative is bookended by the account of aliens, who, having arrived at a desolated Earth, try to piece together what has happened. It was reissued in October 2015 by Candy Jar Books, featuring never-before-published material on Strangelove's early career.\nDuring the filming of \"Dr. Strangelove\", Stanley Kubrick learned that \"Fail Safe\", a film with a similar theme, was being produced. Although \"Fail Safe\" was to be an ultrarealistic thriller, Kubrick feared that its plot resemblance would damage his film's box office potential, especially if it were released first. Indeed, the novel \"Fail-Safe\" (on which the film is based) is so similar to \"Red Alert\" that Peter George sued on charges of plagiarism and settled out of court.\nWhat worried Kubrick the most was that \"Fail Safe\" boasted the acclaimed director Sidney Lumet and the first-rate dramatic actors Henry Fonda as the American president and Walter Matthau as the advisor to the Pentagon, Professor Groeteschele. Kubrick decided to throw a legal wrench into \"Fail Safe\"'s production gears. Lumet recalled in the documentary \"Inside the Making of Dr. Strangelove\": \"We started casting. Fonda was already set\u00a0... which of course meant a big commitment in terms of money. I was set, Walter [Bernstein, the screenwriter] was set\u00a0... And suddenly, this lawsuit arrived, filed by Stanley Kubrick and Columbia Pictures.\"\nKubrick argued that \"Fail Safe\"'s own source novel \"Fail-Safe\" (1962) had been plagiarized from Peter George's \"Red Alert\", to which Kubrick owned creative rights. He pointed out unmistakable similarities in intentions between the characters Groeteschele and Strangelove. The plan worked, and the suit was settled out of court, with the agreement that Columbia Pictures, which had financed and was distributing \"Strangelove\", also buy \"Fail Safe\", which had been an independently financed production. Kubrick insisted that the studio release his movie first, and \"Fail Safe\" opened eight months after \"Dr. Strangelove\", to critical acclaim but mediocre ticket sales.\nEnding.\nThe end of the film shows Dr. Strangelove exclaiming, \"\"Mein F\u00fchrer,\" I can walk!\" before cutting to footage of nuclear explosions, with Vera Lynn and her audience singing \"We'll Meet Again\". This footage comes from nuclear tests such as shot \"Baker\" of Operation Crossroads at Bikini Atoll, the Trinity test, a test from Operation Sandstone and the hydrogen bomb tests from Operation Redwing and Operation Ivy. In some shots, old warships (such as the German heavy cruiser \"Prinz Eugen\"), which were used as targets, are plainly visible. In others, the smoke trails of rockets used to create a calibration backdrop can be seen. Former \"Goon Show\" writer and friend of Sellers Spike Milligan was credited with suggesting Vera Lynn's song for the ending.\nOriginal ending.\nIt was originally planned for the film to end with a scene that depicted everyone in the War Room involved in a pie fight. Accounts vary as to why the pie fight was cut. In a 1969 interview, Kubrick said, \"I decided it was farce and not consistent with the satiric tone of the rest of the film.\" Critic Alexander Walker observed that \"the cream pies were flying around so thickly that people lost definition, and you couldn't really say whom you were looking at.\" Nile Southern, son of screenwriter Terry Southern, suggested the fight was intended to be less jovial: \"Since they were laughing, it was unusable, because instead of having that totally black, which would have been amazing, like, this blizzard, which in a sense is metaphorical for all of the missiles that are coming, as well, you just have these guys having a good old time. So, as Kubrick later said, 'it was a disaster of Homeric proportions.'\"\nEffects of the Kennedy assassination on the film.\nA first test screening of the film was scheduled for November 22, 1963, the day of the assassination of John F. Kennedy. The film was just weeks from its scheduled premiere, but because of the assassination, the release was delayed until late January 1964, as it was felt that the public was in no mood for such a film any sooner.\nDuring post-production, one line by Slim Pickens, \"a fella could have a pretty good weekend in Dallas with all that stuff\", was dubbed to change \"Dallas\" to \"Vegas\", since Dallas was where Kennedy was killed. The original reference to Dallas survives in the English audio of the French-subtitled version of the film.\nThe assassination also serves as another possible reason that the pie-fight scene was cut. In the scene, after Muffley takes a pie in the face, General Turgidson exclaims: \"Gentlemen! Our gallant young president has been struck down in his prime!\" Editor Anthony Harvey stated that the scene \"would have stayed, except that Columbia Pictures were horrified, and thought it would offend the president's family.\" Kubrick and others have said that the scene had already been cut before preview night because it was inconsistent with the rest of the film.\nRerelease in 1994.\nIn 1994, the film was re-released. While the 1964 release used a 1.85:1 aspect ratio, the new print was in the slightly squarer 1.66:1 (5:3) ratio that Kubrick had originally intended.\nThemes.\nSatirizing the Cold War.\n\"Dr. Strangelove\" ridicules nuclear war planning. It mocks numerous contemporary Cold War attitudes such as the \"missile gap\" but it primarily directs its satire on the theory of mutually assured destruction (MAD), in which each side is supposed to be deterred from a nuclear war by the prospect of a universal cataclysm regardless of who \"won\". Military strategist and former physicist Herman Kahn, in the book \"On Thermonuclear War\" (1960), used the theoretical example of a \"doomsday machine\" to illustrate the limitations of MAD, which was developed by John von Neumann.\nThe concept of such a machine is consistent with MAD doctrine when it is logically pursued to its conclusion. It thus worried Kahn that the military might like the idea of a doomsday machine and build one. Kahn, a leading critic of MAD and the Eisenhower administration's doctrine of massive retaliation upon the slightest provocation by the USSR, considered MAD to be foolish bravado, and urged America to instead plan for proportionality, and thus even a limited nuclear war. With this reasoning, Kahn became one of the architects of the flexible response doctrine which, while superficially resembling MAD, allowed for the possibility of responding to a limited nuclear strike with a proportional, or calibrated, return of fire (see \"Conflict escalation\").\nKahn educated Kubrick on the concept of the semi-realistic \"cobalt-thorium G\" doomsday machine, and then Kubrick used the concept for the film. Kahn in his writings and talks would often come across as cold and calculating, for example, with his use of the term \"megadeaths\" and in his willingness to estimate how many human lives the United States could lose and still rebuild economically. Kahn's dispassionate attitude towards millions of deaths is reflected in Turgidson's remark to the president about the outcome of a preemptive nuclear war: \"Mr. President, I'm not saying we wouldn't get our hair mussed. But I do say no more than ten to twenty million killed, tops, uh, depending on the breaks.\" Turgidson has a binder that is labelled \"World Targets in Megadeaths,\" a term coined in 1953 by Kahn and popularized in his 1960 book \"On Thermonuclear War\".\nThe fallout-shelter-network proposal mentioned in the film, with its inherently high radiation protection characteristics, has similarities and contrasts to that of the real Swiss civil defense network. Switzerland has an overcapacity of nuclear fallout shelters for the country's population size, and by law, new homes must still be built with a fallout shelter. If the US did that, it would violate the spirit of MAD and, according to MAD adherents, allegedly destabilize the situation because the US could launch a first strike and its population would largely survive a retaliatory second strike (see MAD \u00a7 Theory).\nTo rebut early 1960s novels and Hollywood films like \"Fail-Safe\" and \"Dr. Strangelove\", which raised questions about US control over nuclear weapons, the Air Force produced a documentary film, \"SAC Command Post\", to demonstrate its responsiveness to presidential command and its tight control over nuclear weapons. However, later academic research into declassified documents showed that U.S. military commanders had been given presidentially-authorized pre-delegation for the use of nuclear weapons during the early Cold War, showing that this aspect of the film's plot was plausible.\nThe characters of Buck Turgidson and Jack Ripper both satirize the real-life Gen. Curtis LeMay of the Strategic Air Command.\nSexual themes.\nIn the months following the film's release, director Stanley Kubrick received a fan letter from Legrace G. Benson of the Department of History of Art at Cornell University interpreting the film as being sexually-layered. The director wrote back to Benson and confirmed the interpretation, \"Seriously, you are the first one who seems to have noticed the sexual framework from intromission (the planes going in) to the last spasm (Kong's ride down and detonation at target).\"\nRelease.\nThe film was a popular success, earning US$4,420,000 in rentals in North America during its initial theatrical release.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Dr. Strangelove\" is Kubrick's highest-rated film on Rotten Tomatoes, holding a 98% approval rating based on 96 reviews, with an average rating of 9.10/10. The site's summary states that \"Stanley Kubrick's brilliant Cold War satire remains as funny and razor-sharp today as it was in 1964.\" The film also holds a score of 97 out of 100 on Metacritic, based on 32 reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim.\" The film is ranked number 7 in the All-Time High Scores chart of Metacritic's Video/DVD section. It was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.\n\"Dr. Strangelove\" is on Roger Ebert's list of \"The Great Movies\", and he described it as \"arguably the best political satire of the century\". One of the most celebrated of all film comedies, in 1998, \"Time Out\" conducted a reader's poll and \"Dr. Strangelove\" was voted the 47th greatest film of all time. \"Entertainment Weekly\" voted it at No. 14 on their list of \"100 Greatest Movies of All Time\". in 2002, it was ranked as the 5th best film in \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll of best films. John Patterson of \"The Guardian\" wrote, \"There had been nothing in comedy like \"Dr Strangelove\" ever before. All the gods before whom the America of the stolid, paranoid 50s had genuflected\u2014the Bomb, the Pentagon, the National Security State, the President himself, Texan masculinity and the alleged Commie menace of water-fluoridation\u2014went into the wood-chipper and never got the same respect ever again.\" It is also listed as number 26 on \"Empire's 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\", and in 2010 it was listed by \"Time\" magazine as one of the 100 best films since the publication's inception in 1923. The Writers Guild of America ranked its screenplay the 12th best ever written.\nIn 2000, readers of \"Total Film\" magazine voted it the 24th greatest comedic film of all time. The film ranked 42nd in BBCs 2015 list of the 100 greatest American films. The film was selected as the 2nd best comedy of all time in a poll of 253 film critics from 52 countries conducted by the BBC in 2017.\nStudio response.\nColumbia Pictures' early reaction to \"Dr. Strangelove\" was anything but enthusiastic. In \"Notes From The War Room\", in the summer 1994 issue of \"Grand Street\" magazine, co-screenwriter Terry Southern recalled that, as production neared the end, \"It was about this time that word began to reach us, reflecting concern as to the nature of the film in production. Was it anti-American? Or just anti-military? And the jackpot question: Was it, in fact, anti-American to whatever extent it was anti-military?\"\nSouthern recalled how Kubrick grew concerned about seeming apathy and distancing by studio heads Abe Schneider and Mo Rothman, and by Columbia's characterization of the film as \"just a zany, novelty flick which did not reflect the views of the corporation in any way.\" Southern noted that Rothman was in \"prominent attendance\" at a ceremony in 1989 when the Library of Congress announced it as one of the first 25 films on the National Film Registry.\nAccolades.\nThe film ranked No. 32 on \"TV Guide\"'s list of the 50 Greatest Movies on TV (and Video).\nAmerican Film Institute included the film as #26 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies, #3 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs, #64 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes (\"Gentlemen, you can't fight in here! This is the War Room!\") and #39 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition).\nPotential sequel.\nIn 1995, Kubrick enlisted Terry Southern to script a sequel titled \"Son of Strangelove\". Kubrick had Terry Gilliam in mind to direct. The script was never completed, but index cards laying out the story's basic structure were found among Southern's papers after he died in October 1995. It was set largely in underground bunkers, where Dr. Strangelove had taken refuge with a group of women.\nIn 2013, Gilliam commented, \"I was told after Kubrick died\u2014by someone who had been dealing with him\u2014that he had been interested in trying to do another \"Strangelove\" with me directing. I never knew about that until after he died but I would have loved to.\"\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "8697", "revid": "40917049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8697", "title": "DNA ligase", "text": "Class of enzymes\nDNA ligase is a type of enzyme that facilitates the joining of DNA strands together by catalyzing the formation of a phosphodiester bond. It plays a role in repairing single-strand breaks in duplex DNA in living organisms, but some forms (such as DNA ligase IV) may specifically repair double-strand breaks (i.e. a break in both complementary strands of DNA). Single-strand breaks are repaired by DNA ligase using the complementary strand of the double helix as a template, with DNA ligase creating the final phosphodiester bond to fully repair the DNA.\nDNA ligase is used in both DNA repair and DNA replication (see \"Mammalian ligases\"). In addition, DNA ligase has extensive use in molecular biology laboratories for recombinant DNA experiments (see \"Research applications\"). Purified DNA ligase is used in gene cloning to join DNA molecules together to form recombinant DNA.\nEnzymatic mechanism.\nThe mechanism of DNA ligase is to form two covalent phosphodiester bonds between 3' hydroxyl ends of one nucleotide (\"acceptor\"), with the 5' phosphate end of another (\"donor\"). Two ATP molecules are consumed for each phosphodiester bond formed. AMP is required for the ligase reaction, which proceeds in four steps:\nLigase will also work with blunt ends, although higher enzyme concentrations and different reaction conditions are required.\nTypes.\n\"E. coli\".\nThe \"E. coli\" DNA ligase is encoded by the \"lig\" gene. DNA ligase in \"E. coli\", as well as most prokaryotes, uses energy gained by cleaving nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to create the phosphodiester bond. It does not ligate blunt-ended DNA except under conditions of molecular crowding with polyethylene glycol, and cannot join RNA to DNA efficiently.\nThe activity of E. coli DNA ligase can be enhanced by DNA polymerase at the right concentrations. Enhancement only works when the concentrations of the DNA polymerase 1 are much lower than the DNA fragments to be ligated. When the concentrations of Pol I DNA polymerases are higher, it has an adverse effect on E. coli DNA ligase\nT4.\nThe DNA ligase from bacteriophage T4 (a bacteriophage that infects \"Escherichia coli\" bacteria). The T4 ligase is the most-commonly used in laboratory research. It can ligate either cohesive or blunt ends of DNA, oligonucleotides, as well as RNA and RNA-DNA hybrids, but not single-stranded nucleic acids. It can also ligate blunt-ended DNA with much greater efficiency than \"E. coli\" DNA ligase. Unlike \"E. coli\" DNA ligase, T4 DNA ligase cannot utilize NAD and it has an absolute requirement for ATP as a cofactor. Some engineering has been done to improve the \"in vitro\" activity of T4 DNA ligase; one successful approach, for example, tested T4 DNA ligase fused to several alternative DNA binding proteins and found that the constructs with either p50 or NF-kB as fusion partners were over 160% more active in blunt-end ligations for cloning purposes than wild type T4 DNA ligase. A typical reaction for inserting a fragment into a plasmid vector would use about 0.01 (sticky ends) to 1 (blunt ends) units of ligase. The optimal incubation temperature for T4 DNA ligase is 16\u00a0\u00b0C.\nBacteriophage T4 ligase mutants have increased sensitivity to both UV irradiation and the alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate indicating that DNA ligase is employed in the repair of the DNA damages caused by these agents.\nMammalian.\nIn mammals, there are four specific types of ligase.\nDNA ligase from eukaryotes and some microbes uses adenosine triphosphate (ATP) rather than NAD.\nThermostable.\nDerived from a thermophilic bacterium, the enzyme is stable and active at much higher temperatures than conventional DNA ligases. Its half-life is 48 hours at 65\u00a0\u00b0C and greater than 1\u00a0hour at 95\u00a0\u00b0C. Ampligase DNA Ligase has been shown to be active for at least 500 thermal cycles (94\u00a0\u00b0C/80\u00a0\u00b0C) or 16 hours of cycling.10\u00a0This exceptional thermostability permits extremely high hybridization stringency and ligation specificity.\nMeasurement of activity.\nThere are at least three different units used to measure the activity of DNA ligase:\nResearch applications.\nDNA ligases have become indispensable tools in modern molecular biology research for generating recombinant DNA sequences. For example, DNA ligases are used with restriction enzymes to insert DNA fragments, often genes, into plasmids.\nControlling the optimal temperature is a vital aspect of performing efficient recombination experiments involving the ligation of cohesive-ended fragments. Most experiments use T4 DNA Ligase (isolated from bacteriophage T4), which is most active at 37\u00a0\u00b0C. However, for optimal ligation efficiency with cohesive-ended fragments (\"sticky ends\"), the optimal enzyme temperature needs to be balanced with the melting temperature Tm of the sticky ends being ligated, the homologous pairing of the sticky ends will not be stable because the high temperature disrupts hydrogen bonding. A ligation reaction is most efficient when the sticky ends are already stably annealed, and disruption of the annealing ends would therefore result in low ligation efficiency. The shorter the overhang, the lower the Tm.\nSince blunt-ended DNA fragments have no cohesive ends to anneal, the melting temperature is not a factor to consider within the normal temperature range of the ligation reaction. The limiting factor in blunt end ligation is not the activity of the ligase but rather the number of alignments between DNA fragment ends that occur. The most efficient ligation temperature for blunt-ended DNA would therefore be the temperature at which the greatest number of alignments can occur. The majority of blunt-ended ligations are carried out at 14-25\u00a0\u00b0C overnight. The absence of stably annealed ends also means that the ligation efficiency is lowered, requiring a higher ligase concentration to be used.\nA novel use of DNA ligase can be seen in the field of nano chemistry, specifically in DNA origami. \u00a0DNA based self-assembly principles have proven useful for organizing nanoscale objects, such as biomolecules, nanomachines, nanoelectronic and photonic component. Assembly of such nano structure requires the creation of an intricate mesh of DNA molecules. Although DNA self-assembly is possible without any outside help using different substrates such as provision of catatonic surface of Aluminium foil, DNA ligase can provide the enzymatic assistance that is required to make DNA lattice structure from DNA over hangs.\nHistory.\nThe first DNA ligase was purified and characterized in 1967 by the Gellert, Lehman, Richardson, and Hurwitz laboratories. It was first purified and characterized by Weiss and Richardson using a six-step chromatographic-fractionation process beginning with elimination of cell debris and addition of streptomycin, followed by several Diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)-cellulose column washes and a final phosphocellulose fractionation. The final extract contained 10% of the activity initially recorded in the\u00a0\"E. coli\u00a0\"media; along the process it was discovered that ATP and Mg++ were necessary to optimize the reaction. The common commercially available DNA ligases were originally discovered in bacteriophage T4, \"E. coli\" and other bacteria.\nDisorders.\nGenetic deficiencies in human DNA ligases have been associated with clinical syndromes marked by immunodeficiency, radiation sensitivity, and developmental abnormalities,\u00a0 LIG4 syndrome (Ligase IV syndrome) is a rare disease associated with mutations in DNA ligase 4 and interferes with dsDNA break-repair mechanisms. Ligase IV syndrome causes immunodeficiency in individuals and is commonly associated with microcephaly and marrow hypoplasia. A list of prevalent diseases caused by lack of or malfunctioning of DNA ligase is as follows.\nXeroderma pigmentosum.\nXeroderma pigmentosum, which is commonly known as XP, is an inherited condition characterized by an extreme sensitivity to ultraviolet (UV) rays from sunlight. This condition mostly affects the eyes and areas of skin exposed to the sun. Some affected individuals also have problems involving the nervous system.\nAtaxia-telangiectasia.\nMutations in the\u00a0ATM\u00a0gene cause\u00a0ataxia\u2013telangiectasia. The\u00a0ATM\u00a0gene provides instructions for making a protein that helps control\u00a0cell\u00a0division\u00a0and is involved in DNA repair. This protein plays an important role in the normal development and activity of several body systems, including the nervous system and immune system. The ATM protein assists cells in recognizing damaged or broken DNA strands and coordinates DNA repair by activating enzymes that fix the broken strands. Efficient repair of damaged DNA strands helps maintain the stability of the cell's genetic information. Affected children typically develop difficulty walking, problems with balance and hand coordination, involuntary jerking movements (chorea), muscle twitches (myoclonus), and disturbances in nerve function (neuropathy). The movement problems typically cause people to require wheelchair assistance by adolescence. People with this disorder also have slurred speech and trouble moving their eyes to look side-to-side (oculomotor apraxia).\nFanconi Anemia.\nFanconi anemia (FA) is a rare, inherited blood disorder that leads to bone marrow failure. FA prevents bone marrow from making enough new blood cells for the body to work normally. FA also can cause the bone marrow to make many faulty blood cells. This can lead to serious health problems, such as leukemia.\nBloom syndrome.\nBloom syndrome results in skin that is sensitive to sun exposure, and usually the development of a butterfly-shaped patch of reddened skin across the nose and cheeks. A skin rash can also appear on other areas that are typically exposed to the sun, such as the back of the hands and the forearms. Small clusters of enlarged blood vessels (telangiectases) often appear in the rash; telangiectases can also occur in the eyes. Other skin features include patches of skin that are lighter or darker than the surrounding areas (hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation respectively). These patches appear on areas of the skin that are not exposed to the sun, and their development is not related to the rashes.\nAs a drug target.\nIn recent studies, human DNA ligase I was used in Computer-aided drug design to identify DNA ligase inhibitors as possible therapeutic agents to treat cancer. Since excessive cell growth is a hallmark of cancer development, targeted chemotherapy that disrupts the functioning of DNA ligase can impede adjuvant cancer forms. Furthermore, it has been shown that DNA ligases can be broadly divided into two categories, namely, ATP- and NAD+-dependent. Previous research has shown that although NAD+-dependent DNA ligases have been discovered in sporadic cellular or viral niches outside the bacterial domain of life, there is no instance in which a NAD+-dependent ligase is present in a eukaryotic organism. The presence solely in non-eukaryotic organisms, unique substrate specificity, and distinctive domain structure of NAD+ dependent compared with ATP-dependent human DNA ligases together make NAD+-dependent ligases ideal targets for the development of new antibacterial drugs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8699", "revid": "1157761976", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8699", "title": "Dewey Decimal Classification", "text": "Library classification system\nThe Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC), colloquially known as the Dewey Decimal System, is a proprietary library classification system which allows new books to be added to a library in their appropriate location based on subject. \nIt was first published in the United States by Melvil Dewey in 1876. Originally described in a 44-page pamphlet, it has been expanded to multiple volumes and revised through 23 major editions, the latest printed in 2011. It is also available in an abridged version suitable for smaller libraries. OCLC, a non-profit cooperative that serves libraries, currently maintains the system and licenses online access to WebDewey, a continuously updated version for catalogers.\nThe decimal number classification introduced the concepts of \"relative location\" and \"relative index\". Libraries previously had given books permanent shelf locations that were related to the order of acquisition rather than topic. The classification's notation makes use of three-digit numbers for main classes, with fractional decimals allowing expansion for further detail. Numbers are flexible to the degree that they can be expanded in linear fashion to cover special aspects of general subjects. A library assigns a classification number that unambiguously locates a particular volume in a position relative to other books in the library, on the basis of its subject. The number makes it possible to find any book and to return it to its proper place on the library shelves. The classification system is used in 200,000 libraries in at least 135 countries.\nHistory.\n1873\u20131885: early development.\nMelvil Dewey (1851\u20131931) was an American librarian and self-declared reformer. He was a founding member of the American Library Association and can be credited with the promotion of card systems in libraries and business. He developed the ideas for his library classification system in 1873 while working at the Amherst College library. He applied the classification to the books in that library, until in 1876 he had a first version of the classification. In 1876, he published the classification in pamphlet form with the title \"A Classification and Subject Index for Cataloguing and Arranging the Books and Pamphlets of a Library.\"\nHe used the pamphlet, published in more than one version during the year, to solicit comments from other librarians. It is not known who received copies or how many commented as only one copy with comments has survived, that of Ernest Cushing Richardson. His classification system was mentioned in an article in the first issue of the \"Library Journal\" and in an article by Dewey in the Department of Education publication \"Public Libraries in America\" in 1876. In March 1876, he applied for, and received, copyright on the first edition of the index. The edition was 44 pages in length, with 2,000 index entries, and was printed in 200 copies.\n1885\u20131942: period of adoption.\nThe second edition of the Dewey Decimal system, published in 1885 with the title \"Decimal Classification and Relativ Index for arranging, cataloging, and indexing public and private libraries and for pamflets, clippings, notes, scrap books, index rerums, etc.\", comprised 314 pages, with 10,000 index entries. Five hundred copies were produced. Editions 3\u201314, published between 1888 and 1942, used a variant of this same title. Dewey modified and expanded his system considerably for the second edition. In an introduction to that edition Dewey states that \"nearly 100 persons hav [spelling of 'have' per English-language spelling reform, which Dewey championed] contributed criticisms and suggestions\".\nOne of the innovations of the Dewey Decimal system was that of positioning books on the shelves in relation to other books on similar topics. When the system was first introduced, most libraries in the US used fixed positioning: each book was assigned a permanent shelf position based on the book's height and date of acquisition. Library stacks were generally closed to all but the most privileged patrons, so shelf browsing was not considered of importance. The use of the Dewey Decimal system increased during the early 20th century as librarians were convinced of the advantages of relative positioning and of open shelf access for patrons.\nNew editions were readied as supplies of previously published editions were exhausted, even though some editions provided little change from the previous, as they were primarily needed to fulfill demand. In the next decade, three editions followed closely on: the 3rd (1888), 4th (1891), and 5th (1894). Editions 6 through 11 were published from 1899 to 1922. The 6th edition was published in a record 7,600 copies, although subsequent editions were much lower. During this time, the size of the volume grew, and edition 12 swelled to 1,243 pages, an increase of 25% over the previous edition.\nIn response to the needs of smaller libraries which were finding the expanded classification schedules difficult to use, in 1894, the first abridged edition of the Dewey Decimal system was produced. The abridged edition generally parallels the full edition, and has been developed for most full editions since that date. By popular request, in 1930, the Library of Congress began to print Dewey Classification numbers on nearly all of its cards, thus making the system immediately available to all libraries making use of the Library of Congress card sets.\nDewey's was not the only library classification available, although it was the most complete. Charles Ammi Cutter published the Expansive Classification in 1882, with initial encouragement from Melvil Dewey. Cutter's system was not adopted by many libraries, with one major exception: it was used as the basis for the Library of Congress Classification system.\nIn 1895, the International Institute of Bibliography, located in Belgium and led by Paul Otlet, contacted Dewey about the possibility of translating the classification into French, and using the classification system for bibliographies (as opposed to its use for books in libraries). This would have required some changes to the classification, which was under copyright. Dewey gave permission for the creation of a version intended for bibliographies, and also for its translation into French. Dewey did not agree, however, to allow the International Institute of Bibliography to later create an English version of the resulting classification, considering that a violation of their agreement, as well as a violation of Dewey's copyright. Shortly after Dewey's death in 1931, however, an agreement was reached between the committee overseeing the development of the Decimal Classification and the developers of the French \"Classification Decimal\". The English version was published as the Universal Decimal Classification and is still in use today.\nAccording to a study done in 1927, the Dewey system was used in the US in approximately 96% of responding public libraries and 89% of the college libraries. After the death of Melvil Dewey in 1931, administration of the classification was under the Decimal Classification Committee of the Lake Placid Club Education Foundation, and the editorial body was the Decimal Classification Editorial Policy Committee with participation of the American Library Association (ALA), Library of Congress, and Forest Press. By the 14th edition in 1942, the Dewey Decimal Classification index was over 1,900 pages in length and was published in two volumes.\n1942\u2013present: forging an identity.\nThe growth of the classification to date had led to significant criticism from medium and large libraries which were too large to use the abridged edition but found the full classification overwhelming. Dewey had intended issuing the classification in three editions: the library edition, which would be the fullest edition; the bibliographic edition, in English and French, which was to be used for the organization of bibliographies rather than of books on the shelf; and the abridged edition. In 1933, the bibliographic edition became the Universal Decimal Classification, which left the library and abridged versions as the formal Dewey Decimal Classification editions. The 15th edition, edited by Milton Ferguson, implemented the growing concept of the \"standard edition\", designed for the majority of general libraries but not attempting to satisfy the needs of the very largest or of special libraries. It also reduced the size of the Dewey system by over half, from 1,900 to 700 pages. This revision was so radical that an advisory committee was formed right away for the 16th and 17th editions. The 16th and 17th editions, under the editorship of the Library of Congress, grew again to two volumes. However, by then, the Dewey Decimal system had established itself as a classification for general libraries, with the Library of Congress Classification having gained acceptance for large research libraries.\nThe first electronic version of \"Dewey\" was created in 1993. Hard-copy editions continue to be issued at intervals; the online WebDewey and Abridged WebDewey are updated quarterly.\nAdministration and publication.\nDewey and a small editorial staff managed the administration of the very early editions. Beginning in 1922, the Lake Placid Club Educational Foundation, a not-for-profit organization founded by Melvil Dewey, managed administrative affairs. The ALA set up a Special Advisory Committee on the Decimal Classification as part of the Cataloging and Classification division of ALA in 1952. The previous Decimal Classification Committee was changed to the Decimal Classification Editorial Policy Committee, with participation of the ALA Division of Cataloging and Classification, and of the Library of Congress.\nMelvil Dewey edited the first three editions of the classification system and oversaw the revisions of all editions until his death in 1931. May Seymour became editor in 1891 and served until her death in 1921. She was followed by Dorcas Fellows, who was editor until her death in 1938. Constantin J. Mazney edited the 14th edition. Milton Ferguson functioned as editor from 1949 to 1951. The 16th edition in 1958 was edited under an agreement between the Library of Congress and Forest Press, with David Haykin as director. Editions 16\u201319 were edited by Benjamin A. Custer and the editor of edition 20 was John P. Comaromi. Joan Mitchell was editor until 2013, covering editions 21 to 23. In 2013 Michael Panzer of OCLC became Editor-in-Chief. The Dewey Editorial Program Manager since 2016 has been Rebecca Green.\nDewey himself held copyright in editions 1 to 6 (1876\u20131919). Copyright in editions 7\u201310 was held by the publisher, The Library Bureau. On the death of May Seymour, Dewey conveyed the \"copyrights and control of all editions\" to the Lake Placid Club Educational Foundation, a non-profit chartered in 1922. The Online Computer Library Center (OCLC) of Dublin, Ohio, US, acquired the trademark and copyrights associated with the Dewey Decimal Classification system when it bought Forest Press in 1988. In 2003 the Dewey Decimal Classification came to the attention of the U.S. press when OCLC sued the Library Hotel for trademark infringement for using the classification system as the hotel theme. The case was settled shortly thereafter.\nThe OCLC has maintained the classification since 1988, and also publishes new editions of the system. The editorial staff responsible for updates is based partly at the Library of Congress and partly at OCLC. Their work is reviewed by the Decimal Classification Editorial Policy Committee, a ten-member international board which meets twice each year. The four-volume unabridged edition was published approximately every six years, with the last edition (DDC 23) published in mid-2011. In 2017 the editorial staff announced that the English edition of DDC will no longer be printed, in favor of using the frequently updated WebDewey. An experimental version of Dewey in RDF was previously available at dewey.info beginning in 2009, but has not been available since 2015.\nIn addition to the full version, a single-volume abridged edition designed for libraries with 20,000 titles or fewer has been made available since 1895. The last printed English abridged edition, Abridged Edition 15, was published in early 2012.\nDesign.\nThe Dewey Decimal Classification organizes library materials by discipline or field of study. The scheme comprises ten classes, each divided into ten divisions, each having ten sections. The system's notation uses Indo-Arabic numbers, with three whole numbers making up the main classes and sub-classes and decimals designating further divisions. The classification structure is hierarchical and the notation follows the same hierarchy. Libraries not needing the full level of detail of the classification can trim right-most decimal digits from the class number to obtain more general classifications. For example:\n500 Natural sciences and mathematics\n 510 Mathematics\n 516 Geometry\n 516.3 Analytic geometries\n 516.37 Metric differential geometries\n 516.375 Finsler geometry\nThe classification was originally enumerative, meaning that it listed all of the classes explicitly in the schedules. Over time it added some aspects of a faceted classification scheme, allowing classifiers to construct a number by combining a class number for a topic with an entry from a separate table. Tables cover commonly used elements such as geographical and temporal aspects, language, and bibliographic forms. For example, a class number could be constructed using 330 for economics +\u00a0.9 for geographic treatment +\u00a0.04 for Europe to create the class 330.94 European economy. Or one could combine the class 973 (for the United States) +\u00a0.05 (for periodical publications on the topic) to arrive at the number 973.05 for periodicals concerning the United States generally. The classification also makes use of mnemonics in some areas, such that the number 5 represents the country Italy in classification numbers like 945 (history of Italy), 450 (Italian language), and 195 (Italian philosophy). The combination of faceting and mnemonics makes the classification \"synthetic\" in nature, with meaning built into parts of the classification number.\nThe Dewey Decimal Classification has a number for all subjects, including fiction, although many libraries maintain a separate fiction section shelved by alphabetical order of the author's surname. Each assigned number consists of two parts: a class number (from the Dewey system) and a book number, which \"prevents confusion of different books on the same subject\". A common form of the book number is called a Cutter number, which represents the author and distinguishes the book from other books on the same topic.\nRelative Index.\nThe Relative Index (or, as Dewey spelled it, \"Relativ Index\") is an alphabetical index to the classification, for use both by classifiers and by library users when seeking books by topic. The index was \"relative\" because the index entries pointed to the class numbers, not to the page numbers of the printed classification schedule. In this way, the Dewey Decimal Classification itself had the same relative positioning as the library shelf and could be used either as an entry point to the classification, by catalogers, or as an index to a Dewey-classed library itself.\nInfluence and criticism.\nDewey Decimal Classification numbers formed the basis of the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC), which combines the basic Dewey numbers with selected punctuation marks (comma, colon, parentheses, etc.). Adaptations of the system for specific regions outside the English-speaking world include the Korean Decimal Classification, the New Classification Scheme for Chinese Libraries, and the Nippon Decimal Classification in Japan.\nDespite its widespread use, the classification has been criticized for its complexity and its limited capability for amendment. In particular, the arrangement of subheadings has been described as archaic and biased towards an Anglo-American world view. This is particularly clear in the 800s section, in which most literature, particularly from outside the United States or Europe, is relegated to the 890s particularly when contrasted with the 900s\u2014history. In 2007\u201308, the Maricopa County Library District in Arizona abandoned the DDC in favor of the Book Industry Standards and Communications (BISAC) system commonly used by commercial bookstores, in an effort to make its libraries more accessible for their users. Several other libraries across the United States and other countries (including Canada and the Netherlands) followed suit. \nTreatment of homosexuality.\nIn 1932, topics relating to homosexuality were first added to the system under 132 (mental derangements) and 159.9 (abnormal psychology). In 1952, homosexuality was also included under 301.424 (the study of sexes in society). In 1989, it was added to 363.49 (social problems), a classification that continues in the current edition.\nIn 1996, homosexuality was added to 306.7 (sexual relations); this remains the preferred location in the current edition. Although books can also be found under 616.8583 (sexual practices viewed as medical disorders), the official direction states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Use 616.8583 for homosexuality only when the work treats homosexuality as a medical disorder, or focuses on arguing against the views of those who consider homosexuality to be a medical disorder. ... If in doubt, prefer a number other than 616.8583.\nTreatment of religion.\nThe top-level class for religion heavily favors Christianity, dedicating nearly all of the 200 division to it: the world's thousands of other religions were listed under the 290s. For example, Islam is under just DDC 297, despite being almost as large as Christianity by population. The entire 200 section has remained largely unchanged since DDC 1, since restructuring would pose a significant amount of work for existing libraries. The motivation for this change is ideological rather than technical, as appending significant figures can add space as needed.\nTreatment of women.\nIt has also been argued by Hope A. Olson that the placement of topics related to women shows implicit bias, but this has been simpler to address than the religion schema. Some changes made so far have been in numerical proximity, altering the placement of topics relative to each other. For example, in older versions of the DDC, some categories regarding women were adjacent to categories on etiquette; the placement of these categories next to each other imposed an association of etiquette with women, rather than treating it as gender-neutral. This was changed in DDC version 17, in 1965.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8702", "revid": "1154751732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8702", "title": "Du\u1e25kha", "text": "Concept in Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism\nDu\u1e25kha (; Sanskrit: \u0926\u0941\u0903\u0916; P\u0101li: dukkha), commonly translated as \"suffering\", \"pain\", or \"unhappiness\", is an important concept in Buddhism, Jainism and Hinduism. Its meaning depends on the context, and may refer more specifically to the \"unsatisfactoriness\" or \"unease\" of mundane life when driven by craving/grasping and ignorance. \nWhile the term \"dukkha\" has often been derived from the prefix \"du\" (\"bad\" or \"difficult\") and the root \"kha\", \"empty\", \"hole\", a badly fitting axle-hole of a cart or chariot giving \"a very bumpy ride\", it may actually be derived from \"du\u1e25-stha\", a \"dis-/ bad- + stand-\", that is, \"standing badly, unsteady\", \"unstable\".\nIt is the first of the Four Noble Truths and it is one of the three marks of existence. The term also appears in scriptures of Hinduism, such as the Upanishads, in discussions of moksha (spiritual liberation).\nEtymology and meaning.\n\"Du\u1e25kha\" (Sanskrit: \u0926\u0941\u0903\u0916; Pali: \"dukkha\") is a term found in the Upanishads and Buddhist texts, meaning anything that is \"uneasy, uncomfortable, unpleasant, difficult, causing pain or sadness\". It is also a concept in Indian religions about the nature of life that innately includes the \"unpleasant\", \"suffering\", \"pain\", \"sorrow\", \"distress\", \"grief\" or \"misery.\" The term \"du\u1e25kha\" does not have a one-word English translation, and embodies diverse aspects of unpleasant human experiences. It is often understood as the opposite of \"sukha\", meaning \"happiness,\" \"comfort\" or \"ease.\"\nEtymology.\nAxle hole.\nThe word has been explained in recent times as a derivation from Aryan terminology for an axle hole, referring to an axle hole which is not in the center and leads to a bumpy, uncomfortable ride. According to Winthrop Sargeant,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ancient Aryans who brought the Sanskrit language to India were a nomadic, horse- and cattle-breeding people who travelled in horse- or ox-drawn vehicles. \"Su\" and \"dus\" are prefixes indicating good or bad. The word \"kha\", in later Sanskrit meaning \"sky,\" \"ether,\" or \"space,\" was originally the word for \"hole,\" particularly an axle hole of one of the Aryan's vehicles. Thus \"sukha\" ... meant, originally, \"having a good axle hole,\" while \"duhkha\" meant \"having a poor axle hole,\" leading to discomfort.\nJoseph Goldstein, American vipassana teacher and writer, explains the etymology as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The word \"dukkha\" is made up of the prefix \"du\" and the root \"kha\". \"Du\" means \"bad\" or \"difficult\". \"Kha\" means \"empty\". \"Empty\", here, refers to several things\u2014some specific, others more general. One of the specific meanings refers to the empty axle hole of a wheel. If the axle fits badly into the center hole, we get a very bumpy ride. This is a good analogy for our ride through sa\u1e43s\u0101ra.\n'Standing unstable'.\nHowever, according to Monier Monier-Williams, the actual roots of the Pali term \"dukkha\" appear to be Sanskrit \u0926\u0941\u0938\u094d- (\"dus-\", \"bad\") + \u0938\u094d\u0925\u093e (\"stha\", \"to stand\"). Regular phonological changes in the development of Sanskrit into the various Prakrits led to a shift from \"dus-sth\u0101\" to \"du\u1e25kha\" to \"dukkha\".\nAnalayo concurs, stating that \"dukkha\" as derived from \"duh-stha\", \"standing badly,\" \"conveys nuances of \"uneasiness\" or of being \"uncomfortable.\" Silk Road philologist Christopher I. Beckwith elaborates on this derivation. According to Beckwith:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...although the sense of du\u1e25kha in Normative Buddhism is traditionally given as 'suffering', that and similar interpretations are highly unlikely for Early Buddhism. Significantly, Monier-Williams himself doubts the usual explanation of du\u1e25kha and presents an alternative one immediately after it, namely: du\u1e25-stha \"'standing badly,' unsteady, disquieted (lit. and fig.); uneasy\", and so on. This form is also attested, and makes much better sense as the opposite of the Rig Veda sense of sukha, which Monier-Williams gives in full.\nTranslation.\nThe literal meaning of \"duhkha\", as used in a general sense is \"suffering\" or \"painful.\" Its exact translation depends on the context. Contemporary translators of Buddhist texts use a variety of English words to convey the aspects of \"dukh\". Early Western translators of Buddhist texts (before the 1970s) typically translated the Pali term \"dukkha\" as \"suffering.\" Later translators have emphasized that \"suffering\" is a too limited translation for the term du\u1e25kha, and have preferred to either leave the term untranslated, or to clarify that translation with terms such as anxiety, distress, frustration, unease, unsatisfactoriness, not having what one wants, having what one doesn't want, etc. In the sequence \"birth is painfull,\" \"dukhka\" may be translated as \"painfull.\" When related to vedana, \"feeling,\" \"dukkha\" (\"unpleasant,\" \"painfull\") is the opposite of \"sukkha\" (\"pleasure,\" \"pleasant\"), yet all feelings are \"dukkha\" in that they are impermanent, conditioned phenomena, which are unsatisfactory, incapable of providing lasting satisfaction. The term \"unsatisfactoriness\" then is often used to emphasize the unsatisfactoriness of \"life under the influence of afflictions and polluted karma.\"\nBuddhism.\n\"Du\u1e25kha\" is one of the three marks of existence, namely \"anitya\" (\"impermanent\"), \"du\u1e25kha\" (\"unsatisfactory\"), \"anatman\" (without a lasting essence).\nWithin the Buddhist sutras, du\u1e25kha has a broad meaning, and is divided in three categories:\nVarious sutras sum up how life in this \"mundane world\" is regarded to be \"du\u1e25kha\", starting with \"samsara\", the ongoing process of death and rebirth itself:\nThe Buddhist tradition emphasizes the importance of developing insight into the nature of \"du\u1e25kha\", the conditions that cause it, and how it can be overcome. This process is formulated in the teachings on the Four Noble Truths.\nHinduism.\nIn Hindu literature, the earliest Upaniads \u2014 the and the \u2014 in all likelihood predate the advent of Buddhism. In these scriptures of Hinduism, the Sanskrit word \"dukha\" (\u0926\u0941\u0903\u0916) appears in the sense of \"suffering, sorrow, distress\", and in the context of a spiritual pursuit and liberation through the knowledge of Atman (soul/self).\nThe verse 4.4.14 of the states:\nThe verse 7.26.2 of the states:\nThe concept of sorrow and suffering, and self-knowledge as a means to overcome it, appears extensively with other terms in the pre-Buddhist Upanishads. The term \"Duhkha\" also appears in many other middle and later post-Buddhist Upanishads such as the verse 6.20 of Shvetashvatara Upanishad, as well as in the Bhagavada Gita, all in the context of moksha. The term also appears in the foundational Sutras of the six schools of Hindu philosophy, such as the opening lines of \"Samkhya karika\" of the Samkhya school.\nComparison of Buddhism and Hinduism.\nBoth Hinduism and Buddhism emphasize that one overcomes \"dukha\" through the development of understanding and insight. However, the two religions widely differ in the nature of that understanding. Hinduism emphasizes the understanding and acceptance of \"Atman\" (\"self\", \"soul\") and \"Brahman\" (\"the ultimate reality of the universe\"). The connection is the distress and suffering caused by an individual situation that can counter a person's wishes and perception. \"Duhkha\", in particular, refers to the sense of disappointing feelings that come from the gulf between perception and desires and true experience. In Hindi, \"duhkha\" generally means \"difficult to do\" or \"to have hardship in doing\" as it is inflexible. By contrast, Buddhism emphasizes the understanding and acceptance of \"anatta\" (\"anatman\", \"non-self\", \"non-soul\"), the means to liberation from \"du\u1e25kha\". The root meaning of \"duhkha\" is used in various ways in different schools of Indian thought and Buddhism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8703", "revid": "42403794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8703", "title": "Darwin Awards", "text": "Tongue-in-cheek award\nThe Darwin Awards are a tongue-in-cheek honor that originated in Usenet newsgroup discussions around 1985. They recognize individuals who have supposedly contributed to human evolution by selecting themselves out of the gene pool by dying or becoming sterilized via their own actions.\nThe project became more formalized with the creation of a website in 1993, followed by a series of books starting in 2000 by Wendy Northcutt. The criterion for the awards states: \"In the spirit of Charles Darwin, the Darwin Awards commemorate individuals who protect our gene pool by making the ultimate sacrifice of their own lives. Darwin Award winners eliminate themselves in an extraordinarily idiotic manner, thereby improving our species' chances of long-term survival.\"\nAccidental self-sterilization also qualifies, but the site notes: \"Of necessity, the award is usually bestowed posthumously.\" The candidate is disqualified, though, if \"innocent bystanders\" are killed in the process, as they might have contributed positively to the gene pool. The logical problem presented by award winners who may have already reproduced is not addressed in the selection process owing to the difficulty of ascertaining whether or not a person has children; the Darwin Award rules state that the presence of offspring does not disqualify a nominee.\nHistory.\nThe origin of the Darwin Awards can be traced back to posts on Usenet group discussions as early as 1985. A post on August 7, 1985 describes the awards as being \"given posthumously to people who have made the supreme sacrifice to keep their genes out of our pool. Style counts, not everyone who dies from their own stupidity can win.\" This early post cites an example of a person who tried to break into a vending machine and was crushed to death when he pulled it over himself. Another widely distributed early story mentioning the Darwin Awards is the JATO Rocket Car, which describes a man who strapped a jet-assisted take-off unit to his Chevrolet Impala in the Arizona desert and who died on the side of a cliff as his car achieved speeds of . This story was later determined to be an urban legend by the Arizona Department of Public Safety. Wendy Northcutt says the official Darwin Awards website run by Northcutt does its best to confirm all stories submitted, listing them as, \"confirmed true by Darwin\". Many of the viral emails circulating the Internet, however, are hoaxes and urban legends.\nThe website and collection of books were started in 1993 by Wendy Northcutt, who at the time was a graduate in molecular biology from the University of California, Berkeley. She went on to study neurobiology at Stanford University, doing research on cancer and telomerase. In her spare time, she organised chain letters from family members into the original Darwin Awards website hosted in her personal account space at Stanford. She eventually left the bench in 1998 and devoted herself full-time to her website and books in September 1999. By 2002, the website received 7 million page hits per month.\nShe encountered some difficulty in publishing the first book, since most publishers would only offer her a deal if she agreed to remove the stories from the internet. Northcutt refused to do so, saying, \"It was a community! I could not do that. Even though it might have cost me a lot of money, I kept saying no.\" She eventually found a publisher who agreed to print a book containing only 10% of the material gathered for the website. The first book turned out to be a success, and was listed on \"The New York Times\" best-seller list for 6 months.\nNot all of the feedback from the stories Northcutt published was positive, and she occasionally received email from people who knew the deceased. One such person wrote, \"This is horrible. It has shocked our community to the core. You should remove this.\" Northcutt, though, said, \"I can't. It's just too stupid.\" Northcutt kept the stories on the website and in her books, citing them as a \"funny-but-true safety guide\", and mentioning that children who read the book are going to be much more careful around explosives.\nThe website also recognizes, with Honorable Mentions, individuals who survive their misadventures with their reproductive capacity intact. One example of this is Larry Walters, who attached helium-filled weather balloons to a lawn chair and floated far above Long Beach, California, in July 1982. He reached an altitude of , but survived, to be later fined for crossing controlled airspace. (Walters later fell into depression and committed suicide.) Another notable honorable mention was given to the two men who attempted to burgle the home of footballer Duncan Ferguson (who had an infamous reputation for physical aggression on and off the pitch, including four convictions for assault and who had served six months in Glasgow's Barlinnie Prison) in 2001, with one burglar requiring three days' hospitalisation after being confronted by the player.\nA 2014 study published in the \"British Medical Journal\" found that between 1995 and 2014, males represented 88.7% of Darwin Award winners (see figure).\nA 2006 comedy film, \"The Darwin Awards\", written and directed by Finn Taylor, was based on the website and many of the Darwin Awards stories.\nRules.\nNorthcutt has stated five requirements for a Darwin Award:\nNominee must be dead or rendered sterile\nThis may be subject to dispute. Potential awardees may be out of the gene pool because of age; others have already reproduced before their deaths. To avoid debates about the possibility of \"in vitro\" fertilization, artificial insemination, or cloning, the original Darwin Awards book applied the following \"deserted island\" test to potential winners: If the person were unable to reproduce when stranded on a deserted island with a fertile member of the opposite sex, he or she would be considered sterile. Winners of the award, in general, either are dead or have become unable to use their sexual organs.\nAstoundingly stupid judgment\nThe candidate's foolishness must be unique and sensational, likely because the award is intended to be funny. A number of foolish but common activities, such as smoking in bed, are excluded from consideration. In contrast, self-immolation caused by smoking after being administered a flammable ointment in a hospital and specifically told not to smoke is grounds for nomination. One \"Honorable Mention\" (a man who attempted suicide by swallowing nitroglycerine pills, and then tried to detonate them by running into a wall) is noted to be in this category, despite being intentional and self-inflicted (i.e. attempted suicide), which would normally disqualify the inductee.\nCause of one's own demise\nKilling a friend with a hand grenade would not be eligible, but killing oneself while manufacturing a homemade chimney-cleaning device from a grenade would be. To earn a Darwin Award, one must have killed oneself, or rendered oneself sterile; merely causing death to a third party is insufficient.\nCapable of sound judgement\nThe nominee must be at least past the legal driving age and free of mental defect (Northcutt considers injury or death caused by mental defect to be tragic, rather than amusing, and routinely disqualifies such entries). After much discussion, a small category regarding deaths below this age limit also exists. Entry into this category requires that the peers of the candidate be of the opinion that the actions of the person in question were above and beyond the limits of reason.\nIn 2011, however, the awards targeted a 16-year-old boy in Leeds who died stealing copper wiring (the standard minimum driving age in Great Britain being 17). In 2012, Northcutt made similar light of a 14-year-old girl in Brazil who was killed while leaning out of a school bus window, but she was \"disqualified\" for the award itself because of the likely public objection owing to the girl's age, which Northcutt asserts is based on \"magical thinking\".\nEvent must be verified\nThe story must be documented by reliable sources: e.g., reputable newspaper articles, confirmed television reports, or responsible eyewitnesses. If a story is found to be untrue, it is disqualified, but particularly amusing ones are placed in the urban legend section of the archives. Despite this requirement, many of the stories are fictional, often appearing as \"original submissions\" and presenting no further sources than unverified \"eyewitnesses\". Most such stories on Northcutt's Darwin Awards site are filed in the Personal Accounts section.\nRules under development.\nIn addition, later revisions to the qualification criteria add several requirements that have not been made into formalized \"rules\":\nReception.\nThe Darwin Awards have received varying levels of scrutiny from the scientific community. In his book \"Encyclopedia of Evolution\", biology professor Stanley A. Rice comments: \"Despite the tremendous value of these stories as entertainment, it is unlikely that they represent evolution in action\", citing the nonexistence of \"judgment impairment genes\". On an essay in the book \"The Evolution of Evil\", professor Nathan Hallanger acknowledges that the Darwin Awards are meant as black humor, but associates them with the eugenics movement of the early 20th century. University of Oxford biophysicist Sylvia McLain, writing for \"The Guardian\", says that while the Darwin Awards are \"clearly meant to be funny\", they do not accurately represent how genetics work, further noting that \"'smart' people do stupid things all the time\". Geologist and science communicator Sharon A. Hill has criticized the Darwin Awards on both scientific and ethical grounds, claiming that no genetic traits impact personal intelligence or good judgment to be targeted by natural selection, and calling them an example of \"ignorance\" and \"heartlessness\". There are now roughly 100 genes thought to be associated with risk taking. \nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8704", "revid": "40710022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8704", "title": "Outline of dance", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to dance\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to dance:\nDance \u2013 human movement either used as a form of expression or presented in a social, spiritual or performance setting. Choreography is the art of making dances, and the person who does this is called a choreographer. Definitions of what constitutes dance are dependent on social, cultural, aesthetic, artistic and moral constraints and range from functional movement (such as Folk dance) to codified, virtuoso techniques such as ballet. A great many dances and dance styles are performed to dance music.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat \"type\" of thing is dance?\nDance (also called \"dancing\") can fit the following categories:\nSome other things can be named \"dance\" metaphorically; see dance (disambiguation)\nTypes of dance.\nType of dance \u2013 a particular dance or dance style. There are many varieties of dance. Dance categories are not mutually exclusive. For example, tango is traditionally a \"partner dance\". While it is mostly \"social dance\", its ballroom form may be \"competitive dance\", as in DanceSport. At the same time it is enjoyed as \"performance dance\", whereby it may well be a \"solo dance\".\nDance genres.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n Africa\n West Africa \n Benin \u2022 Burkina Faso \u2022 Cape Verde \u2022 C\u00f4te d'Ivoire \u2022 Gambia \u2022 Ghana \u2022 Guinea \u2022 Guinea-Bissau \u2022 Liberia \u2022 Mali \u2022 Mauritania \u2022 Niger \u2022 Nigeria \u2022 Senegal \u2022 Sierra Leone \u2022 Togo\n North Africa \n Algeria \u2022 Egypt (Ancient Egypt) \u2022 Libya \u2022 Mauritania \u2022 Morocco \u2022 Sudan \u2022 South Sudan \u2022Tunisia \u2022 Western Sahara\n Central Africa \n Angola \u2022 Burundi \u2022 Cameroon \u2022 Central African Republic \u2022 Chad \u2022 The Democratic Republic of the Congo \u2022 Equatorial Guinea \u2022 Gabon \u2022 Republic of the Congo \u2022 Rwanda \u2022 S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe\n East Africa \n Burundi \u2022 Comoros \u2022 Djibouti \u2022 Eritrea \u2022 Ethiopia \u2022 Kenya \u2022 Madagascar \u2022 Malawi \u2022 Mauritius \u2022 Mozambique \u2022 Rwanda \u2022 Seychelles \u2022 Somalia \u2022 Tanzania \u2022 Uganda \u2022 Zambia \u2022 Zimbabwe\n Southern Africa \n Botswana \u2022 Eswatini \u2022 Lesotho \u2022 Namibia \u2022 South Africa \n Dependencies\n Mayotte\u00a0 \u2022 St.\u00a0Helena\u00a0 \u2022 Puntland \u2022 Somaliland \u2022 Sahrawi\u00a0Arab\u00a0Democratic\u00a0Republic\n Antarctica\n \"None\"\n Asia\n Central Asia\n Kazakhstan \u2022 Kyrgyzstan \u2022 Tajikistan \u2022 Turkmenistan \u2022 Uzbekistan\n East Asia\n China \n Tibet\n Hong Kong \u2022 Macau\n Japan \u2022 North Korea \u2022 South Korea \u2022 Mongolia \u2022 Taiwan \n North Asia\n Russia\n Southeast Asia\n Brunei \u2022 Burma (Myanmar) \u2022 Cambodia \u2022 East Timor (Timor-Leste) \u2022 Indonesia \u2022 Laos \u2022 Malaysia \u2022 Philippines \u2022 Singapore \u2022 Thailand \u2022 Vietnam\n South Asia\n Afghanistan \u2022 Bangladesh \u2022 Bhutan \u2022 Iran \u2022 Maldives \u2022 Nepal \u2022 Pakistan \u2022 Sri Lanka\n India\n West Asia\n Armenia \u2022 Azerbaijan \u2022 Bahrain \u2022 Cyprus (including disputed Northern Cyprus) \u2022 Georgia \u2022 Iraq \u2022 Israel \u2022 Jordan \u2022 Kuwait \u2022 Lebanon \u2022 Oman \u2022 Palestinian territories Qatar \u2022 Saudi Arabia \u2022 Syria \u2022 Turkey \u2022 United Arab Emirates \u2022 Yemen\n Caucasus (a region considered to be in both Asia and Europe, or between them)\n North Caucasus\n Parts of Russia (Chechnya, Ingushetia, Dagestan, Adyghea, Kabardino-Balkaria, Karachai-Cherkessia, North Ossetia, Krasnodar Krai, Stavropol Krai)\n South Caucasus\n Georgia (including disputed Abkhazia, South Ossetia) \u2022 Armenia \u2022 Azerbaijan (including disputed Nagorno-Karabakh Republic)\n Europe \n Akrotiri and Dhekelia \u2022 \u00c5land \u2022 Albania \u2022 Andorra \u2022 Armenia \u2022 Austria \u2022 Azerbaijan \u2022 Belarus \u2022 Belgium \u2022 Bosnia and Herzegovina \u2022 Bulgaria \u2022 Croatia \u2022 Cyprus \u2022 Czech Republic \u2022 Denmark \u2022 Estonia \u2022 Faroe Islands \u2022 Finland \u2022 France \u2022 Georgia \u2022 Germany \u2022 Gibraltar \u2022 Greece \u2022 Guernsey \u2022 Hungary \u2022 Iceland \u2022 Ireland \u2022 Isle of Man \u2022 Italy \u2022 Jersey \u2022 Kazakhstan \u2022 Kosovo \u2022 Latvia \u2022 Liechtenstein \u2022 Lithuania \u2022 Luxembourg \u2022 Macedonia \u2022 Malta \u2022 Moldova (including disputed Transnistria) \u2022 Monaco \u2022 Montenegro \u2022 Netherlands \u2022 Poland \u2022 Portugal \u2022 Romania \u2022 Russia \u2022 San Marino \u2022 Serbia \u2022 Slovakia \u2022 Slovenia \u2022\n Norway\n Svalbard \nSpain\n Autonomous communities of Spain: Catalonia\n Sweden \u2022 Switzerland \u2022 Turkey \u2022 Ukraine \n United Kingdom\n England \u2022 Northern Ireland \u2022 Scotland \u2022 Wales\n Vatican City\n European Union\n North America\n Canada \n Provinces of Canada: \u2022 Alberta \u2022 British Columbia \u2022 Manitoba \u2022 New Brunswick \u2022 Newfoundland and Labrador \u2022 Nova Scotia \u2022 Ontario (Toronto) \u2022 Prince Edward Island \u2022 Quebec \u2022 Saskatchewan\n Territories of Canada: Northwest Territories \u2022 Nunavut \u2022 Yukon\nGreenland \u2022 Saint Pierre and Miquelon\n United States \n Mexico \n Central America\n Belize \u2022 Costa Rica \u2022 El Salvador \u2022 Guatemala \u2022 Honduras \u2022 Nicaragua \u2022 Panama\n Caribbean\n Anguilla \u2022 Antigua and Barbuda \u2022 Aruba \u2022 Bahamas \u2022 Barbados \u2022 Bermuda \u2022 British Virgin Islands \u2022 Cayman Islands \u2022 Cuba \u2022 Dominica \u2022 Dominican Republic \u2022 Grenada \u2022 Haiti \u2022 Jamaica \u2022 Montserrat \u2022 Netherlands Antilles \u2022 Puerto Rico \u2022 Saint Barth\u00e9lemy \u2022 Saint Kitts and Nevis \u2022 Saint Lucia \u2022 Saint Martin \u2022 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines \u2022 Trinidad and Tobago \u2022 Turks and Caicos Islands \u2022 United States Virgin Islands\nOceania (includes the continent of Australia)\n Australasia\n Australia \n Dependencies/Territories of Australia\n Christmas Island \u2022 Cocos (Keeling) Islands \u2022 Norfolk Island\n New Zealand \n Melanesia\n Fiji \u2022 Indonesia (Oceanian part only) \u2022 New Caledonia (France) \u2022 Papua New Guinea \u2022 Rotuma \u2022 Solomon Islands \u2022 Vanuatu \n Micronesia\n Federated States of Micronesia \u2022 Guam (USA) \u2022 Kiribati \u2022 Marshall Islands \u2022 Nauru \u2022 Northern Mariana Islands (USA) \u2022 Palau \u2022 Wake Island (USA) \n Polynesia\n American Samoa (USA) \u2022 Chatham Islands (NZ) \u2022 Cook Islands (NZ) \u2022 Easter Island (Chile) \u2022 French Polynesia (France) \u2022 Hawaii (USA) \u2022 Loyalty Islands (France) \u2022 Niue (NZ) \u2022 Pitcairn Islands (UK) \u2022 Adamstown \u2022 Samoa \u2022 Tokelau (NZ) \u2022 Tonga \u2022 Tuvalu \u2022 Wallis and Futuna (France)\n South America \n Argentina \u2022 Bolivia \u2022 Brazil \u2022 Chile \u2022 Colombia \u2022 Ecuador \u2022 Falkland Islands \u2022 Guyana \u2022 Paraguay \u2022 Peru \u2022 Suriname \u2022 Uruguay \u2022 Venezuela\n South Atlantic\n Ascension Island \u2022 Saint Helena \u2022 Tristan da Cunha\nHistory of dance.\nHistory of dance\nDance science.\nDance science"}
{"id": "8706", "revid": "1074894345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8706", "title": "DCM", "text": "DCM may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "8707", "revid": "1057393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8707", "title": "DKW", "text": "German car and motorcycle marque, now Audi\nDKW (Dampf-Kraft-Wagen, , also Deutsche Kinder-Wagen . Das-Kleine-Wunder, or Des-Knaben-Wunsch, ) was a German car- and motorcycle-marque. DKW was one of the four companies that formed Auto Union in 1932 and thus became an ancestor of the modern-day Audi company.\nIn 1916, Danish engineer J\u00f8rgen Skafte Rasmussen founded a factory in Zschopau, Saxony, Germany, to produce steam fittings. That year he attempted to produce a steam-driven car, called the DKW. Although unsuccessful, he made a two-stroke toy engine in 1919, called \"Des Knaben Wunsch\" \u2013 \"the boy's wish\". He put a slightly modified version of this engine into a motorcycle and called it \"Das Kleine Wunder\" \u2013 \"the little wonder\" the initials from this becoming the DKW brand: by the late 1920s, DKW had become the world's largest motorcycle manufacturer.\nIn September 1924, DKW bought Slaby-Beringer, saving them from Germany's hyperinflation economic crisis. Rudolf Slaby became chief-engineer at DKW.\nIn 1932, DKW merged with Audi, Horch and Wanderer to form Auto Union. After World War II, DKW moved to West Germany. The original factory became MZ. Auto Union came under Daimler-Benz ownership in 1957 and was purchased by the Volkswagen Group in 1964. The last German-built DKW car was the F102, which ceased production in 1966. Its successor, the four-stroke F103, was marketed under the Audi brand, another Auto Union marque.\nDKW-badged cars continued to be built under license in Brazil and Argentina until 1967 and 1969 respectively. The DKW trademark is currently owned by Auto Union GmbH, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Audi AG which also owns the rights to other historical trademarks and intellectual property of the Auto Union combine.\nAutomobiles made between 1928 and 1942.\nDKW cars were made from 1928 until 1966, apart from the interruption caused by the Second World War. DKWs always used two-stroke engines, reflecting the company's position by the end of the 1920s as the world's largest producer of motorcycles. The first DKW car, the small and rather crude Typ P, emerged on 7 May 1928 and the model continued to be built at the company's Spandau (Berlin) plant, first as a roadster and later as a stylish if basic sports car, until 1931.\nMore significant was a series of inexpensive cars built 300\u00a0km (185 miles) to the south in Zwickau in the plant acquired by the company's owner in 1928 when he had become the majority owner in Audi Werke AG. Models F1 to F8 (F for Front) were built between 1931 and 1942, with successor models reappearing after the end of the war in 1945. They were the first volume production cars in Europe with front wheel drive, and were powered by transversely mounted two-cylinder two-stroke engines. Displacement was 584 or 692\u00a0cc: claimed maximum power was initially 15 PS, and from 1931 a choice between 18 or . These models had a generator that doubled as a starter, mounted directly on the crankshaft, known as a Dynastart. DKWs from Zwickau notched up approximately 218,000 units between 1931 and 1942. Most cars were sold on the home market and over 85% of DKWs produced in the 1930s were the little F series cars: DKW reached second place in German sales by 1934 and stayed there, accounting for 189,369 of the cars sold between 1931 and 1938, more than 16% of the market.\nBetween 1929 and 1940, DKW produced a less well remembered but technically intriguing series of rear-wheel drive cars called (among other names) \"Schwebeklasse\" and \"Sonderklasse\" with two-stroke V4 engines. Engine displacement was 1,000\u00a0cc, later 1,100\u00a0cc. The engines had two extra cylinders for forced induction, so they appeared like V6 engines but without spark plugs on the front cylinder pair.\nIn 1939, DKW made a prototype with the first three-cylinder engine, with a displacement of 900\u00a0cc and producing . With a streamlined body, the car could run at . It was put into production after World War II, first as an Industrieverband Fahrzeugbau (IFA) F9 (later Wartburg) in Zwickau, East Germany, and shortly afterwards in DKW-form from D\u00fcsseldorf as the 3=6 or F91.\nDKW engines were used by Saab as a model for the Saab two-stroke in its Saab 92 car manufacturing venture, in 1947.\nAutomobiles made after 1945.\nAs Auto Union was based in Saxony in what became the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), it took some time for it to regroup after the war. The company was registered in West Germany as Auto Union GmbH in 1949, first as a spare-part provider, but soon to take up production of the RT 125 motorcycle and a new delivery van, called a \"Schnellaster\" F800. Their first line of production took place in D\u00fcsseldorf. This van used the same engine as the last F8 made before the war.\nTheir first car was the F89 using the body from the prototype F9 made before the war and the two-cylinder two-stroke engine from the last F8. Production went on until it was replaced by the successful three-cylinder engine that came with the F91. The F91 was in production 1953\u20131955, and was replaced by the larger F93 in 1956. The F91 and F93 had 900\u00a0cc three-cylinder two-stroke engines, the first ones delivering , the last . The ignition system comprised three independent sets of points and coils, one for each cylinder, with the points mounted in a cluster around a single lobed cam at the front end of the crankshaft. The cooling system was of the free convection type assisted by a fan driven from a pulley mounted at the front end of the crankshaft.\nThe F93 was produced until 1959, and was replaced by the Auto-Union 1000. These models were produced with a 1,000\u00a0cc two-stroke engine, with a choice between or S versions until 1963. During this transition, production was moved from D\u00fcsseldorf to Ingolstadt, where Audi still has its production. From 1957, the cars could be fitted with a saxomat, an automatic clutch, the only small car then offering this feature. The last versions of the Auto-Union 1000S had disc brakes as option, an early development for this technology. A sporting 2+2 seater version was available as the Auto-Union 1000 SP from 1957 to 1964, the first years only as a coup\u00e9 and from 1962 also as a convertible.\nIn 1956, the very rare DKW Monza was put into small-scale production on a private initiative, with a sporting two-seater body of glassfiber on a standard F93 frame. It was first called Solitude, but got its final name from the long-distance speed records it made on the Autodromo Nazionale Monza in Italy in November 1956. Running in F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA) class G, it set records including 48 hours at an average speed of , 10,000\u00a0km at and 72 hours at . The car was first produced by Dannenhauer &amp; Strauss in Stuttgart, then by Massholder in Heidelberg and lastly by Robert Schenk in Stuttgart. The number produced is said to be around 230 and production finished by the end of 1958.\nA more successful range of cars was sold from 1959, the Junior/F12 series based on a modern concept from the late 1950s. The range consists of Junior (basic model) made from 1959 to 1961, Junior de Luxe (a little enhanced) from 1961 to 1963, F11 (a little larger) and F12 (larger and bigger engine) from 1963 to 1965, and F12 Roadster from 1964 to 1965. The Junior/F12 series became quite popular, and many cars were produced. An assembly plant was licensed in Ballincollig, County Cork, Ireland between 1952 and c.1964 and roughly 4,000 vehicles were assembled, ranging from saloons, vans and motorbikes to commercial combine harvesters. This was the only DKW factory outside Germany in Europe and for many years after its closure its large DKW sign could be visible on the wall of the factory. The building was demolished in the late 2000s and was redeveloped into a German Aldi store and a McDonald's drive-thru.\nAll the three-cylinder two-stroke post-war cars had some sporting potential and formed the basis for many rally victories in the 1950s and early 1960s. This made DKW the most winning car brand in the European rally league for several years during the fifties.\nIn 1960, DKW developed a V6 engine by combining two three-cylinder two-stroke engines, with a capacity of 1,000\u00a0cc. The capacity was increased and the final V6 in 1966 had a capacity of 1,300\u00a0cc, which developed at 5,000\u00a0rpm using the standard configuration with two carburettors. A four-carburettor version produced , a six-carburettor one . It weighed only . The V6 was planned to be used in the DKW Munga and the F102. About 100 engines were built for testing purposes and 13 DKW F102 and some Mungas were fitted with the V6 engine in the 1960s.\nThe last DKW was the F102, coming into production in 1964 as a replacement for the old-looking AU1000. However, the F102 sold poorly, largely due to its two-stroke engine technology which was at the limit of its development. Auto Union's parent, Daimler-Benz, decided to offload the company to Volkswagen. The car was re-engineered with a four-stroke engine and relaunched as the Audi F103. This marked the end of the DKW marque for cars, and the rebirth of the Audi name.\nFrom 1956 to 1961, Dutch importer Hart, Nibbrig &amp; Greve assembled cars in an abandoned asphalt factory in Sassenheim, where they employed about 120 workers, two transporter, that collected SKD kits from Duesseldorf and built about 13.500 cars. When the DKW plant moved the import of SKD kits stopped, as it became too expensive.\nDKW in South America.\nFrom 1956 to 1967, DKW cars were made in Brazil by the local company Vemag (\"Ve\u00edculos e M\u00e1quinas Agr\u00edcolas S.A.\", \"Vehicles and Agricultural Machinery Inc.\"). Vemag was assembling Scania-Vabis trucks, but Scania Vabis became an independent company in July 1960. The original plans were to build the Candango off-roader (Munga), a utility vehicle and a four-door sedan, called Vemaguet and Belcar respectively. The first model built was the 900\u00a0cc F91 Universal but the Belcar and Vemaguet names were applied later.\nIn 1958, the F94 four-door sedan and station wagon were launched, in the early 1960s renamed Belcar and Vemaguet. The company also produced a luxury coupe (the DKW Fissore) and the off-road Munga (locally called Candango). In 1960 Vemag cars received the larger one-litre, engine from the Auto Union 1000.\nVemag had a successful official racing team, with the coupe GT Malzoni, with fiberglass body. This project was the foundation of the long-lasting Brazilian sports car brand Puma. The Brazilian F94 line has been improved with several cosmetic changes and became more and more different from the German and Argentine models. Vemag had no capital to invest in new products and came under governmental pressure to merge. In 1964\u20131965 Volkswagen gradually took over Auto Union, a minority holder in Vemag, and in 1967 Volkswagen bought the remainder of the stock. VW quickly began phasing out DKW-Vemag production and introduced the Volkswagen 1600 sedan to the old Vemag plant, after a total of 109,343 DKW-Vemag cars had been built.\nDKW vehicles were made in Argentina from 1960 to 1969 by IASF S.A. (Industria Automotriz Santa Fe Sociedad An\u00f3nima) in Sauce Viejo, Santa Fe. The most beautiful were the Cup\u00e9 Fissore, which had many famous owners (Julio Sosa, C\u00e9sar Luis Menotti, and others). Other models are the Auto Union 1000 S Sed\u00e1n (21,797 made until 1969) and the Auto Union 1000 Universal S (6,396 made until 1969). and the Auto Union Combi/Pick-up.\nThe last version of the Auto Union Combi/Pick-up (DKW F1000 L), launched in 1969, survived a few months and was bought out by IME, which continued production until 1979.\nVans and utility vehicles.\nThe DKW Munga was built by Auto Union in Ingolstadt. Production began in October 1956 and ended in December 1968, with 46,750 cars built.\nFrom 1949 to 1962, DKW produced the \"Schnellaster\" with a trailing-arm rear suspension system with springs in the cross bar assembly. Spanish subsidiary IMOSA produced a modern successor introduced in 1963, the DKW F 1000\u00a0L. This van started with the three-cylinder 1,000\u00a0cc engine, but later received a Mercedes-Benz Diesel engine and was renamed a Mercedes-Benz in 1975.\nMotorcycles.\nDuring the late 1920s and until WWII broke out, DKW was both the world's largest motorcycle manufacturer, as well as Europe's pioneer of front-wheel drive automobiles with their successful 1931 and later DKW Front models, before the 1932 Adler Trumpf and the 1934 Citroen Traction Avant. In 1931, Arnold Zoller started building split-singles and this concept made DKW the dominant racing motorcycle in the Lightweight and Junior classes between the wars. This included off-road events like the International Six Days Trial where the marque scored some considerable inter-war year successes alongside Bavarian Motor Works At the same time, the company also had some success with super-charged racing motorcycles which because of their light weight were particularly successful in the ISDT\nThe motorcycle branch produced famous models such as the RT 125 pre- and post-World War II, and after the war with production at the original factory in GDR becoming MZ it made 175, 250 and 350 (cc) models. As war reparations, the design drawings of the RT125 were given to Harley-Davidson in the US and BSA in the UK. The Harley-Davidson version was known loosely as the Hummer (Hummer is really just a few specific years, but generally people call the Harley lightweights Hummers), while BSA used them for the Bantam. IFA and later MZ models continued in production until the 1990s, when economics brought production of the two stroke to an end. Other manufacturers copied the DKW design, officially or otherwise. This can be seen in the similarity of many small two-stroke motorcycles from the 1950s, including from Yamaha, Voskhod, Maserati, and Polish WSK.\nCars.\nPre-war production.\nPre-war and war-years production of civilian models totalled almost 250,000 units, of which some 218,000 were front-wheel driven.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8708", "revid": "18313966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8708", "title": "Doctor Syn", "text": "Fictional character from novels by Russell Thorndike\nThe Reverend Doctor Christopher Syn is the smuggler hero of a series of novels by Russell Thorndike. The first book, \"Doctor Syn: A Tale of the Romney Marsh\" was published in 1915. The story idea came from smuggling in the 18th-century Romney Marsh, where brandy and tobacco were brought in at night by boat from France to avoid the tax. Minor battles were fought, sometimes at night, between gangs of smugglers, such as the Hawkhurst Gang, and the Revenue, supported by the army and local militias in South Kent and Sussex.\nCharacter biography.\nChristopher Syn, born 1729, is portrayed as a brilliant scholar from Queen's College, Oxford, possessing swashbuckling skills such as riding, fencing, and seamanship. He was content to live the quiet life of a country vicar in Dymchurch-under-the-Wall under the patronage of Sir Charles Cobtree, the father of his best friend Anthony Cobtree, until his beautiful young Spanish wife Imogene was seduced by and eloped with Nicholas Tappitt, who Dr. Syn had considered a close friend.\nChristopher Syn set out on a quest for revenge, always managing to reach the eloped pair's destinations ahead of them just in time to terrify them against landing and facing him in a deliberate campaign of terror. While sailing from Spain to America in pursuit, his ship was captured by the pirate ship \"The Sulphur Pit\", commanded by Captain Satan. In a one-on-one fight, Syn defeated and killed Captain Satan to take command of his ship and crew; among them was Mr. Mipps, a former Royal Navy carpenter with whom Syn had become friends in England after rescuing him from the Customs men. Mipps swore loyalty to Syn from that time onward.\nWith Mipps at his side, Syn turned to piracy and became a great success. Later, when his crew refused to let Syn leave, Syn and Mipps slipped away in one of the ship's boats; unknown to Syn, Mipps had arranged a convenient \"accident\" in the ship's powder magazine with an exploding barrel of gunpowder, eliminating witnesses of Syn's piratical acts.\nMipps then joined Syn in his quest for revenge, pursuing Tappitt and Imogene throughout the thirteen American colonies (supposedly preaching the gospel to the Indians) and around the world (as part of a whaling voyage) afterwards. Mipps was with him in the Caribbean when Dr. Syn turned again to piracy, assuming the name of Captain Clegg (taking the name \"Clegg\" from a certain vicious biting fly he had encountered in America)., \"Clegg\" hijacked his enemy Tappitt's own ship and crew and sailed off with them (renaming the ship the \"Imogene\") to become the most infamous pirate of the day.\nHowever, a mulatto who escaped the destruction of Syn's previous ship stowed away in Clegg's ship and accused him before the crew; Clegg quelled the potential mutiny by having the mulatto's tongue cut out, marooning him on a coral reef and violently killing Yellow Pete, the ship's Chinese cook, who represented the crew in their wish to rescue the mulatto. Afterwards, realizing that Clegg had become too notorious, Syn decided to abandon his quest and return to England, and Mipps set up a second \"accidental\" explosion to destroy the \"Imogene\" and her crew.\nSyn returned to England on the night of a storm (13 November 1775) that wrecked his brig off the English coast in sight of Dymchurch. That night he went to the house of his old friend (and now squire) Anthony Cobtree. When news came that the local vicar had drowned while trying to save victims of the shipwreck, Squire Cobtree offered the post to Christopher Syn. Syn accepted and settled down to a more respectable life as the vicar of Dymchurch and Dean of Peculiars in Romney Marsh, Kent, resuming his original name.\nMipps arrived in Dymchurch with the intent of settling down. Syn made him the village sexton upon condition that Mipps \"remember to forget\" (that Syn had been Clegg and that they had known each other before), and that Mipps never get involved with the local smugglers.\nSyn soon became aware that his parishioners were smuggling goods from France to avoid the excessive customs duties the government charged. Learning from Mipps (who, contrary to Syn's orders, had become a leader of the smugglers) that certain townsfolk had been ambushed and captured during a smuggling run, Syn purchased the great black stallion Gehenna from gypsy horse-traders and raced to their rescue. A suit of clothing borrowed from a scarecrow made an improvised disguise, and Syn and Mipps were able to rescue the townsfolk from the Dragoons.\nAfter this, Syn decided that he could only protect his people by becoming their leader. He created a more elaborate scarecrow costume, with eerie luminous paint. Riding Gehenna at night, the respectable Dr. Syn became \"The Scarecrow\", the feared head of the smugglers. Together with Mipps, he organized the smugglers into a well-organized band of \"Night Riders\", also called \"The Devil Riders\", with macabre disguises and code-names.\nSyn's cunning was so great that the smugglers outwitted the government forces for many years. A hidden stable watched over by Mother Handaway, the local \"witch\" (who believed the Scarecrow to be The Devil in living form), was the hiding place for the horses of the Scarecrow and his lieutenants, Mipps and the local highwayman Jimmie Bone (who, being as good a horseman as Syn and of similar build, was sometimes called upon to impersonate the Scarecrow when Syn either had to be elsewhere or seen in the same place.).\nShortly after the first appearances of the Scarecrow, Nicholas Tappitt (using the name \"Colonel Delacourt\") and the ailing Imogene returned to England, ending up in Dymchurch. Recognizing Syn as Clegg, Tappitt realized that Syn and the Scarecrow were the same and helped the authorities set a trap for him, hoping to both rid himself of his enemy and claim the reward for his capture. The trap was sprung, but Squire Cobtree's daughter Charlotte, who had fallen in love with Syn and also learned his secret identities as both Clegg and the Scarecrow, was the tragic victim when she dressed in the Scarecrow's disguise and was fatally wounded as a result. Tappitt was then suspected of being the Scarecrow, and a Customs officer and three constables came to arrest him. In the ensuing fight, Tappitt killed the Customs man and the constables subdued and arrested Tappitt for murdering the Customs officer.\nAfter Imogene's death in Syn's arms (during which she revealed to him that he had a son by her who was missing somewhere in America), Syn fought a final duel with Tappitt in his jail cell, defeating him. Syn then struck a bargain with Tappitt: If Tappitt confessed to being the notorious pirate Clegg, then Syn would look after and care for Tappitt and Imogene's new-born infant daughter (also named Imogene). Tappitt agreed, and \"Captain Clegg\" was hanged and later \"buried without benefit of clergy at a cross-roads hard by the Kent Ditch.\"\nMany years later, Captain Collyer, a Royal Navy officer assigned to smash the local smuggling ring, uncovered the deception and Dr. Syn's true identity, thanks in part to the tongueless mulatto (who had been rescued by Collyer years before and who had been serving Collyer as a \"ferret\" seeking out hidden contraband) who recognized Syn as Clegg. Syn evaded capture while at the same time making sure that Imogene and Squire Cobtree's son Denis (who had fallen in love with Imogene) would have a happy life together (they were eventually married), but was murdered in revenge by the mulatto, who then mysteriously managed to escape, leaving Syn harpooned through the neck. As a last mark of respect, Collyer ordered that Syn be buried at sea, rather than have his body hung in chains.\nMipps escaped in the confusion of Syn's death and disappeared from England, but it is said that a little man very much like him is living out his days in a Buddhist Monastery somewhere in the Malay Peninsula, delighting the monks with recounting the adventures of Doctor Syn and the eerie stories of the Romney Marsh and the mysterious Scarecrow and his Night Riders.\nPublication history.\nThe Dr. Syn books detail his adventures and attempts to help the people of Dymchurch and the surrounding area evade the Excise tax. There are seven novels in the series:\nNote: the \"first\" book, \"Doctor Syn,\" is actually the final story chronologically; the others proceed in published sequence.\nAn expanded version of \"Doctor Syn Returns\" titled \"The Scarecrow Rides\" was published for the U.S. market by The Dial Press in 1935; years later in 2013 it was re-printed in paperback by Black Curtain Press. ().\nIn 1960, American author William Buchanan reworked Thorndike's \"Further Adventures of Doctor Syn\" under the title \"Christopher Syn\" (New York, Abelard Schuman), giving Thorndike co-authorship credit; this version provides a different conclusion and some conflation, renaming and even removal of the supporting characters. \"Christopher Syn\" became the basis for the 1962 Disney production (see below); there was also a novelization of the Disney theatrical version titled \"Doctor Syn, Alias the Scarecrow\" written by Vic Crume.\nIn other media.\nFilms.\nThree film adaptations have been made of Dr. Syn's exploits.\n\"Doctor Syn\" (1937).\nThe first, \"Doctor Syn\" (1937), starred the actor George Arliss in the title role and was his last film.\n\"Captain Clegg\" (1962).\n\"Captain Clegg\" (1962), known as \"Night Creatures\" in the U. S., was produced by Hammer Film Productions with actor Peter Cushing in the lead role, directed by Peter Graham Scott. In the screenplay by Anthony Hinds, the main character's name was changed from Doctor Syn to Parson Blyss to avoid rights problems with Disney's forthcoming version, and \"Captain Clegg\"'s screenplay follows the novel \"Doctor Syn\" and the screenplay of the 1937 film closely with the exception of a tightening of the plot. In the Arliss movie \"Doctor Syn\", Syn escapes to sea with Mipps and the rest of the Dymchurch smugglers, whereas \"Captain Clegg\" ends more faithfully to the novel, with Parson Blyss being killed by the mulatto (who is then killed by Mipps) and then being carried to and buried in Captain Clegg's empty grave by Mipps. \"Captain Clegg\" was released in the UK on DVD and Blu-ray in 2014; \"Night Creatures\" was never released on videotape in the United States, but is included in the 2014 two-disc DVD collection \"The Hammer Horror Series\". In North America, the film was released on 6 September 2005 along with seven other Hammer horror films on the 4-DVD set \"The Hammer Horror Series\" (ASIN: B0009X770O), which is part of MCA-Universal's \"Franchise Collection\". This set was re-released on Blu-ray September 13, 2016. A Blu-ray was released in the UK on 23 June 2014 by Final Cut Entertainment. In 2021, Powerhouse Films re-released the film on Blu-Ray, along with \"The Shadow of the Cat\", \"The Phantom of the Opera\", and \"Nightmare,\" as part of \"Hammer Volume Six: Night Shadows\" boxset\".\"\n\"The Scarecrow of Romney Marsh\" (1963).\n\"The Scarecrow of Romney Marsh\" (1963) was produced for the \"Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color\" TV series. It was shot on location in Kent, England and was directed by James Neilson. It stars Patrick McGoohan in the title role, with George Cole as Mipps and Sean Scully as John Banks, the younger son of Squire Banks (Michael Hordern). St Clement's Church in Old Romney doubled as Dr Syn's Dymchurch parish church in the production, and Disney funded the repair of the building in order to use it as a filming location.\nPart One dealt with the arrival of General Pugh (Geoffrey Keen), who had been ordered by the War Office to smash the smuggling ring and prevent the Scarecrow from rescuing a Dymchurch man captured by a naval press gang as bait to trap the Scarecrow. Part Two depicted The Scarecrow dealing with the traitorous Joe Ransley (Patrick Wymark). Part Three showed how the Scarecrow rescued Harry Banks (David Buck) and American Simon Bates (Tony Britton) from General Pugh's clutches in Dover Castle.\nWhile originally conceived and edited for American television (and announced in an advertisement by NBC in the Tuesday, July 9, 1963 issue of \"The Hollywood Reporter\"), \"The Scarecrow of Romney Marsh\" was re-edited for a British theatrical release before the American television debut. Retitled \"Dr Syn, Alias the Scarecrow\", the British theatrical version was released on a double bill with \"The Sword in the Stone\" and ran during the 1963 Christmas season (advertised in the January 1964 issue of \"Photoplay\"). This version was shown in Europe as well as Central and South America through 1966.\nIn the 1970s, the production was re-edited again for its first American theatrical release, on double bills with both \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" and \"Treasure Island\". (The VHS release of the 1980s, sharing the removal of the Scarecrow's laugh from Terry Gilkyson's title song, was expanded to include the story material from all three television episodes, while retaining the feature film structure and credits; it was available for a relatively short amount of time.) Shortly after the US theatrical run, it was re-edited once more for a two-part presentation on Disney's television series in the 1970s, simply omitting the middle episode. The original three-part series was first shown as part of \"Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color\" on February 9, 16 and 23, 1964. Later it was included in a late 1980s \"Wonderful World of Disney\" syndication rerun package, and cablecast in 1990s on the Disney Channel. This version generally followed the storyline of \"The Further Adventures of Dr. Syn\" and made it clear that Syn did not die or stage his own death: at the film's end, he is having a cup of tea with the Squire, who admits to now owing a debt of gratitude to the Scarecrow.\nOn November 11, 2008 The Walt Disney Company released a limited pressing of 39,500 copies of \"The Scarecrow of Romney Marsh\" on DVD for the first time, in a collector's metal tin case. This was a part of the \"\" collection and was now titled \"Dr. Syn: The Scarecrow of Romney Marsh\". This release sold out in three weeks. On February 17, 2009 the DVD was made available again for the members of the Disney Movie Club. This two-disc set includes the American television version and the original British theatrical release version \"Dr Syn, Alias the Scarecrow\" in a widescreen format. It also includes the original introductions by Walt Disney (in which he erroneously states that Dr. Syn was an actual historical figure) and a documentary on Disney's interest in filming the property. In October 2019, the Disney Movie Club released it on Blu-ray, this time titled \"The Scarecrow of Romney Marsh.\" Its single disc, also in the widescreen format, contains the three episodes originally broadcast on television in 1963. It also includes Walt Disney's introductions, but none of the supplemental features that appear on 2009 release.\nOther adaptations.\nMade in 1974, \"Carry On Dick\", of the \"Carry On\" series of films, followed the same premise of a country vicar (Sid James) who is secretly an outlaw, in this case the highwayman Dick Turpin.\nTheatre.\nIn 2001 a stage adaptation titled \"Doctor Syn\" was performed at churches throughout the Romney Marsh, the final night being performed in Dymchurch. The cast featured Daniel Thorndike (the author's son), Michael Fields, Steven Povey and Ben Barton, along with various amateurs from the area.\nAudio adaptations.\nRufus Sewell read a 10-part audio adaptation combining and abridging \"Doctor Syn on the High Seas\" and \"Doctor Syn Returns\" for BBC Radio, broadcast on BBC Radio 7 in December 2006 and repeated in June 2007.\nA 10-part audio adaptation of \"The Further Adventures of Doctor Syn\" (combining and abridging \"The Further Adventures of Doctor Syn\" and \"The Shadow of Doctor Syn\") read by Rufus Sewell was performed on BBC Radio 7 in December 2007.\nIn April 2009, a third series was announced for broadcast later in 2009. BBC Radio 7 broadcast the six-part series, an abridged reading by Rufus Sewell of the original \"Doctor Syn\" novel, from January 4, 2010 to January 11.\nJohn Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin reinterpreted elements of the Doctor Syn story as his \"No Quarter\" fantasy sequence in Led Zeppelin's concert film \"The Song Remains the Same\".\nComic books.\nA three-issue adaptation of the Disney production was published by Gold Key Comics under the \"Scarecrow of Romney Marsh\" title, spanning April 1964 through October 1965.\nA much abridged revision of the adventures of Dr. Syn appeared as a short comic serialized in the monthly publication \"Disney Adventures\". The new story features the heroic Doctor and his young sidekick protecting innocent villagers from corrupt government officials and soldiers. \"Disney Adventures\" would also produce a crossover story with the \"Pirates of the Caribbean\" franchise, where Dr. Syn meets Captain Jack Sparrow.\nDoctor Syn appears in the \"League of Extraordinary Gentlemen\" series as a member of the league gathered by Lemuel Gulliver. His alter ego, Captain Clegg, also makes appearances, where he is mentioned to have had a brief romantic liaison with future teammate Fanny Hill. In the 2003 film adaptation of \"League\", Dr. Syn can be spotted in one of the portraits hanging on the wall in M's library.\nCultural legacy.\nA \"Days of Syn\" festival is held even-numbered years by Dymchurch residents for fund-raising. The 2006 \"Days of Syn\" was on 26\u201328 August (UK August Bank Holiday weekend) and featured a talk on Dr. Syn at the Anglican church at 6:30\u00a0p.m. On Sunday at 3 p.m. there was a church service where Dr. Syn and the cast appeared in period costume. On Monday, starting at the Bowery Hall, scenes were reenacted from \"Doctor Syn\", and again during the day along the Dymchurch shoreline and in the Ocean pub.\nIn 2009, discussions took place to build a 100\u00a0ft high statue of \"The Scarecrow\" on a site in the centre of Romney Marsh. This had not been done by 2016.\nDoctor Syn is also the name given to one of the locomotives on the Romney, Hythe and Dymchurch Railway.\nDoctor Syn also inspired novelist George Chittenden, who captured smuggling on the Kent coast in his debut novel \"The Boy Who Led Them\", which follows the rise and fall of a smuggling gang leader further down the coast in the notorious town of Deal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8709", "revid": "5243703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8709", "title": "Dhrystone", "text": "Computer benchmarking program\nDhrystone is a synthetic computing benchmark program developed in 1984 by Reinhold P. Weicker intended to be representative of system (integer) programming. The Dhrystone grew to become representative of general processor (CPU) performance. The name \"Dhrystone\" is a pun on a different benchmark algorithm called Whetstone (pun explained: w\"h\"et-stone = wet-stone | d\"h\"ry-stone = dry-stone), which emphasizes floating point performance.\nWith Dhrystone, Weicker gathered meta-data from a broad range of software, including programs written in FORTRAN, PL/1, SAL, ALGOL 68, and Pascal. He then characterized these programs in terms of various common constructs: procedure calls, pointer indirections, assignments, etc. From this he wrote the Dhrystone benchmark to correspond to a representative mix. Dhrystone was published in Ada, with the C version for Unix developed by Rick Richardson (\"version 1.1\") greatly contributing to its popularity.\nDhrystone vs. Whetstone.\nThe Dhrystone benchmark contains no floating point operations, thus the name is a pun on the then-popular Whetstone benchmark for floating point operations. The output from the benchmark is the number of Dhrystones per second (the number of iterations of the main code loop per second).\nBoth Whetstone and Dhrystone are \"synthetic\" benchmarks, meaning that they are simple programs that are carefully designed to statistically mimic the processor usage of some common set of programs. Whetstone, developed in 1972, originally strove to mimic typical Algol 60 programs based on measurements from 1970, but eventually became most popular in its Fortran version, reflecting the highly numerical orientation of computing in the 1960s.\nIssues addressed by Dhrystone.\nDhrystone's eventual importance as an indicator of general-purpose (\"integer\") performance of new computers made it a target for commercial compiler writers. Various modern compiler static code analysis techniques (such as elimination of dead code: for example, code which uses the processor but produces internal results which are not used or output) make the use and design of synthetic benchmarks more difficult. Version 2.0 of the benchmark, released by Weicker and Richardson in March 1988, had a number of changes intended to foil a range of compiler techniques. Yet it was carefully crafted so as not to change the underlying benchmark. This effort to foil compilers was only partly successful. Dhrystone 2.1, released in May of the same year, had some minor changes and as of \u00a02010[ [update]] remains the current definition of Dhrystone.\nOther than issues related to compiler optimization, various other issues have been cited with the Dhrystone. Most of these, including the small code size and small data set size, were understood at the time of its publication in 1984. More subtle is the slight over-representation of string operations, which is largely language-related: both Ada and Pascal have strings as normal variables in the language, whereas C does not, so what was simple variable assignment in reference benchmarks became buffer copy operations in the C library. Another issue is that the score reported does not include information which is critical when comparing systems such as which compiler was used, and what optimizations.\nDhrystone remains remarkably resilient as a simple benchmark, but its continuing value in establishing true performance is questionable. It is easy to use, well documented, fully self-contained, well understood, and can be made to work on almost any system. In particular, it has remained in broad use in the embedded computing world, though the recently developed EEMBC benchmark suite, the CoreMark standalone benchmark, HINT, Stream, and even Bytemark are widely quoted and used, as well as more specific benchmarks for the memory subsystem (Cachebench), TCP/IP (TTCP), and many others.\nResults.\nDhrystone may represent a result more meaningfully than MIPS (million instructions per second) because instruction count comparisons between different instruction sets (e.g. RISC vs. CISC) can confound simple comparisons. For example, the same high-level task may require many more instructions on a RISC machine, but might execute faster than a single CISC instruction. Thus, the Dhrystone score counts only the number of program iteration completions per second, allowing individual machines to perform this calculation in a machine-specific way. Another common representation of the Dhrystone benchmark is the DMIPS (Dhrystone MIPS) obtained when the Dhrystone score is divided by 1757 (the number of Dhrystones per second obtained on the VAX 11/780, nominally a 1 MIPS machine).\nAnother way to represent results is in DMIPS/MHz, where DMIPS result is further divided by CPU frequency, to allow for easier comparison of CPUs running at different clock rates.\nShortcomings.\nUsing Dhrystone as a benchmark has pitfalls: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8710", "revid": "15934865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8710", "title": "Durham University (England)", "text": ""}
{"id": "8711", "revid": "697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8711", "title": "Distilling", "text": ""}
{"id": "8713", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8713", "title": "Dave Winer", "text": "American software developer, entrepreneur, and writer\nDave Winer (born May 2, 1955, in Queens, New York City) is an American software developer, entrepreneur, and writer who resides in New York City. Winer is noted for his contributions to outliners, scripting, content management, and web services, as well as blogging and podcasting. He is the founder of the software companies Living Videotext, Userland Software and Small Picture Inc., a former contributing editor for the Web magazine HotWired, the author of the \"Scripting News\" weblog, a former research fellow at Harvard Law School, and current visiting scholar at New York University's Arthur L. Carter Journalism Institute.\nEarly life and education.\nWiner was born on May 2, 1955, in Queens, New York City, the son of Eve Winer, PhD, a school psychologist, and Leon Winer, PhD, a former professor of the Columbia University Graduate School of Business. Winer is also the grandnephew of German novelist Arno Schmidt and a relative of Hedy Lamarr. He graduated from the Bronx High School of Science in 1972. Winer received a BA in Mathematics from Tulane University in New Orleans in 1976. In 1978 he received an MS in Computer Science from the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison.\nCareer.\nEarly work in outliners.\nIn 1979 Dave Winer became an employee of Personal Software, where he worked on his own product idea named VisiText, which was his first attempt to build a commercial product around an \"expand and collapse\" outline display and which ultimately established outliners as a software product. In 1981 he left the company and founded Living Videotext to develop this still-unfinished product. The company was based in Mountain View, CA, and grew to more than 50 employees.\nThinkTank, which was based on VisiText, was released in 1983 for Apple II and was promoted as an \"idea processor.\" It became the \"first popular outline processor, the one that made the term generic.\" A ThinkTank release for the IBM PC followed in 1984, as well as releases for the Macintosh 128K and 512K. Ready, a RAM resident outliner for the IBM PC released in 1985, was commercially successful but soon succumbed to the competing Sidekick product by Borland. MORE, released for Apple's Macintosh in 1986, combined an outliner and a presentation program. It became \"uncontested in the marketplace\" and won the MacUser's Editor's Choice Award for \"Best Product\" in 1986.\nIn 1987, at the height of the company's success, Winer sold Living Videotext to Symantec for an undisclosed but substantial transfer of stock that \"made his fortune.\" Winer continued to work at Symantec's Living Videotext division, but after six months he left the company in pursuit of other challenges.\nYears at UserLand.\nWiner founded UserLand Software in 1988 and served as the company's CEO until 2002.\nUserLand's original flagship product, Frontier, was a system-level scripting environment for the Mac. Winer's pioneering weblog, \"Scripting News\", takes its name from this early interest. Frontier was an outliner-based scripting language, echoing Winer's longstanding interest in outliners and anticipating code-folding editors of the late 1990s.\nWiner became interested in web publishing while helping automate the production process of the strikers' online newspaper during San Francisco's newspaper strike of November 1994, According to Newsweek, through this experience, he \"revolutionized Net publishing.\" Winer subsequently shifted the company's focus to online publishing products, enthusiastically promoting and experimenting with these products while building his websites and developing new features. One of these products was Frontier's NewsPage Suite of 1997, which supported the publication of Winer's \"Scripting News\" and was adopted by a handful of users who \"began playing around with their own sites in the Scripting News vein.\" These users included notably Chris Gulker and Jorn Barger, who envisaged blogging as a networked practice among users of the software.\nWiner was named a Seybold Fellow in 1997, to assist the executives and editors that comprised the Seybold Institute in ensuring \"the highest quality and topicality\" in their educational program, the Seybold Seminars; the honor was bestowed for his \"pioneering work in web-based publishing systems.\" Keen to enter the \"competitive arena of high-end Web development,\" Winer then came to collaborate with Microsoft and jointly developed the XML-RPC protocol. This led to the creation of SOAP, which he co-authored with Microsoft's Don Box, Bob Atkinson, and Mohsen Al-Ghosein.\nIn December 1997, acting on the desire to \"offer much more timely information,\" Winer designed and implemented an XML syndication format for use on his \"Scripting News\" weblog, thus making an early contribution to the history of web syndication technology. By December 2000, competing dialects of RSS included several varieties of Netscape's RSS, Winer's RSS 0.92, and an RDF-based RSS 1.0. Winer continued to develop the branch of the RSS fork originating from RSS 0.92, releasing in 2002 a version called RSS 2.0. Winer's advocacy of web syndication in general and RSS 2.0 in particular convinced many news organizations to syndicate their news content in that format. For example, in early 2002 \"The New York Times\" entered an agreement with UserLand to syndicate many of their articles in RSS 2.0 format. Winer resisted calls by technologists to have the shortcomings of RSS 2.0 improved. Instead, he froze the format and turned its ownership over to Harvard University.\nWith products and services based on UserLand's Frontier system, Winer became a leader in blogging tools from 1999 onwards, as well as a \"leading evangelist of weblogs.\" In 2000 Winer developed the Outline Processor Markup Language OPML, an XML format for outlines, which originally served as the native file format for Radio UserLand's outliner application and has since been adopted for other uses, the most common being to exchange lists of web feeds between web feed aggregators. UserLand was the first to add an \"enclosure\" tag in its RSS, modifying its blog software and its aggregator so that bloggers could easily link to an audio file (see podcasting and history of podcasting).\nIn February 2002 Winer was named one of the \"Top Ten Technology Innovators\" by InfoWorld.\nIn June 2002 Winer underwent life-saving bypass surgery to prevent a heart attack and as a consequence stepped down as CEO of UserLand shortly after. He remained the firm's majority shareholder, however, and claimed personal ownership of Weblogs.com.\nWriter.\nAs \"one of the most prolific content generators in Web history,\" Winer has enjoyed a long career as a writer and has come to be counted among Silicon Valley's \"most influential web voices.\"\nWiner started \"DaveNet\", \"a stream-of-consciousness newsletter distributed by e-mail\" in November 1994 and maintained Web archives of the \"goofy and informative\" 800-word essays since January 1995, which earned him a Cool Site of the Day award in March 1995. From the start, the \"Internet newsletter\" \"DaveNet\" was widely read among industry leaders and analysts, who experienced it as a \"real community.\" Dissatisfied with the quality of the coverage that the Mac and, especially, his own Frontier software received in the trade press, Winer saw \"DaveNet\" as an opportunity to \"bypass\" the conventional news channels of the software business. Satisfied with his success, he \"reveled in the new direct email line he had established with his colleagues and peers, and in his ability to circumvent the media.\" In the early years, Winer often used \"DaveNet\" to vent his grievances against Apple's management, and as a consequence of his strident criticism came to be seen as \"the most notorious of the disgruntled Apple developers.\" Redacted \"DaveNet\" columns were published weekly by the web magazine \"HotWired\" between June 1995 and May 1996. \"DaveNet\" was discontinued in 2004.\nWiner's \"Scripting News\", described as \"one of the [web's] oldest blogs,\" launched in February 1997 and earned him titles such as \"protoblogger\" and \"forefather of blogging.\" \"Scripting News\" started as \"a home for links, offhand observations, and ephemera\" and allowed Winer to mix \"his roles as a widely read pundit and an ambitious entrepreneur.\" Offering an \"as-it-happened portrait of the work of writing software for the Web in the 1990s,\" the site became an \"established must-read for industry insiders.\" \"Scripting News\" continues to be updated regularly.\nVisiting scholar positions.\nWiner spent one year as a resident fellow at the Harvard Law School's Berkman Center for Internet &amp; Society, where he worked on using weblogs in education. While there, he launched \"Weblogs at Harvard Law School\" using UserLand software, and held the first BloggerCon conferences. Winer's fellowship ended in June 2004.\nIn 2010 Winer was appointed visiting scholar at New York University's Arthur L. Carter Journalism Institute.\nReturn to Outliners.\nOn December 19, 2012, Winer co-founded Small Picture, Inc. with Kyle Shank; Small Picture is a corporation that builds two outlining products, Little Outliner and Fargo. Little Outliner, an entry-level outliner designed to teach new users about outliners, which launched on March 25, 2013. Fargo, the company's \"primary product\", launched less than a month later, on April 17, 2013. Fargo is a free browser-based outliner which syncs with a user's Dropbox account. Small Picture has stated that in future it may offer paid-for services to Fargo users. Fargo was retired at the end of September 2017.\nProjects and activities.\n24 Hours of Democracy.\nIn February 1996, while working as a columnist for HotWired, Winer organized 24 Hours of Democracy, an online protest against the recently passed Communications Decency Act. As part of the protest, over 1,000 people, among them Microsoft chairman Bill Gates, posted essays to the Web on the subject of democracy, civil liberty and freedom of speech.\nEdit This Page.\nIn December 1999, Winer became the \"proprietor of a growing free blog service\" at EditThisPage.com, hosting \"approximately 20,000 sites\" in February 2001. The service closed in December 2005.\nPodcasting.\nWiner has been given \"credit for the invention of the podcasting model.\" Having received user requests for audioblogging features since October 2000, especially from Adam Curry, Winer decided to include new functionality in RSS 0.92 by defining a new element called \"enclosure,\" which would pass the address of a media file to the RSS aggregator. He demonstrated the RSS enclosure feature on January 11, 2001, by enclosing a Grateful Dead song in his \"Scripting News\" weblog.\nWiner's weblogging product, Radio Userland, the program favored by Curry, had a built-in aggregator and thus provided both the \"send\" and \"receive\" components of what was then called audioblogging. In July 2003 Winer challenged other aggregator developers to provide support for enclosures. In October 2003, Kevin Marks demonstrated a script to download RSS enclosures and pass them to iTunes for transfer to an iPod. Curry then offered an RSS-to-iPod script that moved MP3 files from Radio UserLand to iTunes. The term \"podcasting\" was suggested by Ben Hammersley in February 2004.\nWiner also has an occasional podcast, Morning Coffee Notes, which has featured guests such as Doc Searls, Mike Kowalchik, Jason Calacanis, Steve Gillmor, Peter Rojas, Cecile Andrews, Adam Curry, Betsy Devine and others.\nBloggerCon.\nBloggerCon is a user-focused conference for the blogger community. BloggerCon I (October 2003) and II (April 2004), were organized by Dave Winer and friends at Harvard Law School's Berkman Center for the Internet and Society in Cambridge, Mass. BloggerCon III met at Stanford Law School on November 6, 2004.\nWeblogs.com.\nWeblogs.com provided a free ping-server used by many blogging applications, as well as free hosting to many bloggers. After leaving Userland, Winer claimed personal ownership of the site, and in mid-June 2004 he shut down its free blog-hosting service, citing lack of resources and personal problems. A swift and orderly migration off Winer's server was facilitated by Rogers Cadenhead, whom Winer then hired to port the server to a more stable platform. In October 2005, VeriSign bought the Weblogs.com ping-server from Winer and promised that its free services would remain free. The podcasting-related web site audio.weblogs.com was also included in the $2.3\u00a0million deal.\nShare your OPML.\nWiner opened his self-described \"commons for sharing outlines, feeds, and taxonomy\" in May 2006. The site allowed users to publish and syndicate blogrolls and aggregator subscriptions using OPML. Winer suspended its service in January 2008.\nRebooting the News.\nSince 2009, Winer has collaborated with New York University's associate professor of journalism Jay Rosen on \"Rebooting the News\", a weekly podcast on technology and innovation in journalism. It was announced on July 1, 2011, that the show would be on break, as NYU itself was, from June to September. However, no new episodes have been released since, making show #94 released on May 23, 2011, the last.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8714", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8714", "title": "December 10", "text": "Day of the yearDecember 10 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8715", "revid": "4117151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8715", "title": "Taiko", "text": "Japanese percussion instruments\n are a broad range of Japanese percussion instruments. In Japanese, the term refers to any kind of drum, but outside Japan, it is used specifically to refer to any of the various Japanese drums called and to the form of ensemble drumming more specifically called . The process of constructing varies between manufacturers, and the preparation of both the drum body and skin can take several years depending on the method.\n have a mythological origin in Japanese folklore, but historical records suggest that were introduced to Japan through Chinese and Korean cultural influence as early as the 6th century CE; pottery from the Haniwa period depicting drums has also been found. Some are similar to instruments originating from India. Archaeological evidence also supports the view that were present in Japan during the 6th century in the Kofun period. Their function has varied throughout history, ranging from communication, military action, theatrical accompaniment, religious ceremony and concert performances. In modern times, have also played a central role in social movements for minorities both within and outside Japan.\n performance, characterized by an ensemble playing on different drums, was developed in 1951 through the work of Daihachi Oguchi and later in 1961 by the Ondekoza, and was made later popular with many other groups copying the format of Ondekoza such as Kodo, Yamato, Tao, Taikoza, Fuun No Kai, Sukeroku Taiko, etc. Other performance styles, such as , have also emerged from specific communities in Japan. performance groups are active not only in Japan, but also in the United States, Australia, Canada, Europe, Taiwan, and Brazil. Taiko performance consists of many components in technical rhythm, form, stick grip, clothing, and the particular instrumentation. Ensembles typically use different types of barrel-shaped as well as smaller . Many groups accompany the drums with vocals, strings, and woodwind instruments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nThe origin of the and its variants is unclear, though there have been many suggestions. Historical accounts, of which the earliest date from 588\u00a0CE, note that young Japanese men traveled to Korea to study the , a drum that originated in South China. This study and appropriation of Chinese instruments may have influenced the emergence of . Certain court music styles, especially and , arrived in Japan through both China and Korea. In both traditions, dancers were accompanied by several instruments that included drums similar to . Certain percussive patterns and terminology in , an early dance and music style in Japan, in addition to physical features of the , also reflect influence from both China and India on drum use in performance.\nArchaeological evidence shows that were used in Japan as early as the 6th century CE, during the latter part of the Kofun period, and were likely used for communication, in festivals, and in other rituals. This evidence was substantiated by the discovery of haniwa statues in the Sawa District of Gunma Prefecture. Two of these figures are depicted playing drums; one of them, wearing skins, is equipped with a barrel-shaped drum hung from his shoulder and uses a stick to play the drum at hip height. This statue is titled \"Man Beating the \" and is considered the oldest evidence of performance in Japan. Similarities between the playing style demonstrated by this and known music traditions in China and Korea further suggest influences from these regions.\nThe , the second-oldest book of Japanese classical history, contains a mythological story describing the origin of . The myth tells how Amaterasu, who had sealed herself inside a cave in anger, was beckoned out by an elder goddess Ame-no-Uzume when others had failed. Ame-no-Uzume accomplished this by emptying out a barrel of sake and dancing furiously on top of it. Historians regard her performance as the mythological creation of music.\nUse in warfare.\nIn feudal Japan, were often used to motivate troops, call out orders or announcements, and set a marching pace; marches were usually set to six paces per beat of the drum. During the 16th-century Warring States period, specific drum calls were used to communicate orders for retreating and advancing. Other rhythms and techniques were detailed in period texts. According to the war chronicle , nine sets of five beats would summon an ally to battle, while nine sets of three beats, sped up three or four times, was the call to advance and pursue an enemy. Folklore from the 16th century on the legendary 6th-century Emperor Keitai offers a story that he obtained a large drum from China, which he named . The Emperor was thought to have used it to both encourage his own army and intimidate his enemies.\nIn traditional settings.\n have been incorporated in Japanese theatre for rhythmic needs, general atmosphere, and in certain settings decoration. In the kabuki play \"The Tale of Shiroishi and the Taihei Chronicles\", scenes in the pleasure quarters are accompanied by to create dramatic tension. Noh theatre also features music, where performance consists of highly specific rhythmic patterns. The school of drumming, for example, contains 65 basic patterns in addition to 25 special patterns; these patterns are categorized in several classes. Differences between these patterns include changes in tempo, accent, dynamics, pitch, and function in the theatrical performance. Patterns are also often connected together in progressions.\n continue to be used in , a classical music tradition typically performed at the Tokyo Imperial Palace in addition to local temples and shrines. In , one component of the art form is traditional dance, which is guided in part by the rhythm set by the .\n have played an important role in many local festivals across Japan. They are also used to accompany religious ritual music. In , a category of music and dances stemming from Shinto practices, frequently appear alongside other performers during local festivals. In Buddhist traditions, are used for ritual dances as part of the Bon Festival. , along with other instruments, are featured atop towers that are adorned with red-and-white cloth and serve to provide rhythms for the dancers who are encircled around the performers.\nIn addition to the instruments, the term also refers to the performance itself, and commonly to one style called , or ensemble-style playing (as opposed to festival performances, rituals, or theatrical use of the drums). was developed by Daihachi Oguchi in 1951. He is considered a master performer and helped transform performance from its roots in traditional settings in festivals and shrines. Oguchi was trained as a jazz musician in Nagano, and at one point, a relative gave him an old piece of written music. Unable to read the traditional and esoteric notation, Oguchi found help to transcribe the piece, and on his own added rhythms and transformed the work to accommodate multiple taiko players on different-sized instruments. Each instrument served a specific purpose that established present-day conventions in performance.\nOguchi's ensemble, Osuwa Daiko, incorporated these alterations and other drums into their performances. They also devised novel pieces that were intended for non-religious performances. Several other groups emerged in Japan through the 1950s and 1960s. Oedo Sukeroku Daiko was formed in Tokyo in 1959 under Seid\u014d Kobayashi, and has been referred to as the first group who toured professionally. Globally, performance became more visible during the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo, when it was featured during the Festival of Arts event.\n was also developed through the leadership of , who gathered young men who were willing to devote their entire lifestyle to playing and took them to Sado Island for training where Den and his family had settled in 1968. Den chose the island based on a desire to reinvigorate the folk arts in Japan, particularly ; he became inspired by a drumming tradition unique to Sado called that required considerable strength to play well. Den called the group \"Za Ondekoza\" or Ondekoza for short, and implemented a rigorous set of exercises for its members including long-distance running. In 1975, Ondekoza was the first group to tour in the United States. Their first performance occurred just after the group finished running the Boston Marathon while wearing their traditional uniforms. In 1981, some members of Ondekoza split from Den and formed another group called Kodo under the leadership of Eitetsu Hayashi. Kodo continued to use Sado Island for rigorous training and communal living, and went on to popularize through frequent touring and collaborations with other musical performers. Kodo is one of the most recognized groups both in Japan and worldwide.\nEstimates of the number of groups in Japan vary to up to 5,000 active groups in Japan, but more conservative assessments place the number closer to 800 based on membership in the Nippon Taiko Foundation, the largest national organization of groups. Some pieces that have emerged from early groups that continue to be performed include Yatai-bayashi from Ondekoza, from Osuwa Daiko, and from Kodo.\nCategorization.\nTaiko have been developed into a broad range of percussion instruments that are used in both Japanese folk and classical musical traditions. An early classification system based on shape and tension was advanced by Francis Taylor Piggott in 1909. Taiko are generally classified based on the construction process, or the specific context in which the drum is used, but some are not classified, such as the toy den-den daiko.\nWith few exceptions, taiko have a drum shell with heads on both sides of the body, and a sealed resonating cavity. The head may be fastened to the shell using a number of different systems, such as using ropes. Taiko may be either tunable or non-tunable depending on the system used.\nTaiko are categorized into three types based on construction process. \"By\u014d-uchi-daiko\" are constructed with the drumhead nailed to the body. \"Shime-daiko\" are classically constructed with the skin placed over iron or steel rings, which are then tightened with ropes. Contemporary \"shime-daiko\" are tensioned using bolts or turnbuckles systems attached to the drum body. \"Tsuzumi\" are also rope-tensioned drums, but have a distinct hourglass shape and their skins are made using deerskin.\n\"By\u014d-uchi-daiko\" were historically made only using a single piece of wood; they continue to be made in this manner, but are also constructed from staves of wood. Larger drums can be made using a single piece of wood, but at a much greater cost due to the difficulty in finding appropriate trees. The preferred wood is the Japanese zelkova or \"keyaki\", but a number of other woods, and even wine barrels, have been used to create taiko. \"By\u014d-uchi-daiko\" cannot be tuned.\nThe typical \"by\u014d-uchi-daiko\" is the \"nagad\u014d-daiko\", an elongated drum that is roughly shaped like a wine barrel. \"Nagad\u014d-daiko\" are available in a variety of sizes, and their head diameter is traditionally measured in shaku (units of roughly 30\u00a0cm). Head diameters range from . are the smallest of these drums and are usually about in diameter. The is a medium-sized \"nagad\u014d-daiko\" ranging from , and weighing about . vary in size, and are often as large as in diameter. Some \"\u014d-daiko\" are difficult to move due to their size, and therefore permanently remain inside the performance space, such as temple or shrine. \"\u014c-daiko\" means \"large drum\" and for a given ensemble, the term refers to their largest drum. The other type of \"by\u014d-uchi-daiko\" is called a and can be any drum constructed such that the head diameter is greater than the length of the body.\n\"Shime-daiko\" are a set of smaller, roughly snare drum-sized instrument that are tunable. The tensioning system usually consists of hemp cords or rope, but bolt or turnbuckle systems have been used as well. , sometimes referred to as \"taiko\" in the context of theater, have thinner heads than other kinds of shime-daiko. The head includes a patch of deerskin placed in the center, and in performance, drum strokes are generally restricted to this area. The is a heavier type of \"shime-daiko\". They are available in sizes 1\u20135, and are named according to their number: \"namitsuke\"\u00a0(1), \"nich\u014d-gakke\"\u00a0(2), \"sanch\u014d-gakke\"\u00a0(3), \"yonch\u014d-gakke\"\u00a0(4), and \"goch\u014d-gakke\"\u00a0(5). The \"namitsuke\" has the thinnest skins and the shortest body in terms of height; thickness and tension of skins, as well as body height, increase toward the \"goch\u014d-gakke\". The head diameters of all \"shime-daiko\" sizes are around .\n is a type of racket-shaped Japanese drum. It is the only Japanese traditional drum without a sound box and only one skin. It is played with a drumstick while hanging it with the other hand.\n\"Oked\u014d-daiko\" or simply \"oked\u014d\", are a type of \"shime-daiko\" that are stave-constructed using narrower strips of wood, have a tube-shaped frame. Like other \"shime-daiko\", drum heads are attached by metal hoops and fastened by rope or cords. \"Oked\u014d\" can be played using the same drumsticks (called \"bachi\") as \"shime-daiko\", but can also be hand-played. \"Oked\u014d\" come in short- and long-bodied types.\n\"Tsuzumi\" are a class of hourglass-shaped drums. The drum body is shaped on a spool and the inner body carved by hand. Their skins can be made from cowhide, horsehide, or deerskin. While the \"\u014d-tsuzumi\" skins are made from cowhide, \"ko-tsuzumi\" are made from horsehide. While some classify \"tsuzumi\" as a type of taiko, others have described them as a drum entirely separate from taiko.\nTaiko can also be categorized by the context in which they are used. The \"miya-daiko\", for instance, is constructed in the same manner as other \"by\u014d-uchi-daiko\", but is distinguished by an ornamental stand and is used for ceremonial purposes at Buddhist temples. The (a \"ko-daiko\") and (a \"nagad\u014d-daiko\" with a cigar-shaped body) are used in sumo and festivals respectively.\nSeveral drums, categorized as \"gagakki\", are used in the Japanese theatrical form, gagaku. The lead instrument of the ensemble is the kakko, which is a smaller \"shime-daiko\" with heads made of deerskin, and is placed horizontally on a stand during performance. A \"tsuzumi\", called the \"san-no-tsuzumi\" is another small drum in gagaku that is placed horizontally and struck with a thin stick. are the largest drums of the ensemble, and have heads that are about in diameter. During performance, the drum is placed on a tall pedestals and surrounded by a rim decoratively painted with flames and adorned with mystical figures such as wyverns. \"Dadaiko\" are played while standing, and are usually only played on the downbeat of the music. The is a smaller drum that produces a lower sound, its head measuring about in diameter. It is used in ensembles that accompany bugaku, a traditional dance performed at the Tokyo Imperial Palace and in religious contexts. \"Tsuri-daiko\" are suspended on a small stand, and are played sitting down. \"Tsuri-daiko\" performers typically use shorter mallets covered in leather knobs instead of bachi. They can be played simultaneously by two performers; while one performer plays on the head, another performer uses bachi on the body of the drum.\nThe larger \"\u014d-tsuzumi\" and smaller \"ko-tsuzumi\" are used in the opening and dances of Noh theater. Both drums are struck using the fingers; players can also adjust pitch by manually applying pressure to the ropes on the drum. The color of the cords of these drums also indicates the skill of the musician: Orange and red for amateur players, light blue for performers with expertise, and lilac for masters of the instrument. \"Nagauta-shime daiko\" or \"uta daiko\" are also featured in Noh performance.\nMany taiko in Noh are also featured in kabuki performance and are used in a similar manner. In addition to the \"\u014d-tsuzumi\", \"ko-tsuzumi\", and \"nagauta-shime daiko\", Kabuki performances make use of the larger \"\u014d-daiko\" offstage to help set the atmosphere for different scenes.\nConstruction.\nProcess.\nTaiko construction has several stages, including making and shaping of the drum body (or shell), preparing the drum skin, and tuning the skin to the drumhead. Variations in the construction process often occur in the latter two parts of this process. Historically, \"by\u014d-uchi-daiko\" were crafted from trunks of the Japanese zelkova tree that were dried out over years, using techniques to prevent splitting. A master carpenter then carved out the rough shape of the drum body with a chisel; the texture of the wood after carving softened the tone of the drum. In contemporary times, taiko are carved out on a large lathe using wood staves or logs that can be shaped to fit drum bodies of various sizes. Drumheads can be left to air-dry over a period of years, but some companies use large, smoke-filled warehouses to hasten the drying process. After drying is complete, the inside of the drum is worked with a deep-grooved chisel and sanded. Lastly, handles are placed onto the drum. These are used to carry smaller drums and they serve an ornamental purpose for larger drums.\nThe skins or heads of taiko are generally made from cowhide from Holstein cows aged about three or four years. Skins also come from horses, and bull skin is preferred for larger drums. Thinner skins are preferred for smaller taiko, and thicker skins are used for larger ones. On some drumheads, a patch of deer skin placed in the center serves as the target for many strokes during performance. Before fitting it to the drum body the hair is removed from the hide by soaking it in a river or stream for about a month; winter months are preferred as colder temperatures better facilitate hair removal. To stretch the skin over the drum properly, one process requires the body to be held on a platform with several hydraulic jacks underneath it. The edges of the cowhide are secured to an apparatus below the jacks, and the jacks stretch the skin incrementally to precisely apply tension across the drumhead. Other forms of stretching use rope or cords with wooden dowels or an iron wheel to create appropriate tension. Small tension adjustments can be made during this process using small pieces of bamboo that twist around the ropes. Particularly large drumheads are sometimes stretched by having several workers, clad in stockings, hop rhythmically atop it, forming a circle along the edge. After the skin has dried, tacks, called \"by\u014d\", are added to the appropriate drums to secure it; \"ch\u016b-daiko\" require about 300 of them for each side. After the body and skin have been finished, excess hide is cut off and the drum can be stained as needed.\nDrum makers.\nSeveral companies specialize in the production of taiko. One such company that created drums exclusively for the Emperor of Japan, Miyamoto Unosuke Shoten in Tokyo, has been making taiko since 1861. The Asano Taiko Corporation is another major taiko-producing organization, and has been producing taiko for over 400 years. The family-owned business started in Matt\u014d, Ishikawa, and, aside from military equipment, made taiko for Noh theater and later expanded to creating instruments for festivals during the Meiji period. Asano currently maintains an entire complex of large buildings referred to as Asano Taiko Village, and the company reports producing up to 8000 drums each year. As of 2012, there is approximately one major taiko production company in each prefecture of Japan, with some regions having several companies. Of the manufacturers in Naniwa, Taikoya Matab\u0113 is one of the most successful and is thought to have brought considerable recognition to the community and attracted many drum makers there. Umetsu Daiko, a company that operates in Hakata, has been producing taiko since 1821.\nPerformance.\nTaiko performance styles vary widely across groups in terms of the number of performers, repertoire, instrument choices, and stage techniques. Nevertheless, a number of early groups have had broad influence on the tradition. For instance, many pieces developed by Ondekoza and Kodo are considered standard in many taiko groups.\nForm.\nKata is the posture and movement associated with taiko performance. The notion is similar to that of kata in martial arts: for example, both traditions include the idea that the hara is the center of being. Author Shawn Bender argues that kata is the primary feature that distinguishes different taiko groups from one another and is a key factor in judging the quality of performance. For this reason, many practice rooms intended for taiko contain mirrors to provide visual feedback to players. An important part of kata in taiko is keeping the body stabilized while performing and can be accomplished by keeping a wide, low stance with the legs, with the left knee bent over the toes and keeping the right leg straight. It is important that the hips face the drum and the shoulders are relaxed. Some teachers note a tendency to rely on the upper body while playing and emphasize the importance of the holistic use of the body during performance.\nSome groups in Japan, particularly those active in Tokyo, also emphasize the importance of the lively and spirited \"iki\" aesthetic. In taiko, it refers to very specific kinds of movement while performing that evoke the sophistication stemming from the mercantile and artisan classes active during the Edo period (1603\u20131868).\nThe sticks for playing taiko are called \"bachi\", and are made in various sizes and from different kinds of wood such as white oak, bamboo, and Japanese magnolia. \"Bachi\" are also held in a number of different styles. In \"kumi-daiko\", it is common for a player to hold their sticks in a relaxed manner between the V-shape of the index finger and thumb, which points to the player. There are other grips that allow performers to play much more technically difficult rhythms, such as the \"shime\" grip, which is similar to a matched grip: the \"bachi\" are gripped at the back end, and the fulcrum rests between the performer's index finger and thumb, while the other fingers remain relaxed and slightly curled around the stick.\nPerformance in some groups is also guided by principles based on Zen Buddhism. For instance, among other concepts, the San Francisco Taiko Dojo is guided by emphasizing communication, respect, and harmony. The way the \"bachi\" are held can also be significant; for some groups, \"bachi\" represent a spiritual link between the body and the sky. Some physical parts of taiko, like the drum body, its skin, and the tacks also hold symbolic significance in Buddhism.\nInstrumentation.\n\"Kumi-daiko\" groups consist primarily of percussive instruments where each of the drums plays a specific role. Of the different kinds of taiko, the most common in groups is the \"nagad\u014d-daiko\". \"Ch\u016b-daiko\" are common in taiko groups and represent the main rhythm of the group, whereas \"shime-daiko\" set and change tempo. A \"shime-daiko\" often plays the Jiuchi, a base rhythm holding together the ensemble. \"\u014c-daiko\" provide a steady, underlying pulse and serve as a counter-rhythm to the other parts. It is common for performances to begin with a single stroke roll called an \"\". The player starts slowly, leaving considerable space between strikes, gradually shortening the interval between hits, until the drummer is playing a rapid roll of hits. Oroshi are also played as a part of theatrical performance, such as in Noh theater.\nDrums are not the only instruments played in the ensemble; other Japanese instruments are also used. Other kinds of percussion instruments include the , a hand-sized gong played with a small mallet. In kabuki, the shamisen, a plucked string instrument, often accompanies taiko during the theatrical performance. \"Kumi-daiko\" performances can also feature woodwinds such as the shakuhachi and the shinobue.\nVoiced calls or shouts called kakegoe and kiai are also common in taiko performance. They are used as encouragement to other players or cues for transition or change in dynamics such as an increase in tempo. In contrast, the philosophical concept of ma, or the space between drum strikes, is also important in shaping rhythmic phrases and creating appropriate contrast.\nClothing.\nThere is a wide variety of traditional clothing that players wear during taiko performance. Common in many \"kumi-daiko\" groups is the use of the happi, a decorative, thin-fabric coat, and traditional headbands called hachimaki. Tabi, , and are also typical. During his time with the group Ondekoza, Eitetsu Hayashi suggested that a loincloth called a fundoshi be worn when performing for French fashion designer Pierre Cardin, who saw Ondekoza perform for him in 1975. The Japanese group Kodo has sometimes worn fundoshi for its performances.\nEducation.\nTaiko performance is generally taught orally and through demonstration. Historically, general patterns for taiko were written down, such as in the 1512 encyclopedia called the \"Taigensho\", but written scores for taiko pieces are generally unavailable. One reason for the adherence to an oral tradition is that, from group to group, the rhythmic patterns in a given piece are often performed differently. Furthermore, ethnomusicologist William\u00a0P. Malm observed that Japanese players within a group could not usefully predict one another using written notation, and instead did so through listening. In Japan, printed parts are not used during lessons.\nOrally, patterns of onomatopoeia called kuchi sh\u014dga are taught from teacher to student that convey the rhythm and timbre of drum strikes for a particular piece. For example, represents a single strike to the center of the drum, where as represents two successive strikes, first by the right and then the left, and lasts the same amount of time as one \"don\" strike. Some taiko pieces, such as \"Yatai-bayashi\", include patterns that are difficult to represent in Western musical notation. The exact words used can also differ from region to region.\nMore recently, Japanese publications have emerged in an attempt to standardize taiko performance. The Nippon Taiko Foundation was formed in 1979; its primary goals were to foster good relations among taiko groups in Japan and to both publicize and teach how to perform taiko. Daihachi Oguchi, the leader of the Foundation, wrote \"Japan Taiko\" with other teachers in 1994 out of concern that correct form in performance would degrade over time. The instructional publication described the different drums used in \"kumi-daiko\" performance, methods of gripping, correct form, and suggestions on instrumentation. The book also contains practice exercises and transcribed pieces from Oguchi's group, Osuwa Daiko. While there were similar textbooks published before 1994, this publication had much more visibility due to the Foundation's scope.\nThe system of fundamentals \"Japan Taiko\" put forward was not widely adopted because taiko performance varied substantially across Japan. An updated 2001 publication from the Foundation, called the , describes regional variations that depart from the main techniques taught in the textbook. The creators of the text maintained that mastering a set of prescribed basics should be compatible with learning local traditions.\nRegional styles.\nAside from \"kumi-daiko\" performance, a number of folk traditions that use taiko have been recognized in different regions in Japan. Some of these include from Sado Island, \"gion-daiko\" from the town of Kokura, and \"sansa-odori\" from Iwate Prefecture.\nEisa.\nA variety of folk dances originating from Okinawa, known collectively as eisa, often make use of the taiko. Some performers use drums while dancing, and generally speaking, perform in one of two styles: groups on the Yokatsu Peninsula and on Hamahiga Island use small, single-sided drums called whereas groups near the city of Okinawa generally use \"shime-daiko\". Use of \"shime-daiko\" over \"p\u0101ranku\" has spread throughout the island, and is considered the dominant style. Small \"nagad\u014d-daiko\", referred to as \"\u014d-daiko\" within the tradition, are also used and are worn in front of the performer. These drum dances are not limited to Okinawa and have appeared in places containing Okinawan communities such as in S\u00e3o Paulo, Hawaii, and large cities on the Japanese mainland.\nHachij\u014d-daiko.\n is a taiko tradition originating on the island of Hachij\u014d-jima. Two styles of \"Hachij\u014d-daiko\" emerged and have been popularized among residents: an older tradition based on a historical account, and a newer tradition influenced by mainland groups and practiced by the majority of the islanders.\nThe \"Hachij\u014d-daiko\" tradition was documented as early as 1849 based on a journal kept by an exile named Kakuso Kizan. He mentioned some of its unique features, such as \"a taiko is suspended from a tree while women and children gathered around\", and observed that a player used either side of the drum while performing. Illustrations from Kizan's journal show features of \"Hachij\u014d-daiko\". These illustrations also featured women performing, which is unusual as taiko performance elsewhere during this period was typically reserved for men. Teachers of the tradition have noted that the majority of its performers were women; one estimate asserts that female performers outnumbered males by three to one.\nThe first style of Hachij\u014d-daiko is thought to descend directly from the style reported by Kizan. This style is called \"Kumaoji-daiko\", named after its creator Okuyama Kumaoji, a central performer of the style. \"Kumaoji-daiko\" has two players on a single drum, one of whom, called the , provides the underlying beat. The other player, called the , builds on this rhythmical foundation with unique and typically improvised rhythms. While there are specific types of underlying rhythms, the accompanying player is free to express an original musical beat. \"Kumaoji-daiko\" also features an unusual positioning for taiko: the drums are sometimes suspended from ropes, and historically, sometimes drums were suspended from trees.\nThe contemporary style of \"Hachij\u014d-daiko\" is called , which differs from \"Kumaoji-daiko\" in multiple ways. For instance, while the lead and accompanying roles are still present, \"shin-daiko\" performances use larger drums exclusively on stands. \"Shin-daiko\" emphasizes a more powerful sound, and consequently, performers use larger bachi made out of stronger wood. Looser clothing is worn by \"shin-daiko\" performers compared to kimono worn by \"Kumaoji-daiko\" performers; the looser clothing in \"shin-daiko\" allow performers to adopt more open stances and larger movements with the legs and arms. Rhythms used for the accompanying \"shita-by\u014dshi\" role can also differ. One type of rhythm, called \"y\u016bkichi\", consists of the following: \nThis rhythm is found in both styles, but is always played faster in \"shin-daiko\". Another type of rhythm, called \"honbadaki\", is unique to \"shin-daiko\" and also contains a song which is performed in standard Japanese.\nMiyake-daiko.\n is a style that has spread amongst groups through Kodo, and is formally known as . The word \"miyake\" comes from Miyake-jima, part of the Izu Islands, and the word \"Kamitsuki\" refers to the village where the tradition came from. Miyake-style taiko came out of performances for \u2014 a traditional festival held annually in July on Miyake Island since 1820 honoring the deity Gozu Tenn\u014d. In this festival, players perform on taiko while portable shrines are carried around town. The style itself is characterized in a number of ways. A \"nagad\u014d-daiko\" is typically set low to the ground and played by two performers, one on each side; instead of sitting, performers stand and hold a stance that is also very low to the ground, almost to the point of kneeling.\nOutside Japan.\nAustralia.\nTaiko groups in Australia began forming in the 1990s. The first group, called Ataru Taru Taiko, was formed in 1995 by Paulene Thomas, Harold Gent, and Kaomori Kamei. TaikOz was later formed by percussionist Ian Cleworth and Riley Lee, a former Ondekoza member, and has been performing in Australia since 1997. They are known for their work in generating interest in performing taiko among Australian audiences, such as by developing a complete education program with both formal and informal classes, and have a strong fan base. Cleworth and other members of the group have developed several original pieces.\nBrazil.\nThe introduction of \"kumi-daiko\" performance in Brazil can be traced back to the 1970s and 1980s in S\u00e3o Paulo. Tangue Setsuko founded an eponymous taiko dojo and was Brazil's first taiko group; Setsuo Kinoshita later formed the group Wadaiko Sho. Brazilian groups have combined native and African drumming techniques with taiko performance. One such piece developed by Kinoshita is called \"Taiko de Samba\", which emphasizes both Brazilian and Japanese aesthetics in percussion traditions. Taiko was also popularized in Brazil from 2002 through the work of Yukihisa Oda, a Japanese native who visited Brazil several times through the Japan International Cooperation Agency.\nThe Brazilian Association of Taiko (ABT) suggests that there are about 150 taiko groups in Brazil and that about 10\u201315% of players are non-Japanese; Izumo Honda, coordinator of a large annual festival in S\u00e3o Paulo, estimated that about 60% of all taiko performers in Brazil are women.\nNorth America.\nTaiko emerged in the United States in the late 1960s. The first group, San Francisco Taiko Dojo, was formed in 1968 by Seiichi Tanaka, a postwar immigrant who studied taiko in Japan and brought the styles and teachings to the US. A year later, a few members of Senshin Buddhist Temple in Los Angeles led by its minister Masao Kodani initiated another group called Kinnara Taiko. San Jose Taiko later formed in 1973 in Japantown, San Jose, under Roy and PJ Hirabayashi. Taiko started to branch out to the eastern US in the late 1970s. This included formation of Denver Taiko in 1976, and Soh Daiko in New York City in 1979. Many of these early groups lacked the resources to equip each member with a drum and resorted to makeshift percussion materials such as rubber tires or creating taiko out of wine barrels.\nJapanese-Canadian taiko began in 1979 with Katari Taiko, and was inspired by the San Jose Taiko group. Its early membership was predominantly female. Katari Taiko and future groups were thought to represent an opportunity for younger, third-generation Japanese Canadians to explore their roots, redevelop a sense of ethnic community, and expand taiko into other musical traditions.\nThere are no official counts or estimates of the number of active taiko groups in the United States or Canada, as there is no governing body for taiko groups in either country. Unofficial estimates have been made. In 1989, there were as many as 30 groups in the US and Canada, seven of which were in California. One estimate suggested that around 120 groups were active in the US and Canada as of 2001, many of which could be traced to the San Francisco Taiko Dojo; later estimates in 2005 and 2006 suggested there were about 200 groups in the United States alone.\nThe Cirque du Soleil shows \"Myst\u00e8re\" in Las Vegas and \"Dralion\" have featured taiko performance. Taiko performance has also been featured in commercial productions such as the 2005 Mitsubishi Eclipse ad campaign, and in events such as the 2009 Academy Awards and 2011 Grammy Awards.\nCornell University is also home to a taiko team, Yamatai, founded in 2006. The group hosts an annual showcase concert in Bailey Hall, along with other performances throughout the year.\nFrom 2005 to 2006, the Japanese American National Museum held an exhibition called \"Big Drum: Taiko in the United States\". The exhibition covered several topics related to taiko in the United States, such as the formation of performance groups, their construction using available materials, and social movements. Visitors were able to play smaller drums.\nItaly.\nThe first group, called Quelli del Taiko, was formed in 2000 by Pietro Notarnicola. They played in World Premiere - 2017 - \"On Western Terror 8\" - Concerto for Taiko Ensemble and Orchestra of the Italian composed Luigi Morleo\nRelated cultural and social movements.\nCertain peoples have used taiko to advance social or cultural movements, both within Japan and elsewhere in the world.\nGender conventions.\nTaiko performance has frequently been viewed as an art form dominated by men. Historians of taiko argue that its performance comes from masculine traditions. Those who developed ensemble-style taiko in Japan were men, and through the influence of Ondekoza, the ideal taiko player was epitomized in images of the masculine peasant class, particularly through the character Muh\u014dmatsu in the 1958 film \"Rickshaw Man\". Masculine roots have also been attributed to perceived capacity for \"spectacular bodily performance\" where women's bodies are sometimes judged as unable to meet the physical demands of playing.\nBefore the 1980s, it was uncommon for Japanese women to perform on traditional instruments, including taiko, as their participation had been systematically restricted; an exception was the San Francisco Taiko Dojo under the guidance of Grand master Seiichi Tanaka, who was the first to admit females to the art form. In Ondekoza and in the early performances of Kodo, women performed only dance routines either during or between taiko performances. Thereafter, female participation in \"kumi-daiko\" started to rise dramatically, and by the 1990s, women equaled and possibly exceeded representation by men. While the proportion of women in taiko has become substantial, some have expressed concern that women still do not perform in the same roles as their male counterparts and that taiko performance continues to be a male-dominated profession. For instance, a member of Kodo was informed by the director of the group's apprentice program that women were permitted to play, but could only play \"as women\". Other women in the apprentice program recognized a gender disparity in performance roles, such as what pieces they were allowed to perform, or in physical terms based on a male standard.\nFemale taiko performance has also served as a response to gendered stereotypes of Japanese women as being quiet, subservient, or a femme fatale. Through performance, some groups believe they are helping to redefine not only the role of women in taiko, but how women are perceived more generally.\nBurakumin.\nThose involved in the construction of taiko are usually considered part of the burakumin, a marginalized minority class in Japanese society, particularly those working with leather or animal skins. Prejudice against this class dates back to the Tokugawa period in terms of legal discrimination and treatment as social outcasts. Although official discrimination ended with the Tokugawa era, the burakumin have continued to face social discrimination, such as scrutiny by employers or in marriage arrangements. Drum makers have used their trade and success as a means to advocate for an end to discriminatory practices against their class.\nThe , representing the contributions of burakumin, is found in Naniwa Ward in Osaka, home to a large proportion of burakumin. Among other features, the road contains taiko-shaped benches representing their traditions in taiko manufacturing and leatherworking, and their influence on national culture. The road ends at the Osaka Human Rights Museum, which exhibits the history of systematic discrimination against the burakumin. The road and museum were developed in part due an advocacy campaign led by the Buraku Liberation League and a taiko group of younger performers called .\nNorth American \"sansei\".\nTaiko performance was an important part of cultural development by third-generation Japanese residents in North America, who are called \"sansei\". During World War II, second-generation Japanese residents, called \"nisei\" faced internment in the United States and in Canada on the basis of their race. During and after the war, Japanese residents were discouraged from activities such as speaking Japanese or forming ethnic communities. Subsequently, sansei could not engage in Japanese culture and instead were raised to assimilate into more normative activities. There were also prevailing stereotypes of Japanese people, which sansei sought to escape or subvert. During the 1960s in the United States, the civil rights movement influenced sansei to reexamine their heritage by engaging in Japanese culture in their communities; one such approach was through taiko performance. Groups such as San Jose Taiko were organized to fulfill a need for solidarity and to have a medium to express their experiences as Japanese-Americans. Later generations have adopted taiko in programs or workshops established by sansei; social scientist Hideyo Konagaya remarks that this attraction to taiko among other Japanese art forms may be due to its accessibility and energetic nature. Konagaya has also argued that the resurgence of taiko in the United States and Japan are differently motivated: in Japan, performance was meant to represent the need to recapture sacred traditions, while in the United States it was meant to be an explicit representation of masculinity and power in Japanese-American men.\nNotable performers and groups.\nA number of performers and groups, including several early leaders, have been recognized for their contributions to taiko performance. Daihachi Oguchi was best known for developing \"kumi-daiko\" performance. Oguchi founded the first \"kumi-daiko\" group called Osuwa Daiko in 1951, and facilitated the popularization of taiko performance groups in Japan.\nSeid\u014d Kobayashi is the leader of the Tokyo-based taiko group Oedo Sukeroku Taiko as of December 2014. Kobayashi founded the group in 1959 and was the first group to tour professionally. Kobayashi is considered a master performer of taiko. He is also known for asserting intellectual control of the group's performance style, which has influenced performance for many groups, particularly in North America.\nIn 1968, Seiichi Tanaka founded the San Francisco Taiko Dojo and is regarded as the Grandfather of Taiko and primary developer of taiko performance in the United States. He was a recipient of a 2001 National Heritage Fellowship awarded by the National Endowment for the Arts and since 2013 is the only taiko professional presented with the Order of the Rising Sun 5th Order: Gold and Silver Rays by Emperor Akihito of Japan, in recognition of Grandmaster Seiichi Tanaka's contributions to the fostering of US-Japan relations as well as the promotion of Japanese cultural understanding in the United States.\nIn 1969, founded Ondekoza, a group well known for making taiko performance internationally visible and for its artistic contributions to the tradition. Den was also known for developing a communal living and training facility for Ondekoza on Sado Island in Japan, which had a reputation for its intensity and broad education programs in folklore and music.\nPerformers and groups beyond the early practitioners have also been noted. Eitetsu Hayashi is best known for his solo performance work. When he was 19, Hayashi joined Ondekoza, a group later expanded and re-founded as Kodo, one of the best known and most influential taiko performance groups in the world. Hayashi soon left the group to begin a solo career and has performed in venues such as Carnegie Hall in 1984, the first featured taiko performer there. He was awarded the 47th Education Minister's Art Encouragement Prize, a national award, in 1997 as well as the 8th Award for the Promotion of Traditional Japanese Culture from the Japan Arts Foundation in 2001.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8716", "revid": "39616039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8716", "title": "Dolly Parton", "text": "American country singer (born 1946)\nDolly Rebecca Parton (born January 19, 1946) is an American singer-songwriter, actress, philanthropist, and businesswoman, known primarily for her decades-long career in country music. After achieving success as a songwriter for others, Parton made her album debut in 1967 with \"Hello, I'm Dolly\", which led to success during the remainder of the 1960s (both as a solo artist and with a series of duet albums with Porter Wagoner), before her sales and chart peak came during the 1970s and continued into the 1980s. Parton's albums in the 1990s did not sell as well, but she achieved commercial success again in the new millennium and has released albums on various independent labels since 2000, including her own label, Dolly Records.\nWith a career spanning over fifty years, Parton has been described as a \"country music legend\" and has sold more than 100 million records worldwide, making her one of the best-selling female artists of all time. Parton's music includes Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA)-certified gold, platinum and multi-platinum awards. She has had 25 singles reach no.1 on the \"Billboard\" country music charts, a record for a female artist (tied with Reba McEntire). She has 44 career Top10 country albums, a record for any artist, and she has 110 career-charted singles over the past 40 years. She has composed over 3,000 songs, including \"I Will Always Love You\" (a two-time U.S. country chart-topper, as well as an international pop hit for Whitney Houston), \"Jolene\", \"Coat of Many Colors\", and \"9to5\". As an actress, she has starred in films such as \"9to5\" (1980) and \"The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas\" (1982), for which she earned Golden Globe nominations for Best Actress, as well as \"Rhinestone\" (1984), \"Steel Magnolias\" (1989), \"Straight Talk\" (1992) and \"Joyful Noise\" (2012).\nShe has received 11 Grammy Awards out of 50 nominations, including the Lifetime Achievement Award; ten Country Music Association Awards, including Entertainer of the Year and is one of only seven female artists to win the Country Music Association's Entertainer of the Year Award; five Academy of Country Music Awards, also including Entertainer of the Year; four People's Choice Awards; and three American Music Awards. She is also in a select group to have received at least one nomination from the Academy Awards, Grammy Awards, Tony Awards, and Emmy Awards. In 1999, Parton was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame. In 2005, she received the National Medal of Arts and in 2022, she was nominated for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, a nomination she had initially declined, but ultimately accepted and was inducted.\nOutside of her work in the music industry, she also co-owns The Dollywood Company, which manages a number of entertainment venues, including the Dollywood theme park, the Splash Country water park, and a number of dinner theatre venues including The Dolly Parton Stampede and Pirates Voyage. She has founded a number of charitable and philanthropic organizations, chief among which is the Dollywood Foundation, which manages a number of projects to bring education and poverty relief to East Tennessee where she grew up.\nEarly life and career.\nDolly Rebecca Parton was born January 19, 1946, in a one-room cabin on the banks of the Little Pigeon River in Pittman Center, Tennessee. \nShe is the fourth of twelve children born to Avie Lee Caroline (n\u00e9e Owens; 1923\u20132003) and Robert Lee Parton Sr. (1921\u20132000). Parton's middle name comes from her maternal great-great-grandmother Rebecca (Dunn) Whitted. Parton's father, known as \"Lee\", worked in the mountains of East Tennessee, first as a sharecropper and later tending his own small tobacco farm and acreage. He also worked construction jobs to supplement the farm's small income. Despite her father's illiteracy, Parton has often commented that he was one of the smartest people she had ever known in regards to business and making a profit.\nParton's mother, Avie Lee, cared for their large family. Her 11 pregnancies (the tenth being twins) in 20 years made her a mother of 12 by age 35. Parton credits her musical abilities to her mother; often in poor health, she still managed to keep house and entertain her children with Smoky Mountain folklore and ancient ballads. Having Welsh ancestors, Avie Lee knew many old ballads that immigrants from the British Isles brought to southern Appalachia in the 18th and 19th century. Avie Lee's father, Jake Owens, was a Pentecostal preacher, and Parton and her siblings all attended church regularly. Parton has long credited her father for her business savvy, and her mother's family for her musical abilities. When Parton was a young girl, her family moved from the Pittman Center area to a farm up on nearby Locust Ridge. Most of her cherished memories of youth happened there. Today, a replica of the Locust Ridge cabin resides at Parton's namesake theme park Dollywood. The farm acreage and surrounding woodland inspired her to write the song \"My Tennessee Mountain Home\" in the 1970s. Years after the farm was sold, Parton bought it back in the late 1980s. Her brother Bobby helped with building restoration and new construction.\nParton has described her family as being \"dirt poor\". Parton's father paid missionary Dr. Robert F. Thomas with a sack of cornmeal for delivering her. Parton would write a song about Dr. Thomas when she was grown. She also outlined her family's poverty in her early songs \"Coat of Many Colors\" and \"In the Good Old Days (When Times Were Bad)\". For six or seven years, Parton and her family lived in their rustic, one-bedroom cabin on their small subsistence farm on Locust Ridge. This was a predominantly Pentecostal area located north of the Greenbrier Valley of the Great Smoky Mountains.\nMusic played an important role in her early life. She was brought up in the Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee), in a congregation her grandfather, Jake Robert Owens, pastored. Her earliest public performances were in the church, beginning at age six. At seven, she started playing a homemade guitar. When she was eight, her uncle bought her first real guitar.\nParton began performing as a child, singing on local radio and television programs in the East Tennessee area. By ten, she was appearing on \"The Cas Walker Show\" on both WIVK Radio and WBIR-TV in Knoxville, Tennessee. At 13, she was recording (the single \"Puppy Love\") on a small Louisiana label, Goldband Records, and appeared at the Grand Ole Opry, where she first met Johnny Cash, who encouraged her to follow her own instincts regarding her career.\nAfter graduating from Sevier County High School in 1964, Parton moved to Nashville the next day. Her initial success came as a songwriter, having signed with Combine Publishing shortly after her arrival; with her frequent songwriting partner, her uncle Bill Owens, she wrote several charting singles during this time, including two Top10 hits for Bill Phillips: \"Put It Off Until Tomorrow,\" and \"The Company You Keep\" (1966), and Skeeter Davis's number 11 hit \"Fuel to the Flame\" (1967). Her songs were recorded by many other artists during this period, including Kitty Wells and Hank Williams Jr. She signed with Monument Records in 1965, at age 19; she initially was pitched as a bubblegum pop singer. She released a string of singles, but the only one that charted, \"Happy, Happy Birthday Baby\", did not crack the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Although she expressed a desire to record country material, Monument resisted, thinking her unique, high soprano voice was not suited to the genre.\nAfter her composition \"Put It Off Until Tomorrow\", as recorded by Bill Phillips (with Parton, uncredited, on harmony), went to number six on the country chart in 1966, the label relented and allowed her to record country. Her first country single, \"Dumb Blonde\" (composed by Curly Putman, one of the few songs during this era that she recorded but did not write), reached number 24 on the country chart in 1967, followed by \"Something Fishy\", which went to number 17. The two songs appeared on her first full-length album, \"Hello, I'm Dolly\".\nMusic career.\n1967\u20131975: Country music success.\nIn 1967, musician and country music entertainer Porter Wagoner invited Parton to join his organization, offering her a regular spot on his weekly syndicated television program \"The Porter Wagoner Show\", and in his road show. As documented in her 1994 autobiography, initially, much of Wagoner's audience was unhappy that Norma Jean, the performer whom Parton had replaced, had left the show, and was reluctant to accept Parton (sometimes chanting loudly for Norma Jean from the audience). With Wagoner's assistance, however, Parton was eventually accepted. Wagoner convinced his label, RCA Victor, to sign her. RCA decided to protect their investment by releasing her first single as a duet with Wagoner. That song, a remake of Tom Paxton's \"The Last Thing on My Mind\", released in late 1967, reached the country Top10 in January 1968, launching a six-year streak of virtually uninterrupted Top10 singles for the pair.\nParton's first solo single for RCA Victor, \"Just Because I'm a Woman\", was released in the summer of 1968 and was a moderate chart hit, reaching number 17. For the next two years, none of her solo efforts\u00a0\u2013 even \"In the Good Old Days (When Times Were Bad)\", which later became a standard\u00a0\u2013 were as successful as her duets with Wagoner. The duo was named Vocal Group of the Year in 1968 by the Country Music Association, but Parton's solo records were continually ignored. Wagoner had a significant financial stake in her future; as of 1969, he was her co-producer and owned nearly half of Owe-Par, the publishing company Parton had founded with Bill Owens.\nBy 1970, both Parton and Wagoner had grown frustrated by her lack of solo chart success. Wagoner persuaded Parton to record Jimmie Rodgers' \"Mule Skinner Blues\", a gimmick that worked. The record shot to number three, followed closely, in February 1971, by her first number-one single, \"Joshua\". For the next two years, she had numerous solo hits\u00a0\u2013 including her signature song \"Coat of Many Colors\" (number four, 1971)\u00a0\u2013 in addition to her duets. Top20 singles included \"The Right Combination\" and \"Burning the Midnight Oil\" (both duets with Wagoner, 1971); \"Lost Forever in Your Kiss\" (with Wagoner), \"Touch Your Woman\" (1972), \"My Tennessee Mountain Home\" and \"Travelin' Man\" (1973).\nAlthough her solo singles and the Wagoner duets were successful, her biggest hit of this period was \"Jolene\". Released in late 1973, it topped the country chart in February 1974 and reached the lower regions of the Hot 100 (it eventually also charted in the U.K., reaching number seven in 1976, representing Parton's first U.K. success). Parton, who had always envisioned a solo career, made the decision to leave Wagoner's organization; the pair performed their last duet concert in April 1974, and she stopped appearing on his TV show in mid-1974, although they remained affiliated. He helped produce her records through 1975. The pair continued to release duet albums, their final release being 1975's \"Say Forever You'll Be Mine\".\nIn 1974, her song, \"I Will Always Love You\", written about her professional break from Wagoner, went to number one on the country chart. Around the same time, Elvis Presley indicated that he wanted to record the song. Parton was interested until Presley's manager, Colonel Tom Parker, told her that it was standard procedure for the songwriter to sign over half of the publishing rights to any song recorded by Presley. Parton refused. That decision has been credited with helping to make her many millions of dollars in royalties from the song over the years. Parton had three solo singles reach number one on the country chart in 1974 (\"Jolene\", \"I Will Always Love You\" and \"Love Is Like a Butterfly\"), as well as the duet with Porter Wagoner, \"Please Don't Stop Loving Me\". In a 2019 episode of the Sky Arts music series \"Brian Johnson: A Life on the Road\", Parton described finding old cassette tapes and realizing that she had composed both \"Jolene\" and \"I Will Always Love You\" in the same songwriting session, telling Johnson \"Buddy, that was a good night.\" Parton again topped the singles chart in 1975 with \"The Bargain Store\".\n1976\u20131986: Pop transition.\nBetween 1974 and 1980 Parton had a series of country hits, with eight singles reaching number one. Her influence on pop culture is reflected by the many performers covering her songs, including mainstream and crossover artists such as Olivia Newton-John, Emmylou Harris, and Linda Ronstadt.\nParton began to embark on a high-profile crossover campaign, attempting to aim her music in a more mainstream direction and increase her visibility outside of the confines of country music. In 1976, she began working closely with Sandy Gallin, who served as her personal manager for the next 25 years. With her 1976 album \"All I Can Do\", which she co-produced with Porter Wagoner, Parton began taking more of an active role in production, and began specifically aiming her music in a more mainstream, pop direction. Her first entirely self-produced effort, \"New Harvest...First Gathering\" (1977), highlighted her pop sensibilities, both in terms of choice of songs \u2013 the album contained covers of the pop and R&amp;B classics \"My Girl\" and \"Higher and Higher\" \u2013 and production. Though the album was well received and topped the U.S. country albums chart, neither it nor its single \"Light of a Clear Blue Morning\" made much of an impression on the pop charts.\nAfter \"New Harvest\"'s disappointing crossover performance, Parton turned to high-profile pop producer Gary Klein for her next album. The result, 1977's \"Here You Come Again\", became her first million-seller, topping the country album chart and reaching number 20 on the pop chart. The Barry Mann-Cynthia Weil-penned title track topped the country singles chart, and became Parton's first Top10 single on the pop chart (no.3). A second single, the double A-sided \"Two Doors Down\"/\"It's All Wrong, But It's All Right\" topped the country chart and crossed over to the pop Top20. For the remainder of the 1970s and into the early 1980s, many of her subsequent singles moved up on both charts simultaneously. Her albums during this period were developed specifically for pop-crossover success.\nIn 1978, Parton won a Grammy Award for Best Female Country Vocal Performance for her \"Here You Come Again\" album. She continued to have hits with \"Heartbreaker\" (1978), \"Baby I'm Burning\" (1979) and \"You're the Only One\" (1979)all of which charted in the pop Top\u00a040 and topped the country chart. \"Sweet Summer Lovin'\" (1979) became the first Parton single in two years to not top the country chart (though it did reach the Top10). During this period, her visibility continued to increase, with multiple television appearances. A highly publicized candid interview on a \"Barbara Walters Special\" in 1977 (timed to coincide with \"Here You Come Again\"'s release) was followed by appearances in 1978 on Cher's ABC television special, and her own joint special with Carol Burnett on CBS, \"Dolly &amp; Carol in Nashville\".\nParton served as one of three co-hosts (along with Roy Clark and Glen Campbell) on the CBS special \"Fifty Years of Country Music\". In 1979, Parton hosted the NBC special \"The Seventies: An Explosion of Country Music\", performed live at the Ford Theatre in Washington, D.C., and whose audience included President Jimmy Carter.\nHer commercial success grew in 1980, with three consecutive country chart number-one hits: the Donna Summer-written \"Starting Over Again\", \"Old Flames Can't Hold a Candle to You\", and \"9to5\", which topped the country and pop charts in early 1981. She had another Top10 single that year with \"Making Plans\", a single released from a 1980 album with Porter Wagoner, released as part of a lawsuit settlement between the pair.\nThe theme song to the 1980 feature film \"9to5\", in which she starred along with Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin, not only reached number one on the country chart\u00a0\u2013 in February 1981 it reached number one on the pop and the adult-contemporary charts, giving her a triple number-one hit. Parton became one of the few female country singers to have a number-one single on the country and pop charts simultaneously. It also received a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Original Song. Her singles continued to appear consistently in the country Top10. Between 1981 and 1985, she had twelve Top10 hits; half of them hit number one. She continued to make inroads on the pop chart as well. A re-recorded version of \"I Will Always Love You\", from the feature film \"The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas\" (1982) scraped the Top50 that year and her duet with Kenny Rogers, \"Islands in the Stream\" (written by the Bee Gees and produced by Barry Gibb), spent two weeks at number one in 1983.\nIn the mid-1980s, her record sales were still relatively strong, with \"Save the Last Dance for Me\", \"Tennessee Homesick Blues\", \"God Won't Get You\" (1984), \"Real Love\" (another duet with Kenny Rogers), \"Don't Call It Love\" (1985) and \"Think About Love\" (1986) all reaching the country Top10 (\"Tennessee Homesick Blues\" and \"Think About Love\" reached number one; \"Real Love\" also reached number one on the country chart and became a modest crossover hit). However, RCA Records did not renew her contract after it expired in 1986, and she signed with Columbia Records in 1987.\n1987\u20132005: Country and bluegrass period.\nAlong with Emmylou Harris and Linda Ronstadt, she released \"Trio\" (1987) to critical acclaim. The album revitalized Parton's music career, spending five weeks at number one on \"Billboard's\" Country Albums chart, and also reached the Top10 on \"Billboard\"'s Top200 Albums chart. It sold several million copies and produced four Top10 country hits, including Phil Spector's \"To Know Him Is to Love Him\", which went to number one. \"Trio\" won the Grammy Award for Best Country Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and was nominated for a Grammy Award for Album of the Year. After a further attempt at pop success with \"Rainbow\" (1987), including the single \"The River Unbroken\", it ended up a commercial let-down, causing Parton to focus on recording country material. \"White Limozeen\" (1989) produced two number one hits in \"Why'd You Come in Here Lookin' Like That\" and \"Yellow Roses\". Although Parton's career appeared to be revived, it was actually just a brief revival before contemporary country music came in the early 1990s and moved most veteran artists off the charts.\nA duet with Ricky Van Shelton, \"Rockin' Years\" (1991) reached number one, though Parton's greatest commercial fortune of the decade came when Whitney Houston recorded \"I Will Always Love You\" for the soundtrack of the feature film \"The Bodyguard\" (1992). Both the single and the album were massively successful. Parton's soundtrack album from the 1992 film, \"Straight Talk\", however, was less successful. But her 1993 album \"Slow Dancing with the Moon\" won critical acclaim and did well on the charts, reaching number four on the country albums chart, and number 16 on the \"Billboard\" 200 album chart. She recorded \"The Day I Fall in Love\" as a duet with James Ingram for the feature film \"Beethoven's 2nd\" (1993). The songwriters (Ingram, Carole Bayer Sager, and Clif Magness) were nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song, and Parton and Ingram performed the song at the awards telecast. Similar to her earlier collaborative album with Harris and Ronstadt, Parton released \"Honky Tonk Angels\" in the fall of 1993 with Loretta Lynn and Tammy Wynette. It was certified as a gold album by the Recording Industry Association of America and helped revive both Wynette and Lynn's careers. Also in 1994, Parton contributed the song \"You Gotta Be My Baby\" to the AIDS benefit album \"Red Hot + Country\" produced by the Red Hot Organization. A live acoustic album, \"\", featuring stripped-down versions of some of her hits, as well as some traditional songs, was released in late 1994.\nParton's recorded music during the mid-to-late-1990s remained steady and somewhat eclectic. Her 1995 re-recording of \"I Will Always Love You\" (performed as a duet with Vince Gill), from her album \"Something Special\" won the Country Music Association's Vocal Event of the Year Award. The following year, \"Treasures\", an album of covers of 1960s/70s hits was released, and featured a diverse collection of material, including songs by Mac Davis, Pete Seeger, Kris Kristofferson, Cat Stevens, and Neil Young. Her recording of Stevens' \"Peace Train\" was later re-mixed and released as a dance single, reaching \"Billboard's \"dance singles chart. Her 1998 country-rock album \"Hungry Again\" was made up entirely of her own compositions. Although neither of the album's two singles, \"(Why Don't More Women Sing) Honky Tonk Songs\" and \"Salt in my Tears\", charted, videos for both songs received significant airplay on CMT. A second and more contemporary collaboration with Harris and Ronstadt, \"Trio II\", was released in early 1999. Its cover of Neil Young's song \"After the Gold Rush\" won a Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals. Parton also was inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1999.\nParton recorded a series of bluegrass-inspired albums, beginning with \"The Grass Is Blue\" (1999), winning a Grammy Award for Best Bluegrass Album; and \"Little Sparrow\" (2001), with its cover of Collective Soul's \"Shine\" winning a Grammy Award for Best Female Country Vocal Performance. The third, \"Halos &amp; Horns\" (2002) included a bluegrass version of the Led Zeppelin song \"Stairway to Heaven\". In 2005, she released \"Those Were The Days\" consisting of her interpretations of hits from the folk-rock era of the late 1960s and early 1970s, including \"Imagine\", \"Where Do the Children Play?\", \"Crimson and Clover\", and \"Where Have All the Flowers Gone?\"\n2005\u20132020: Touring and holiday album.\nParton earned her second Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song for \"Travelin' Thru\", which she wrote specifically for the feature film \"Transamerica\". (2005) Due to the song's (and film's) acceptance of a transgender woman, Parton received death threats. She returned to number one on the country chart later in 2005 by lending her distinctive harmonies to the Brad Paisley ballad, \"When I Get Where I'm Going\". In September 2007, Parton released her first single from her own record company, Dolly Records, titled, \"Better Get to Livin'\", which eventually peaked at number 48 on \"Billboard\"'s Hot Country Songs chart. It was followed by the studio album \"Backwoods Barbie\", which was released on February 26, 2008, and reached number two on the country chart. The album's debut at number 17 on the all-genre \"Billboard\" 200 albums chart was the highest in her career. \"Backwoods Barbie\" produced four additional singles, including the title track, written as part of her score for \"9to5: The Musical\", an adaptation of her feature film. After the death of Michael Jackson, whom Parton knew personally, she released a video in which she somberly told of her feelings on Jackson and his death.\nOn October 27, 2009, Parton released a four-CD box set, \"Dolly\", which featured 99 songs and spanned most of her career. She released her second live DVD and album, \"Live From London\" in October 2009, which was filmed during her sold-out 2008 concerts at London's The O2 Arena. On August 10, 2010, with longtime friend Billy Ray Cyrus, Parton released the album \"Brother Clyde\". Parton is featured on \"The Right Time\", which she co-wrote with Cyrus and Morris Joseph Tancredi. On January 6, 2011, Parton announced that her new album would be titled \"Better Day\". In February 2011, she announced that she would embark on the Better Day World Tour on July 17, 2011, with shows in northern Europe and the U.S. The album's lead-off single, \"Together You and I\", was released on May 23, 2011, and \"Better Day\" was released on June 28, 2011. In 2011, Parton voiced the character Dolly Gnome in the animated film \"Gnomeo &amp; Juliet\". On February 11, 2012, after the sudden death of Whitney Houston, Parton stated, \"Mine is only one of the millions of hearts broken over the death of Whitney Houston. I will always be grateful and in awe of the wonderful performance she did on my song, and I can truly say from the bottom of my heart, 'Whitney, I will always love you. You will be missed.'\"\nIn 2013 Parton joined Lulu Roman for a re-recording of \"I Will Always Love You\" for Roman's album, \"At Last\". In 2013, Parton and Kenny Rogers reunited for the title song of his album \"You Can't Make Old Friends\". For their performance, they were nominated at the 2014 Grammy Awards for Grammy Award for Best Country Duo/Group Performance. In 2014, Parton embarked on the Blue Smoke World Tour in support of her 42nd studio album, \"Blue Smoke\". The album was first released in Australia and New Zealand on January 31 to coincide with tour dates there in February, and reached the Top10 in both countries. It was released in the United States on May 13, and debuted at number six on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart, making it her first Top10 album and her highest-charting solo album ever; it also reached the number two on the U.S. country chart. The album was released in Europe on June 9, and reached number two on the UK album chart. On June 29, 2014, Parton performed for the first time at the UK Glastonbury Festival performing songs such as \"Jolene\", \"9to5\" and \"Coat of Many Colors\" to a crowd of more than 180,000. On March 6, 2016, Parton announced that she would be embarking on a tour in support of her new album, \"Pure &amp; Simple\". The tour was one of Parton's biggest tours within the United States in more than 25 years. Sixty-four dates were planned in the United States and Canada, visiting the most requested markets missed on previous tours.\nIn the fall of 2016 she released \"Jolene\" as a single with the \"a cappella\" group Pentatonix and performed on \"\" with Pentatonix and Miley Cyrus in November 2016. Also in 2016, Parton was one of thirty artists to perform on \"Forever Country\", a mash-up of the songs, \"Take Me Home, Country Roads\", \"On the Road Again\" and her own \"I Will Always Love You\". The song celebrates fifty years of the CMA Awards. At the ceremony itself, Parton was honored with the Willie Nelson Lifetime Achievement Award, which was presented by Lily Tomlin and preceded by a tribute featuring Jennifer Nettles, Pentatonix, Reba McEntire, Kacey Musgraves, Carrie Underwood and Martina McBride. In 2017, Parton appeared on \"Rainbow\", the third studio album by Kesha performing a duet of \"Old Flames Can't Hold a Candle to You\". The track had been co-written by Kesha's mother Pebe Sebert. It was previously a hit for Parton and was included on her 1980 album \"Dolly, Dolly, Dolly\". She also co-wrote and provided featuring vocals on the song \"Rainbowland\" on \"Younger Now\", the sixth album by her goddaughter Miley Cyrus.\nIn July 2019, Parton made an unannounced appearance at the Newport Folk Festival in Rhode Island, and performed several songs accompanied by the Highwomen and Linda Perry. In 2020, Parton received worldwide attention after posting four pictures in which she showed how she would present herself on the social media platforms LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram and Twitter. The original post on Instagram went viral after celebrities posted their own versions of the so-called Dolly Parton challenge on social media. On April 10, 2020, Parton re-released 93 songs from six of her classic albums. Little Sparrow, Halos &amp; Horns, For God and Country, Better Day, Those Were The Days, and Live and Well are all available for online listening. On May 27, 2020, Parton released a brand new song called \"When Life Is Good Again\". This song was released to help keep the spirits up of those affected by the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. Parton also released a music video for \"When Life Is Good Again\" which premiered on \"Time\" 100 talks on May 28, 2020.\nIn August 2020 Parton announced plans to release her first holiday album in 30 years, \"A Holly Dolly Christmas\", in October 2020. On December 6, CBS aired a Christmas special, \"A Holly Dolly Christmas\", where Parton performed songs from her album.\n2022\u2013present: Rock album.\nIn early 2022, Parton was nominated for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Parton initially declined the nomination believing that the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame was \"for the people in rock music\", but after learning that this was not the case Parton said she would accept her induction if she were chosen for the honor. In May her induction was announced, and finally on November 5, 2022 she was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In October 2022 Parton stated in an interview that she would no longer tour, but would continue to play live shows occasionally. On December 31, 2022, Parton co-hosted NBC's New Year's special \"Miley's New Year's Eve Party.\"\nOn January 17, 2023, Parton announced she would release her first rock album, entitled \"Rockstar\", later that year, during an interview on \"The View\". It will be released on November 17, 2023, and feature collaborations with Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Elton John, Sheryl Crow, Miley Cyrus, Lizzo, and amongst others. \nPublic image.\nParton had turned down several offers to pose nude for \"Playboy\" magazine, but did appear on the cover of the October 1978 issue wearing a Playboy bunny outfit, complete with ears (the issue featured Lawrence Grobel's extensive and candid interview with Parton, representing one of her earliest high-profile interviews with the mainstream press). The association of breasts with Parton's public image is illustrated in the naming of Dolly the sheep after her, since the sheep was cloned from a cell taken from an adult ewe's mammary gland. In Mobile, Alabama, the General W.K. Wilson Jr. Bridge is commonly called \"the Dolly Parton Bridge\" due to its arches resembling her bust. The thickened appearance of the turret frontal armor of the T-72A main battle tank led to the unofficial Army nickname \"Dolly Parton\" - and later the T-72BI's got the \"Super Dolly Parton\" nickname\nParton is known for having undergone considerable plastic surgery. On a 2003 episode of \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\", Winfrey asked what kind of cosmetic surgery Parton had undergone. Parton replied that cosmetic surgery was imperative in keeping with her famous image.\nParton has repeatedly joked about her physical image and surgeries, saying, \"It takes a lot of money to look this cheap.\" Her breasts have garnered her mentions in several songs, including \"Dolly Parton's Hits\" by Bobby Braddock, \"Marty Feldman Eyes\" by Bruce Baum (a parody of \"Bette Davis Eyes\"), \"No Show Jones\" by George Jones and Merle Haggard, and \"Make Me Proud\" by Drake, featuring Nicki Minaj. When asked about future plastic surgeries, she famously said, \"If I see something sagging, bagging or dragging, I'll get it nipped, tucked or sucked.\" Parton's feminine escapism is acknowledged in her words, \"Womanhood was a difficult thing to get a grip on in those hills, unless you were a man.\" Parton said in 2012 that she had entered a Dolly Parton lookalike contest and lost. \nArtistry.\nInfluences.\nParton, though influenced by big name stars, often credits much of her inspiration to her family and community. On her own mother Parton, in her 2020 book \"Songteller: My Life in Lyrics\", wrote \"So it was just natural for my mom to always be singing. My mother had that old-timey voice, and she used to sing all these songs that were brought over from the Old World. They were English, Irish, Welsh, folk songs where people tell stories.\" Parton calls her mother's voice \"haunting\". \"Lord you would feel it\", she wrote. Her biggest influence however was her Aunt Dorothy Jo: \"People often ask me who my influences were, they think I'm going to say some big names, and there were a few 'stars' I was impressed with. But my hero was my aunt Dorothy Jo. Mama's baby sister. She was not only an evangelist, she played banjo, she played guitar, and she wrote some great songs.\" Of course, fellow singers also had an impact on Parton, describing George Jones as her \"all time favorite singer\", and recognizing her love for other artists such as Kitty Wells, Roy Acuff, and Rose Maddox.\nMusicianship.\nThough unable to read sheet music, Parton can play many instruments, including: the dulcimer, autoharp, banjo, guitar, electric guitar, fiddle, piano, recorder, and the saxophone. Reflecting on her multi-instrumental abilities, Parton said, \"I play some of everything. I ain't that good at none of it, but I try to sell it. I really try to lay into it.\" Parton has also used her fingernails as an instrument, most evident on her 1980 song \"9 to 5\", which she derived the beat for from clacking her nails together while backstage on the set of the film of the same name.\nOther ventures.\nIn 1998, \"Nashville Business\" ranked her the wealthiest country music star. As of 2017[ [update]], her net worth is estimated at $500million.\nSongwriting.\nParton is a prolific songwriter, having begun by writing country music songs with strong elements of folk music, based on her upbringing in humble mountain surroundings and reflecting her family's Christian background. Her songs \"Coat of Many Colors\", \"I Will Always Love You\", and \"Jolene\", among others, have become classics. On November 4, 2003, Parton was honored as a BMI Icon at the 2003 BMI Country Awards.\nParton has earned over 35 BMI Pop and Country Awards. In 2001, she was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. In a 2009 interview on CNN's \"Larry King Live\", she said she had written \"at least 3,000\" songs, having written seriously since the age of seven. Parton also said she writes something every day, be it a song or an idea.\nParton's songwriting has been featured prominently in several films. In addition to the title song for \"9to5\", she also recorded a second version of \"I Will Always Love You\" for \"The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas\" (1982). The second version was a number one country hit and also reached number 53 on the pop charts.\n\"I Will Always Love You\" has been covered by many country artists, including Ronstadt on \"Prisoner In Disguise\" (1975), Kenny Rogers on \"Vote for Love\" (1996), and LeAnn Rimes on \"\" (1997). Whitney Houston performed it on \"The Bodyguard\" soundtrack and her version became the best-selling hit both written and performed by a female vocalist, with worldwide sales of over twelve million copies. In addition, the song has been translated into Italian and performed by the Welsh opera singer Katherine Jenkins.\nAs a songwriter, Parton has twice been nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song, for \"9 to 5\" and \"Travelin' Thru\" (2005) from the film \"Transamerica\". \"Travelin' Thru\" won Best Original Song at the 2005 Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards. It was also nominated for both the 2005 Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song and the 2005 Broadcast Film Critics Association Award (also known as the Critics' Choice Awards) for Best Song. A cover of \"Love Is Like A Butterfly\" by Clare Torry was used as the theme music for the British TV show \"Butterflies\".\n\"9 to 5: The Musical\".\nParton wrote the score (and Patricia Resnick the book) for \"\", a musical-theater adaptation of Parton's feature film \"9 to 5\" (1980). The musical ran at the Ahmanson Theatre, Los Angeles in late 2008. It opened on Broadway at the Marquis Theatre in New York City, on April 30, 2009, to mixed reviews.\nThe title track of her 2008 album \"Backwoods Barbie\" was written for the musical's character Doralee. Although her score (as well as the musical debut of actress Allison Janney) was praised, the show struggled, closing on September 6, 2009, after 24 previews and 148 performances. Parton received nominations for Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music and Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Lyrics, as well as a nomination for Tony Award for Best Original Score.\nDeveloping the musical was not a quick process. According to the public-radio program \"Studio 360\" (October 29, 2005), in October 2005 Parton was in the midst of composing the songs for a Broadway musical theater adaptation of the film. In late June 2007, \"9 to 5: The Musical\" was read for industry presentations. The readings starred Megan Hilty, Allison Janney, Stephanie J. Block, Bebe Neuwirth, and Marc Kudisch. Ambassador Theatre Group announced a 2012 UK tour for \"Dolly Parton's 9to5: The Musical\", commencing at Manchester Opera House, on October 12, 2012.\nThe Dollywood Company.\nParton invested much of her earnings into business ventures in her native East Tennessee, notably Pigeon Forge. She is a co-owner of The Dollywood Company, which operates the theme park Dollywood (a former Silver Dollar City), a dinner theater, Dolly Parton's Stampede, the waterpark Dollywood's Splash Country, and the Dream More Resort and Spa, all in Pigeon Forge. Dollywood is the 24th-most-popular theme park in the United States, with three million visitors per year.\nThe Dolly Parton's Stampede business has venues in Branson, Missouri, and Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. A former location in Orlando, Florida, closed in January 2008 after the land and building were sold to a developer. Starting in June 2011, the Myrtle Beach location became Pirates Voyage Fun, Feast and Adventure; Parton appeared for the opening, and the South Carolina General Assembly declared June 3, 2011, as Dolly Parton Day.\nOn January 19, 2012, Parton's 66th birthday, Gaylord Opryland and Dollywood announced plans to open a $50million water and snow park, a family-friendly destination in Nashville that is open all year. On September 29, 2012, Parton officially withdrew her support for the Nashville park due to the restructuring of Gaylord Entertainment Company after its merger with Marriott International.\nOn June 12, 2015, it was announced that the Dollywood Company had purchased the Lumberjack Feud Dinner Show in Pigeon Forge. The show, which opened in June 2011, was owned and operated by Rob Scheer until the close of the 2015 season. The new, renovated show by the Dollywood Company opened in 2016.\nProduction work.\nParton was a co-owner of Sandollar Productions, with Sandy Gallin, her former manager. A film and television production company, it produced the documentary \"\" (1989), which won an Academy Award for Best Documentary (Feature); the television series \"Babes\" (1990\u201391) and \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" (1997\u20132003); and the feature films \"Father of the Bride\" (1991), \"Father of the Bride: Part II\" (1995) \"Straight Talk\" (1992) (in which Parton starred), and \"Sabrina\" (1995), among other shows. In a 2009 interview, singer Connie Francis revealed that Dolly had been contacting her for years in an attempt to film the singer's life story. Francis turned down Parton's offers, as she was already in negotiations with singer Gloria Estefan to produce the film, a collaboration now ended. After the retirement of her partner, Sandy Gallin, Parton briefly operated Dolly Parton's Southern Light Productions and in 2015 she announced her new production company would be called Dixie Pixie Productions and produce the movies-of-week in development with NBC Television and Magnolia Hill Productions.\nActing career.\nActing breakthrough.\nIn addition to her performing appearances on \"The Porter Wagoner Show\" in the 1960s and into the 1970s, her two self-titled television variety shows in the 1970s and 1980s, and on \"American Idol\" in 2008 and other guest appearances, Parton has had television roles. In 1979, she received an Emmy award nomination as \"Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Variety Program\" for her guest appearance in a Cher special. During the mid-1970s, Parton wanted to expand her audience base. Although her first attempt, the television variety show \"Dolly!\" (1976\u201377), had high ratings, it lasted only one season, with Parton requesting to be released from her contract because of the stress it was causing on her vocal cords (she later tried a second television variety show, also titled \"Dolly\" (1987\u201388); it too lasted only one season).\nIn her first feature film, Parton portrayed a secretary in a leading role with Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin in the comedy film \"9to5\" (1980). The movie highlights discrimination against women in the workplace and created awareness of the National Association of Working Women (9\u20135). She received nominations for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress\u00a0\u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and a Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year\u00a0\u2013 Actress. Parton wrote and recorded the film's title song. It received nominations for an Academy Award for Best Song and a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song. Released as a single, the song won both the Grammy Award for Best Female Country Vocal Performance and the Grammy Award for Best Country Song. It also reached no.1 on the Hot 100 chart and it was no.78 on the \"AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs\" list released by the American Film Institute in 2004. \"9 to 5\" became a major box office success, grossing over $3.9million its opening weekend, and over $103million worldwide. Parton was named Top Female Box Office Star by the \"Motion Picture Herald\" in both 1981 and 1982 due to the film's success.\nIn late 1981, Parton began filming her second film, the musical film \"The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas\" (1982). The film earned her a second nomination for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress\u00a0\u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. The film was greeted with positive critical reviews and became a commercial success, earning over $69million worldwide. After a two-year hiatus from films, Parton was teamed with Sylvester Stallone for \"Rhinestone\" (1984). A comedy film about a country music star's efforts to mould an unknown into a music sensation, the film was a critical and financial failure, making just over $21million on a $28million budget.\nContinued roles.\nIn 1989, Parton returned to film acting in \"Steel Magnolias\" (1989), based on the play of the same name by Robert Harling. The film was popular with critics and audiences, grossing over $95million inside the U.S. She starred in the television movies \"A Smoky Mountain Christmas\" (1986); \"Wild Texas Wind\" (1991); \"Unlikely Angel\" (1996), portraying an angel sent back to earth following a deadly car crash; and \"Blue Valley Songbird\" (1999), where her character lives through her music. Parton starred along with James Woods in \"Straight Talk\" (1992), which received mixed reviews, and grossed a mild $21million at the box office.\nParton's 1987 variety show \"Dolly\" lasted only one season. She made a cameo appearance as herself in \"The Beverly Hillbillies\" (1993), an adaptation of the long-running TV sitcom of the same name (1962\u201371). Parton has done voice work for animation for television series, playing herself in \"Alvin and the Chipmunks\" (episode \"Urban Chipmunk\", 1983) and the character Katrina Eloise \"Murph\" Murphy (Ms. Frizzle's first cousin) in \"The Magic School Bus\" (episode \"The Family Holiday Special\", 1994). She also has guest-starred in several sitcoms, including a 1990 episode of \"Designing Women\" (episode \"The First Day of the Last Decade of the Entire Twentieth Century\") as herself, the guardian movie star of Charlene's baby. She made a guest appearance on \"Reba\" (episode \"Reba's Rules of Real Estate\") portraying a real-estate agency owner and on \"The Simpsons\" (episode \"Sunday, Cruddy Sunday\", 1999). She appeared as herself in 2000 on the Halloween episode of Bette Midler's short-lived sitcom \"Bette\", and on episode 14 of \"Babes\" (produced by Sandollar Productions, Parton and Sandy Gallin's joint production company). She made cameo appearances on the Disney Channel as \"Aunt Dolly\", visiting Hannah and her family in fellow Tennessean and real-life goddaughter Miley Cyrus's series \"Hannah Montana\" (episodes \"Good Golly, Miss Dolly\", 2006, \"I Will Always Loathe You\", 2007, and \"Kiss It All Goodbye\", 2010). She was nominated for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series.\nParton appeared as an overprotective mother in the comedy \"Frank McKlusky, C.I.\". (2002) She made a cameo appearance in the comedy film ', starring Sandra Bullock. She was featured in \"The Book Lady\" (2008), a documentary about her campaign for children's literacy. Parton expected to reprise her television role as Hannah's godmother in the musical comedy film ' (2009), but the character was omitted from the screenplay. She had a voice role in the comedy family film \"Gnomeo &amp; Juliet\" (2011), a computer-animated film with garden gnomes about William Shakespeare's \"Romeo and Juliet\".\nRecent work.\nParton co-starred with Queen Latifah in the musical film \"Joyful Noise\" (2012), playing a choir director's widow who joins forces with Latifah's character, a mother of two teens, to save a small Georgia town's gospel choir.\n\"Dolly Parton's Coat of Many Colors\", a made-for-TV film based on Parton's song of the same name, and featuring narration by Parton, aired on NBC in December 2015, with child actress Alyvia Alyn Lind portraying the young Parton. Parton also had a cameo in , which aired in November 2016. \nIn June 2018, Parton announced an eight-part Netflix series, featuring her music career. She is its executive producer and co-star. The series, called \"Dolly Parton's Heartstrings\", aired in November 2019.\nParton is the subject of the NPR podcast \"Dolly Parton's America\". It is hosted by Jad Abumrad, who also hosts Radiolab.\nIn December 2019, the biographical documentary \"\" was added to the catalog of the Netflix streaming service. The documentary, a co-production of Netflix and the BBC, takes its name from Parton's 1971 song.\nIn November 2020, Parton produced and starred in the Netflix musical film \"Dolly Parton's Christmas on the Square\", which won her a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Television Movie.\nIn November 2021, Parton was confirmed to be appearing in the final season of \"Grace and Frankie\" in a guest-starring role, reuniting with her \"9 to 5\" co-stars Lily Tomlin and Jane Fonda.\nIn July 2022, Parton appeared as a simulation of herself on sci-fi show \"The Orville\" in the episode \"Midnight Blue\".\nIn December 2022, Parton appeared in an NBC special titled \"Dolly Parton's Mountain Magic Christmas.\"\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nParton is the fourth of 12 children. Her siblings are Willadeene, David Wilburn, Coy Denver, Robert Lee, Stella Mae, Cassie Nan, Randel Huston (deceased), Larry Gerald (deceased), twins Floyd Estel (deceased) and Frieda Estelle, and Rachel Ann.\nOn May 30, 1966, Parton and Carl Thomas Dean (born July 20, 1942, in Nashville, Tennessee) were married in Ringgold, Georgia. Although Parton does not use Dean's surname professionally, she has stated that her passport reads \"Dolly Parton Dean\" and that she sometimes uses Dean when signing contracts.\nDean, who is retired from running an asphalt road-paving business in Nashville, has always shunned publicity and rarely accompanies his wife to any events. Parton has jokingly said he has only seen her perform once. She also has said in interviews that, although it appears they spend little time together, it is simply that nobody sees him publicly. She has commented on Dean's romantic side, saying that he does spontaneous things to surprise her and sometimes even writes poems for her. In 2011, Parton said, \"We're really very proud of our marriage. It's the first for both of us. And the last.\"\nOn May 6, 2016, Parton announced that she and her husband would renew their vows in honour of their 50th wedding anniversary later in the month.\nParton and Dean helped raise several of Parton's younger siblings in Nashville, leading her nieces and nephews to refer to them as \"Uncle Peepaw\" and \"Aunt Granny\"; the latter a moniker that later lent its name to one of Parton's Dollywood restaurants. Parton is the godmother of singer-songwriter and actress Miley Cyrus.\nFaith.\nParton is a committed Christian and this has influenced many of her musical releases.\nPhilanthropy.\nSince the mid-1980s, Parton has supported many charitable efforts, particularly in the area of literacy, primarily through her Dollywood Foundation.\nHer literacy program, Dolly Parton's Imagination Library, a part of the Dollywood Foundation, mails one book per month to each enrolled child from the time of their birth until they enter kindergarten. Currently, over 1600 local communities provide the Imagination Library to almost 850,000 children each month across the U.S., Canada, the UK, Australia, and the Republic of Ireland. In 2018, Parton was honored by the Library of Congress on account of the \"charity sending out its 100 millionth book\".\nIn 2006, Parton published a cookbook, \"Dolly's Dixie Fixin's: Love, Laughter and Lots of Good Food\".\nThe Dollywood Foundation, funded from Parton's profits, has been noted for bringing jobs and tax revenues to a previously depressed region. Parton also has worked to raise money for several other causes, including the American Red Cross and HIV/AIDS-related charities.\nIn December 2006, Parton pledged $500,000 toward a proposed $90million hospital and cancer center to be constructed in Sevierville in the name of Robert F. Thomas, the physician who delivered her. She announced a benefit concert to raise additional funds for the project. The concert played to about 8,000 people. That same year, Emmylou Harris and she had allowed their music to be used in a PETA ad campaign that encouraged pet owners to keep their dogs indoors rather than chained outside.\nIn 2003, her efforts to preserve the bald eagle through the American Eagle Foundation's sanctuary at Dollywood earned her the Partnership Award from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Parton received the Woodrow Wilson Award for Public Service from the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars of the Smithsonian Institution at a ceremony in Nashville on November 8, 2007. In February 2018, in honor of her father, who never learned to read or write, she donated her 100 millionth free book, a copy of Parton's children's picture book \"Coat of Many Colors\". It was donated to the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C.\nFor her work in literacy, Parton has received various awards, including Association of American Publishers Honors Award (2000), Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval (2001) (the first time the seal had been awarded to a person), American Association of School Administrators\u00a0\u2013 Galaxy Award (2002), National State Teachers of the Year\u00a0\u2013 Chasing Rainbows Award (2002), and Parents as Teachers National Center\u00a0\u2013 Child and Family Advocacy Award (2003).\nOn May 8, 2009, Parton gave the commencement speech at the graduation ceremony for the University of Tennessee, Knoxville's College of Arts and Sciences. During the ceremony, she received an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters from the university. It was only the second honorary degree given by the university, and in presenting the degree, the university's Chancellor, Jimmy Cheek, said, \"Because of her career not just as a musician and entertainer, but for her role as a cultural ambassador, philanthropist and lifelong advocate for education, it is fitting that she be honored with an honorary degree from the flagship educational institution of her home state.\"\nIn response to the 2016 Great Smoky Mountains wildfires, Parton was one of a number of country music artists who participated in a telethon to raise money for victims of the fires. This was held in Nashville on December 9. In addition, Parton hosted her own telethon for the victims on December 13 and reportedly raised around $9million. Her fund, the \"My People Fund\", provided $1,000 a month for six months to over 900 families affected by the wildfires, finally culminating with $5,000 to each home in the final month due to increased fundraising, for a total of $10,000 per family. In 2018, the FBI honored Parton for her wildfire aid work, awarding her the 2018 Director\u2019s Community Leadership Award at a ceremony at FBI Headquarters in Washington. The honor was bestowed by Director Christopher Wray and was accepted on the Parton\u2019s behalf by David Dotson, the CEO of the Dollywood Foundation.\nThe impact of the fund's financial relief for the 2016 wildfire victims was studied by University of Tennessee College of Social Work professor Stacia West, who examined the impact of cash transfers in poverty alleviation. West surveyed 100 recipients of the emergency relief funds in April 2017 on topics including questions on housing, financial impact, physical and emotional health, and sources of support, with a follow up survey conducted in December 2017. West found that the \"My People Fund\", in tandem with traditional disaster response, gave families the ability to make decisions that were most beneficial to them, and concluded that unconditional cash support may be more beneficial for disaster relief than conditional financial support. The report cited the impact of the monthly financial disbursements from the \"My People Fund\" on residents' emergency savings: \"Following the monthly disbursements of unconditional cash assistance, participants were able to return to baseline financial stability reported prior to the wildfire, and improve their ability to set aside savings for hypothetical future emergencies.\"\nParton has been a generous donor to Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC). Among her gifts was a contribution to the Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt Pediatric Cancer Program in honor of a friend, Professor Naji Abumrad, and her niece, Hannah Dennison, who was successfully treated for leukemia as a child at Children's Hospital.\nModerna COVID-19 vaccine.\nIn response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Parton donated $1million towards research at Vanderbilt University Medical Center and encouraged those who can afford it to make similar donations. She said \"I'm a very proud girl today to know I had anything at all to do with something that's going to help us through this crazy pandemic.\" Her donation funded the critical early stages of development of the Moderna vaccine. In March 2021, Parton was vaccinated against COVID-19 at Vanderbilt University. She labeled social media accounts of the occasion \"Dolly gets a dose of her own medicine.\" Parton strongly encouraged everyone to get vaccinated when eligible and performed a song celebrating her vaccination, set to the tune of her song \"Jolene\". The song included the lines \"Vaccine, vaccine, vaccine, vaccine/I'm begging of you please don't hesitate/Vaccine, vaccine, vaccine, vaccine/'Cos once you're dead, then that's a bit too late.\"\nAwards and honors.\nDolly Parton is one of the most-honored female country performers of all time. The Record Industry Association of America has certified 25 of her single or album releases as either Gold Record, Platinum Record or Multi-Platinum Record. She has had 26 songs reach no.1 on the Billboard country charts, a record for a female artist. She has 42 career Top10 country albums, a record for any artist, and 110 career-charted singles over the past forty years. As of 2012 she had written more than 3,000 songs and sold more than 100 million records, making her one of the best-selling female artists of all time. As of 2021, she had appeared on the country music charts in each of seven decades, the most of any artist.\nDolly Parton has earned eleven Grammy Awards (including her 2011 Lifetime Achievement Grammy) and a total of fifty Grammy Award nominations, the second-most nominations of any female artist in the history of the prestigious awards.\nAt the American Music Awards, she has won three awards out of 18 nominations. At the Country Music Association, she has won ten awards out of 42 nominations. At the Academy of Country Music, she has won seven awards and 39 nominations. She is one of only six female artists (including Reba McEntire, Barbara Mandrell, Shania Twain, Loretta Lynn, and Taylor Swift), to win the Country Music Association's highest honor, Entertainer of the Year (1978). She also has been nominated for two Academy Awards and a Tony Award. She was nominated for an Emmy Award for her appearance in a 1978 Cher television special. She was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her music in 1984, located at 6712 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood, California; a star on the Nashville StarWalk for Grammy winners; and a bronze sculpture on the courthouse lawn in Sevierville. She has called that statue of herself in her hometown \"the greatest honor\", because it came from the people who knew her. Parton was inducted into the Grand Ole Opry in 1969, and in 1986 was named one of \"Ms. Magazine\"'s Women of the Year. In 1986, she was inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame.\nIn 1999, Parton received country music's highest honor, an induction into the Country Music Hall of Fame. She received an honorary doctorate degree from Carson-Newman College (Jefferson City, Tennessee) in 1990. This was followed by induction into the National Academy of Popular Music/Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2001. In 2002, she ranked no.4 in CMT's 40 Greatest Women of Country Music.\nParton was honored in 2003 with a tribute album called \"Just Because I'm a Woman: Songs of Dolly Parton\". The artists who recorded versions of Parton's songs included Melissa Etheridge (\"I Will Always Love You\"), Alison Krauss (\"9 to 5\"), Shania Twain (\"Coat of Many Colors\"), Meshell Ndegeocello (\"Two Doors Down\"), Norah Jones (\"The Grass is Blue\"), and Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor (\"Dagger Through the Heart\"). Parton herself contributed a re-recording of the title song, originally the title song for her first RCA album in 1968. Parton was awarded the Living Legend Medal by the U.S. Library of Congress on April 14, 2004, for her contributions to the cultural heritage of the United States. She is also the focus of a Library of Congress collection exploring the influences of country music on her life and career. The collection contains images, articles, sheet music, and more.\nIn 2005, she was honored with the National Medal of Arts, the highest honor given by the U.S. government for excellence in the arts. The award is presented by the U.S. President. On December 3, 2006, Parton received the Kennedy Center Honors from the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts for her lifetime of contributions to the arts. During the show, some of country music's biggest names came to show their admiration. Carrie Underwood performed \"Islands in the Stream\" with Rogers, Parton's original duet partner. Krauss performed \"Jolene\" and duetted \"Coat of Many Colors\" with Twain. McEntire and Reese Witherspoon also came to pay tribute. On November 16, 2010, Parton accepted the Liseberg Applause Award, the theme park industry's most prestigious honor, on behalf of Dollywood theme park during a ceremony held at IAAPA Attractions Expo 2010 in Orlando, Florida.\nIn 2015, a newly discovered species of lichen found growing in the southern Appalachians was named \"Japewiella dollypartoniana\" in honor of Parton's music and her efforts to bring national and global attention to that region. In 2018, Parton received a second star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, inducted alongside Linda Ronstadt and Emmylou Harris in recognition of their work as a trio. Parton was also recognized in the Guinness World Records 2018 Edition for holding records for the Most Decades with a Top20 hit on Billboard's Hot Country Songs Chart and Most Hits on Billboard's Hot Country Songs Chart by a Female Artist. In 2020, Parton received a Grammy award for her collaboration with For King &amp; Country on their song, \"God Only Knows\". In 2021, she was included on the \"Time\" 100, \"Time\"'s annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. \"The New York Times\" called her among the three of America's Most Beloved Divas (alongside Patti LaBelle and Barbra Streisand).\nParton has turned down the Presidential Medal of Freedom twice due to her husband's illness and the ongoing pandemic. In response to a 2021 proposal by the Tennessee legislature to erect a statue of Parton, she released a statement asking the legislature to remove the bill from consideration, saying \"Given all that is going on in the world, I don't think putting me on a pedestal is appropriate at this time.\"\nIn late 2022, Parton received a $100-million Courage and Civility Award from the founder of Amazon, Jeff Bezos. According to Bezos, the award was given to Parton because of her charity work focused on improving children's literacy around the world.\nIn 2023 Parton was named an Honorary Member of the American Library Association. \nHall of Fame honors.\nDuring her career, Parton has gained induction into numerous Halls of Fame. Those honors include:\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilmography.\nTheatrical releases\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8717", "revid": "30571117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8717", "title": "Diprotodon", "text": "Extinct marsupial genus\nDiprotodon (Ancient Greek: \"two protruding front teeth\") is an extinct genus of marsupial from the Pleistocene of Australia containing one species, D. optatum. The earliest finds date to 1.77 million to 780,000 years ago but most specimens are dated to after 110,000 years ago. Its remains were first unearthed in 1830 in Wellington Caves, New South Wales, and contemporaneous paleontologists guessed they belonged to rhinos, elephants, hippos or dugongs. \"Diprotodon\" was formally described by English naturalist Richard Owen in 1838, and was the first named Australian fossil mammal, and led Owen to become the foremost authority of his time on other marsupials and Australian megafauna, which were enigmatic to European science.\n\"Diprotodon\" is the largest-known marsupial to have ever lived, it greatly exceeds the size of its closest living relatives wombats and koalas. It is a member of the extinct family Diprotodontidae, which includes other large quadrupedal herbivores. It grew as large as at the shoulders, over from head to tail, and possibly weighed almost . Females were much smaller than males. \"Diprotodon\" supported itself on elephant-like legs to travel long distances, and inhabited most of Australia. The digits were weak; most of the weight was probably borne on the wrists and ankles. The hindpaws angled inward at 130\u00b0. Its jaws may have produced a strong bite force of at the long and ever-growing incisor teeth, and over at the last molar. Such powerful jaws would have allowed it to eat vegetation in bulk, crunching and grinding plant materials such as twigs, buds and leaves of woody plants with its bilophodont teeth.\nIt is the only marsupial and metatherian that is known to have made seasonal migrations. Large herds, usually of females, seem to have marched through a wide range of habitats to find food and water, walking at around . \"Diprotodon\" may have formed polygynous societies, possibly using its powerful incisors to fight for mates or fend off predators, such as the largest-known marsupial carnivore \"Thylacoleo carnifex\". Being a marsupial, the mother may have raised her joey in a pouch on her belly, probably with one of these facing backwards, as in wombats.\n\"Diprotodon\" went extinct about 40,000 years ago during the Quaternary extinction event, along with every other Australian animal over ; the extinction was possibly caused by extreme drought conditions and predation pressure from the first Aboriginal Australians, who had co-existed with the megafauna for about 10,000\u201320,000 years. There is little direct evidence of interactions between Aboriginal Australians and \"Diprotodon\"\u2014or any Pleistocene mammalian megafauna. \"Diprotodon\" has been conjectured by some authors to have been the origin of some aboriginal mythological figures\u2014most notably the bunyip\u2014and aboriginal rock artworks but these ideas are unconfirmable.\nResearch history.\nIn 1830, farmer George Ranken found a diverse fossil assemblage while exploring Wellington Caves, New South Wales, Australia. This was the first major site of extinct Australian megafauna. Remains of Diprotodon were excavated when Ranken later returned as part of a formal expedition that was headed by explorer Major Thomas Mitchell.\nAt the time these massive fossils were discovered, it was generally thought they were remains of rhinos, elephants, hippos. or dugongs. They fossils were not formally described until Mitchell took them in 1837 to his former colleague English naturalist Richard Owen while in England publishing his journal. In 1838, while studying a piece of a right mandible with an incisor, Owen compared the tooth to those of wombats and hippos; he wrote to Mitchell designating it as a new genus \"Diprotodon\". Mitchell published the correspondence in his journal. Owen formally described \"Diprotodon\" in Volume 2 without mentioning a species; in Volume 1, however, he listed the name \"Diprotodon optatum\", making that the type species. \"Diprotodon\" means \"two protruding front teeth\" in Ancient Greek and \"optatum\" is Latin for \"desire\" or \"wish\". It was the first-ever Australian fossil mammal to be described. In 1844, Owen replaced the name \"D. optatum\" with \"\"D. australis\". Owen only once used the name \"optatum\" and the acceptance of its apparent replacement \"australis\"\" has historically varied widely but \"optatum\" is now standard.\nIn 1843, Mitchell was sent more \"Diprotodon\" fossils from the recently settled Darling Downs and relayed them to Owen. Owen, having interpreted the incisors as tusks, as well as comparing the flattening (anteroposterior compression) of the femur to the condition in elephants and rhinos, and the raised ridges of the molar to the grinding surfaces of elephant teeth, believed \"Diprotodon\" was an elephant related to or synonymous with \"Mastodon\" or \"Deinotherium\". Later that year, he formally synonymised \"Diprotodon\" with \"Deinotherium\" as \"Dinotherium Australe\", which he recanted in 1844 after German naturalist Ludwig Leichhardt pointed out that the incisors clearly belong to a marsupial. Owen still classified the molars from Wellington as \"Mastodon australis\" and continued to describe \"Diprotodon\" as likely elephantine. In 1847, a nearly complete skull and skeleton was recovered from the Darling Downs, the latter confirming this characterisation. The massive skeleton attracted a large audience while on public display in Sydney. Leichhardt believed the animal was aquatic and in 1844, he said it might still be alive in an undiscovered tropical area nearer the interior but as the European land exploration of Australia progressed, he became certain it was extinct. Owen later become the foremost authority of Australian palaeontology of his time, mostly working with marsupials.\nHuge assemblages of mostly complete \"Diprotodon\" fossils have been unearthed in dry lakes and riverbeds; the largest assemblage came from Lake Callabonna, South Australia. Fossils were first noticed here by an aboriginal stockman working on a sheep property to the east. The owners the Ragless brothers notified the South Australian Museum, which hired Australian geologist Henry Hurst, who reported an enormous wealth of fossil material and was paid \u00a3250 in 1893 to excavate the site. Hurst found up to 360 \"Diprotodon\" individuals over a few acres; excavation was restarted in the 1970s and more were uncovered. American palaeontologist Richard H. Tedford said multiple herds of these animals had at different times become stuck in mud while crossing bodies of water while water levels was low during dry seasons.\nIn addition to \"D. optatum\", several other species were erected in the 19th century, often from single specimens, on the basis of subtle anatomical variations. Among the variations was size difference; adult \"Diprotodon\" specimens have two distinct size ranges. In their 1975 review of Australian fossil mammals, Australian palaeontologists J. A. Mahoney and William David Lindsay Ride did not ascribe this to sexual dimorphism because males and females of modern wombat and koala species\u2014its closest living relatives\u2014are skeletally indistinguishable, so they assumed the same would have been true for extinct relatives, including \"Diprotodon\".\nThese other species are:\nIn 2008, Australian palaeontologist Gilbert Price opted to recognise only one species \"D. optatum\" based most-notably on a lack of dental differences among these supposed species, and said it was likely \"Diprotodon\" was indeed sexually dimorphic, with the male probably being the larger form.\nClassification.\nPhylogeny.\n\"Diprotodon\" is a marsupial in the order Diprotodontia, suborder Vombatiformes (wombats and koalas), and infraorder Vombatomorphia (wombats and allies). It is unclear how different groups of vombatiformes are related to each other because the most-completely known members\u2014living or extinct\u2014are exceptionally derived (highly specialised forms that are quite different from their last common ancestor).\nIn 1872, American mammalogist Theodore Gill erected the superfamily Diprotodontoidea and family Diprotodontidae to house \"Diprotodon\". New species were later added to both groups; by the 1960s, the first diprotodontoids dating to before the Pliocene were discovered, better clarifying their relationship to each other. Because of this, in 1967, American palaeontologist Ruben A. Stirton subdivided Diprotodontoidea into one family, Diprotodontidae, with four subfamilies; Diprotodontinae (containing \"Diprotodon\" among others), Nototheriinae, Zygomaturinae, and Palorchestinae. In 1977, Australian palaeontologist Michael Archer synonymised Nototheriinae with Diprotodontinae and in 1978, Archer and Australian palaeontologist Alan Bartholomai elevated Palorchestinae to family level as Palorchestidae, leaving Diprotodontoidea with families Diprotodontidae and Palorchestidae; and Diprotodontidae with subfamilies Diprotodontinae and Zygomaturinae.\nBelow is the Diprotodontoidea family tree according to Australian palaeontologists Karen H. Black and Brian Mackness, 1999 (top), and Vombatiformes family tree according to Beck \"et al.\" 2020 (bottom):\nEvolution.\nDiprotodontidae is the most diverse family in Vombatomorphia; it was better adapted to the spreading dry, open landscapes over the last tens of millions of years than other groups in the infraorder, living or extinct. \"Diprotodon\" has been found in every Australian state, making it the most-widespread Australian megafauna in the fossil record. The oldest vombatomorph (and vombatiform) is \"Mukupirna\", which was identified in 2020 from Oligocene deposits of the South Australian Namba Formation dating to 26\u201325 million years ago. The group probably evolved much earlier; \"Mukupirna\" was already differentiated as a closer relative to wombats than other vombatiformes, and attained a massive size of roughly , whereas the last common ancestor of vombatiformes was probably a small, creature.\nBoth diprotodontines and zygomaturines were both apparently quite diverse over the Late Oligocene to Early Miocene, roughly 23 million years ago, though the familial and subfamilial classifications of diprotodontoids from this period is debated. Compared to zygomaturines, diprotodontines were rare during the Miocene, the only identified genus being \"Pyramios\". By the Late Miocene, diprotodontians became the commonest marsupial order in fossil sites, a dominance that endures to the present day; at this point, the most-prolific diprotodontians were diprotodontids and kangaroos. Diprotodontidae also began a gigantism trend, along with several other marsupials, probably in response to the lower-quality plant foods available in a drying climate, requiring them to consume much more. Gigantism appears to have evolved independently six times among the vombatiform lineages. Diprotodontine diversity returned in the Pliocene; Diprotodontidae reached peak diversity with seven genera, coinciding with the spread of open forests. In 1977, Archer said \"Diprotodon\" directly evolved from the smaller \"Euryzygoma\", which has been discovered in Pliocene deposits of eastern Australia predating 2.5 million years ago.\nIn general, there is poor resolution on the ages of Australian fossil sites. While the geochronology of \"Diprotodon\" is one of best for Australian megafauna, it is still incomplete and the majority of remains are undated. Price and Australian palaeontologist Katarzyna Piper reported the earliest, indirectly dated \"Diprotodon\" fossils from the Nelson Bay Formation at Nelson Bay, New South Wales, which dates to 1.77 million to 780,000 years ago during the Early Pleistocene. These remains are 8\u201317% smaller than those of Late Pleistocene \"Diprotodon\" but are otherwise indistinguishable. The oldest directly dated \"Diprotodon\" fossils come from the Boney Bite site at Floraville, New South Wales; they were deposited approximately 340,000 years ago during the Middle Pleistocene based on U-series dating and luminescence dating of quartz and orthoclase. Floraville is the only-identified Middle Pleistocene site in tropical northern Australia. Beyond these, almost all dated \"Diprotodon\" material comes from Marine Isotope Stage 5 (MIS5) or younger\u2014after 110,000 years ago during the Late Pleistocene.\nDescription.\nSkull.\n\"Diprotodon\" has a long, narrow skull. Like other marsupials, the top of the skull of \"Diprotodon\" is flat or depressed over the small braincase and the sinuses of the frontal bone. Like many other giant vombatiformes, the frontal sinuses are extensive; in a specimen from Bacchus Marsh, they take up \u2014roughly 25% of skull volume\u2014whereas the brain occupies \u2014only 4% of the skull volume. Marsupials tend to have smaller brain-to-body mass ratios than placental mammals, becoming more disparate the bigger the animal, which could be a response to a need to conserve energy because the brain is a calorically expensive organ, or is proportional to the maternal metabolic rate, which is much less in marsupials due to the shorter gestation period. The expanded sinuses increase the surface area available for the temporalis muscle to attach, which is important for biting and chewing, to compensate for a deflated braincase as a result of a proportionally smaller brain. They may also have helped dissipate stresses produced by biting more efficiently across the skull.\nThe occipital bone, the back of the skull, slopes forward at 45 degrees unlike most modern marsupials, where it is vertical. The base of the occipital is significantly thickened. The occipital condyles, a pair of bones that connect the skull with the vertebral column, are semi-circular and the bottom half is narrower than the top. The inner border, which forms the foramen magnum where the spinal cord feeds through, is thin and well-defined. The top margin of the foramen magnum is somewhat flattened rather than arched. The foramen expands backwards towards the inlet, especially vertically, and is more-reminiscent of a short neural canal\u2014the tube running through a vertebral centrum where the spinal cord passes through\u2014than a foramen magnum.\nA sagittal crest extends across the midline of the skull from the supraoccipital\u2014the top of the occipital bone\u2014to the region between the eyes on the top of the head. The orbit (eye socket) is small and vertically oval-shaped. The nasal bones slightly curve upwards until near their endpoint, where they begin to curve down, giving the bones a somewhat S-shaped profile. Like many marsupials, most of the nasal septum is made of bone rather than cartilage. The nose would have been quite mobile. The height of the skull from the peak of the occipital bone to the end of the nasals is strikingly almost uniform; the end of the nasals is the tallest point. The zygomatic arch (cheek bone) is strong and deep as in kangaroos but unlike those of koalas and wombats, and extends all the way from the supraoccipital.\nJaws.\nAs in kangaroos and wombats, there is a gap between the jointing of the palate (roof of the mouth) and the maxilla (upper jaw) behind the last molar, which is filled by the medial pterygoid plate. This would have been the insertion for the medial pterygoid muscle that was involved in closing the jaw. Like many grazers, the masseter muscle, which is also responsible for closing the jaw, seems to have been the dominant jaw muscle. A probable large temporal muscle compared to the lateral pterygoid muscle may indicate, unlike in wombats, a limited range of side-to-side jaw motion means \"Diprotodon\" would have been better at crushing rather than grinding food. The insertion of the masseter is placed forwards, in front of the orbits, which could have allowed better control over the incisors. \"Diprotodon\"'s chewing strategy appears to align more with kangaroos than wombats; a powerful vertical crunch was followed by a transverse grinding motion.\nAs in other marsupials, the ramus of the mandible, the portion that goes up to connect with the skull, angles inward. The condyloid process, which connects the jaw to the skull, is similar to that of a koala. The ramus is straight and extends almost vertically, thickening as it approaches the body of the mandible where the teeth are. The depth of the body of the mandible increases from the last molar to the first. The strong mandibular symphysis, which fuses the two halves of the mandible, begins at the front-most end of the third molar; this would prevent either half of the mandible from moving independently of the other, unlike in kangaroos which use this ability to better control their incisors.\nTeeth.\nThe dental formula of \"Diprotodon\" is 3.0.1.41.0.1.4. In each half of either jaw are three incisors in the upper jaw and one in the lower jaw; there are one premolar and four molars in both jaws but no canines. A long diastema (gap) separates the incisors from the molars.\nThe incisors are scalpriform (chisel-like). Like those of wombats and rodents, the first incisors in both jaws continuously grew throughout the animal's life but the other two upper incisors did not. This combination is not seen in any living marsupial. The cross-section of the upper incisors is circular. In one old male specimen, the first upper incisor measures of which is within the tooth socket; the second is and is in the socket; and the exposed part of the third is . The first incisor is convex and curves outwards but the other two are concave. The lower incisor has a faint upward curve but is otherwise straight and has an oval cross-section. In the same old male specimen, the lower incisor measures , of which &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 is inside the socket.\nThe premolars and molars are bilophodont, each having two distinct lophs (ridges). The premolar is triangular and about half the size of the molars. As in kangaroos, the necks of the lophs are coated in cementum. Unlike in kangaroos, there is no connecting ridge between the lophs. The peaks of these lophs have a thick enamel coating that thins towards the base; his could wear away with use and expose the dentine layer, and beneath that osteodentine. Like the first premolar of other marsupials, the first molar of \"Diprotodon\" and wombats is the only tooth that is replaced.\nVertebrae.\n\"Diprotodon\" had five cervical (neck) vertebrae. The atlas, the first cervical (C1), has a pair of deep cavities for insertion of the occipital condyles. The diaphophyses of the atlas, an upward-angled projection on either the side of the vertebra, are relatively short and thick, and resemble those of wombats and koalas. The articular surface of the axis (C2), the part that joints to another vertebra, is slightly concave on the front side and flat on the back side. As in kangaroos, the axis has a low subtriangular hypophysis projecting vertically from the underside of the vertebra and a proportionally long odontoid\u2014a projection from the axis which fits into the atlas\u2014but the neural spine, which projects vertically the topside of the vertebra, is more forwards. The remaining cervicals lack a hypophysis. As in kangaroos, C3 and C4 have a shorter and more-compressed neural spine, which is supported by a low ridge along its midline in the front and the back. The neural spine of C5 is narrower but thicker, and is supported by stronger-but-shorter ridges.\n\"Diprotodon\" probably had 13 dorsal vertebrae and 14 pairs of closely-spaced ribs. Like many other mammals, the dorsals initially decrease in breadth and then expand before connecting to the lumbar vertebrae. Unusually, the front dorsals match the short proportions of the cervicals, and the articular surface is flat. At the beginning of the series, the neural spine is broad and angled forward, and is also supported by a low ridge along its midline in the front and the back. In later examples, the neural spine is angled backwards and bifurcates (splits into two). Among mammals, bifurcation of the neural spine is only seen in elephants and humans, and only in a few of the cervicals and not in the dorsals. Compared to those of wombats and kangaroos, the neural arch is proportionally taller. As in elephants, the epiphysial plates (growth plates) and the neural arch, to which the neural spine is attached, are anchylosed\u2014very rigid in regard to the vertebral centrum\u2014which served to support the animal's immense weight.\nLike most marsupials, \"Diprotodon\" likely had six lumbar vertebrae. They retain a proportionally tall neural arch but not the diapophyses, though L1 can retain a small protuberance on one side where a diapophysis would be in a dorsal vertebra; this has been documented in kangaroos and other mammals. The length of each vertebra increases along the series so the lumbar series may have bent downward.\nLike other marsupials, \"Diprotodon\" had two sacral vertebrae. The base of the neural spines of these two were ossified (fused) together.\nLimbs.\nGirdles.\nThe general proportions of the scapula (shoulder blade) align more closely with more-basal vertebrates such as monotremes, birds, reptiles, and fish rather than marsupials and placental mammals. It is triangular and proportionally narrow but unlike most mammals with a triangular scapula, the arm attaches to top of the scapula and the subspinous fossa (the fossa, a depression below the spine of the scapula, increases towards the arm joint rather than decreasing. The glenoid cavity where the arm connects is oval shaped as in most mammals.\nUnlike other marsupials, the ilia, the large wings of the pelvis, are lamelliform (short and broad, with a flat surface instead of an iliac fossa). Lamelliform ilia have only been recorded in elephants, sloths, and apes, though these groups all have a much-longer sacral vertebra series whereas marsupials are restricted to two sacral vertebrae. The ilia provided strong muscle attachments that were probably oriented and used much the same as those in an elephant. The sacroiliac joint where the pelvis connects to the spine is at 35 degrees in reference to the long axis of the ilium. The ischia, which form part of the hip socket, are thick and rounded tailwards but taper and diverge towards the socket, unlike those in kangaroos, where the ischia proceed almost parallel to each other. They were not connected to the vertebra. The hip socket itself is well-rounded and almost hemispherical.\nLong bones.\nUnlike those of most marsupials, the humerus of \"Diprotodon\" is almost straight rather than S-shaped, and the trochlea of the humerus at the elbow joint is not perforated. The ridges for muscle attachments are poorly developed, which seems to have been compensated for by the powerful forearms. Similarly, the condyles where the radius and ulna (the forearm bones) connect maintain their rounded shape and are quite-similarly sized, and unusually reminiscent of the condyles between the femur and the tibia and fibula in the leg of a kangaroo.\nLike elephants, the femur of \"Diprotodon\" is straight and compressed anteroposteriorly (from headside to tailside). The walls of the femur are prodigiously thickened, strongly constricting the medullary cavity where the bone marrow is located. The proximal end (part closest to the hip joint) is notably long, broad, and deep. The femoral head projects up far from the greater trochanter. As in kangaroos, the greater trochanter is split into two lobes. The femoral neck is roughly the same diameter as the femoral head. Also as in kangaroos, the condyle for the fibula is excavated out but the condyle for the tibia is well-rounded and hemispherical. Like those of many other marsupials, the tibia is twisted and the tibial malleolus (on the ankle) is reduced.\nPaws.\n\"Diprotodon\" has five digits on either paw. Like other plantigrade walkers, where the paws were flat on the ground, the wrist and ankle would have been largely rigid and inflexible. The digits are proportionally weak so the paws probably had a lot of padding. Similarly, the digits do not seem to have been much engaged in weight bearing.\nThe forepaw was strong and the shape of the wrist bones is quite similar to those of kangaroos. Like other vombatiformes, the metacarpals, which connect the fingers to the wrist, are broadly similar to those of kangaroos and allies. The enlarged pisiform bone takes up half the jointing surface of the ulna. The fifth digit on the forepaw is the largest.\nThe digits of the hindpaws turn inwards from the ankle at 130 degrees. The second and third metatarsals (the metatarsals connect the toes to the ankle) are significantly reduced, which may mean these digits were syndactylous (fused) like those of all modern diprotodontians. The first, fourth, and fifth digits are enlarged. The toes are each about the same length, except the fifth which is much stouter.\nSize.\n\"Diprotodon\" is the largest-known marsupial to ever have lived. In life, adult \"Diprotodon\" could have reached at the shoulders and from head to tail. Accounting for cartilaginous intervertebral discs, \"Diprotodon\" may have been 20% longer than reconstructed skeletons, exceeding .\nAs researchers were formulating predictive body-mass equations for fossil species, efforts were largely constrained to eutherian mammals rather than marsupials. The first person to attempt to estimate the living weight of \"Diprotodon\" was Peter Murray in his 1991 review of the megafauna of Pleistocene Australia; Murray made an estimate of using cranial and dental measurements, which he said was probably not a very precise figure. This made \"Diprotodon\" the largest herbivore in Australia. In 2001, Canadian biologist Gary Burness and colleagues did a linear regression between the largest herbivores and carnivores\u2014living or extinct\u2014from every continent (for Australia: \"Diprotodon\", \"Varanus priscus\", and \"Thylacoleo carnifex\") against the landmass area of their continent, and another regression between the daily food intake of living creatures against the landmass of their continents. He calculated the food requirement of \"Diprotodon\" was 50\u201360% smaller than expected for Australia's landmass, which he believed was a result of a generally lower metabolism in marsupials compared to placentals\u2014up to 20% lower\u2014and sparser nutritious vegetation than other continents. The maximum-attainable body size is capped much lower than those for other continents.\nIn 2003, Australian palaeontologist Stephen Wroe and colleagues took a more-sophisticated approach to body mass than Murray's estimate. They made a regression between the minimum circumference of the femora and humeri of 18 quadrupedal marsupials and 32 placentals against body mass, and then inputted 17 \"Diprotodon\" long bones into their predictive model. The results ranged from , for a mean of , though Wroe said reconstructing the weight of extinct creatures that far outweighed living counterparts is problematic. For comparison, an American bison they used in their study weighed and a hippo weighed .\nPaleobiology.\nDiet.\nLike modern megaherbivores, most evidently the African elephant, Pleistocene Australian megafauna likely had a profound effect on the vegetation, limiting the spread of forest cover and woody plants. Carbon isotope analysis suggests \"Diprotodon\" fed on a broad range of foods and, like kangaroos, was consuming both C3\u2014well-watered trees, shrubs, and grasses\u2014and C4 plants; arid grasses. Carbon isotope analyses on \"Diprotodon\" excavated from the Cuddie Springs site in units SU6 (possibly 45,000 years old) and SU9 (350,000 to 570,000 years old) indicate \"Diprotodon\" adopted a somewhat-more-varied seasonal diet as Australia's climate dried but any change was subtle. In contrast, contemporary kangaroos and wombats underwent major dietary shifts or specialisations towards, respectively, C3 and C4 plants. The fossilised, incompletely digested gut contents of one 53,000-year-old individual from Lake Callabonna show its last meal consisted of young leaves, stalks, and twigs.\nThe molars of \"Diprotodon\" are a simple bilophodont shape. Kangaroos use their bilophodont teeth to grind tender, low-fibre plants as a browser as well as grass as a grazer. Kangaroos that predominantly graze have specialised molars to resist the abrasiveness of grass but such adaptations are not exhibited in \"Diprotodon\", which may have had a mixed diet similar to that of a browsing wallaby. It may also have chewed like wallabies, beginning with a vertical crunch before grinding transversely, as opposed to wombats, which only grind transversely. Similarly to many large ungulates (hoofed mammals), the jaws of \"Diprotodon\" were better suited for crushing rather than grinding, which would have permitted it to process vegetation in bulk.\nIn 2016, Australian biologists Alana Sharpe and Thomas Rich estimated the maximum-possible bite force of \"Diprotodon\" using finite element analysis. They calculated at the incisors and across the molar series. For reference, the American alligator can produce forces upwards of . Though these are likely overestimates, the jaws of \"Diprotodon\" were exceptionally strong, which would have allowed it to consume a broad range of plants, including tough, fibrous grasses.\nMigration and sociality.\nIn 2017, by measuring the strontium isotope ratio (87Sr/86Sr) at various points along the \"Diprotodon\" incisor QMF3452 from the Darling Downs, and matching those ratios to the ratios of sites across that region, Price and colleagues determined \"Diprotodon\" made seasonal migrations, probably in search of food or watering holes. This individual appears to have been following the Condamine River and, while apparently keeping to the Darling Downs during the three years this tooth had been growing, it would have been annually making a northwest-southeast round trip. This trek parallels the mammalian mass migrations of modern-day East Africa.\n\"Diprotodon\" is the only identified metatherian that seasonally migrated between two places. A few modern marsupials, such as the red kangaroo, have been documented making migrations when necessary but it is not a seasonal occurrence. Because \"Diprotodon\" could do it, it is likely other Pleistocene Australian megafauna also had seasonal migrations.\n\"Diprotodon\" apparently moved in large herds. Possible fossilised herds, which are most-commonly unearthed in south-eastern Australia, seem to be mostly or entirely female, and sometimes travelled with juveniles. Such sexual segregation is normally seen in polygynous species; it is a common social organisation among modern megaherbivores involving an entirely female herd save for their young and the dominant male, with which the herd exclusinvely breeds. Similarly, the skull is adapted to handling much-higher stresses than that which resulted from bite alone so \"Diprotodon\" may have subjected its teeth or jaws to more-strenuous activities than chewing, such as fighting other \"Diprotodon\" for mates or fending off predators, using the incisors. Like modern red and grey kangaroos, which also sexually segregate, bachelor herds of \"Diprotodon\" seem to have been less tolerant to drought conditions than female herds due to their larger size and nutritional requirements.\nGait.\nThe locomotion of an extinct animal can be inferred using fossil trackways, which seldom preserve in Australia over the Cenozoic. Only the trackways of humans, kangaroos, vombatids, \"Diprotodon\", and the diprotodontid \"Euowenia\" have been identified. \"Diprotodon\" trackways have been found at Lake Callabonna and the Victorian Volcanic Plain grasslands. The diprotodontid manus (forepaw) print is semi-circular and the pes (hindpaw) is reniform (kidney-shaped). Owing to proportionally small digits, most of the weight was borne on the carpus and tarsus\u2014the bones connecting to respectively the wrist and the ankle. Diprotodontines seem to have had a much-more-erect gait, an adaptation to long-distance travel that is similar to that of elephants, rather than the more-sprawling posture of wombats and zygomaturines, though there are no fossil trackways of the latter to verify their reconstructed standing posture.\nAt Lake Callabonna, the single \"Diprotodon\" responsible for the impressions had an average stride length of , trackway width of , and track dimensions in length x width. The gleno-acetabular length\u2014the distance between the shoulders and pelvis\u2014could have been about ; assuming a hip height of , the maker of these tracks was probably moving at around .\nThe single \"Diprotodon\" responsible for the impressions at the volcanic plain had an average stride length of , trackway width of , and pes length of . The gleno-acetabular length may have been about and assuming a hip height of , the maker of the tracks was probably moving at around . Its posture was much-more-sprawled than the example from Callabonna, aligning more with what might be expected of \"Zygomaturus\". The animal may have been a female carrying a large joey in her pouch, the added weight on the stomach altering the gait. The first trackway continues for in a south-easterly direction towards a palaeo-lake. The animal seems to have hesitated while stepping down from the first sand bar on its path with the right pes making three overlapping prints here while shuffling around. The trackway vanishes for a stretch and reappears while the animal seemingly is stepping on wet sediment. Another diprotodontid trackway appears away, moving southerly, which may have been left by the same individual.\nLife history.\nThe marsupial metabolic rate is about 30% lower than that of placentals due to a lower body temperature of . Marsupials give birth at an earlier point in foetal development, relying on lactation to facilitate most of the joey's development; because pregnancy is much-more-energetically expensive, investing in lactation rather than longer gestation can be advantageous in a highly seasonal and unpredictable climate to minimise maternal nutritional requirements. Consequently, marsupials cannot support as large a litter size or as short a generation time.\nBased on the relationship between female body size and life history in kangaroos, a \"Diprotodon\" female would have gestated for six-to-eight weeks, and given birth to a single joey. Given its massive size, \"Diprotodon\" may not have sat down to give birth as do smaller marsupials, possibly standing instead. Like koalas and wombats, the pouch may have faced backwards so the joey could crawl down across its mother's abdomen to enter and attach itself to a teat until it could see\u2014perhaps 260 days\u2014and thermoregulate. It would have permanently left the pouch after 860 days and suckled until reaching after four or five years.\nIn large kangaroos, females usually reach sexual maturity and enter oestrus soon after weaning, and males need double the time to reach sexual maturity. A similar pattern could have been exhibited in \"Diprotodon\". Assuming a lifespan of up to 50 years, a female \"Diprotodon\" could have given birth eight times.\nPalaeoecology.\n\"Diprotodon\" was present across the entire Australian continent by the Late Pleistocene, especially following MIS5 approximately 110,000 years ago. The onset of the Quaternary glaciation, with the continuous advance and retreat of glaciers at the poles, created extreme climatic variability elsewhere. In Australia, the warmer, wetter interglacial periods were received by forests and woodlands; colder, dryer glacial periods were more conducive to grasslands and deserts. The continent progressively became dryer as the Asian monsoons became less influential over Australia: the vast interior had become arid and sandy by 500,000 years ago; the mega-lakes that were once prominent, especially during interglacials in north-western Australia, dried up; and the rainforests of eastern Australia gradually retreated. Aridity has hastened over the last 100,000 years, especially after 60,000 years ago with surging El Ni\u00f1o\u2013Southern Oscillations.\nThe continent-wide distribution of \"Diprotodon\" indicates herds trekked across almost any habitat, much like modern African elephants south of the Sahara. \"Diprotodon\" was a member of a diverse assemblage of megafauna that were endemic to Pleistocene Australia; these also included the thylacine, modern kangaroos, sthenurines (giant short-faced kangaroos), a diversity of modern and giant koala and wombat species, the tapir-like \"Palorchestes\", the giant turtle \"Meiolania\", and the giant bird \"Genyornis\". \"Diprotodon\" coexisted with the diprotodontid \"Zygomaturus trilobus\", which appears to have remained in the forests, whereas \"Diprotodon\" foraged the expanding grasslands and woodlands. Other contemporaneous dipotodontids (\"Hulitherium\", \"Z. nimborensia\", and \"Maokopia\") were insular forms that were restricted to the forests of New Guinea.\nPredation.\nDue to its massive size, \"Diprotodon\" would have been a tough adversary for native carnivores. It contended with the largest-known marsupial predator \"Thylacoleo carnifex\"; while \"Diprotodon\" remains that were gnawed or bitten by \"T. carnifex\" have been identified, it is unclear if the marsupial predator was powerful enough to kill an animal surpassing . The modern jaguar, at half the size of \"T. carnifex\", can kill a bull so it is possible \"T. carnifex\" could have killed small \"Diprotodon\". Similar to recent kangaroos with thylacines or quolls, juvenile \"Diprotodon\" may have been at high risk of predation by \"T. carnifex\"; it and fossils of juvenile \"Diprotodon\" have been recovered from the same caves.\nThe largest predators of Australia were reptiles, most notably the saltwater crocodile, the now-extinct crocodiles \"Paludirex\" and \"Quinkana\", and the giant lizard megalania (\"Varanus priscus\"). At in length, megalania was the largest carnivore of Pleistocene Australia.\nExtinction.\nAs part of the Quaternary extinction event, \"Diprotodon\" and every other Australian land animal heavier than became extinct. The timing and the exact cause are unclear because there is poor resolution on the ages of Australian fossil sites. Since their discovery, the extinction of the Australian megafauna has usually been blamed on the changing climate or overhunting by the first Aboriginal Australians. In 2001, Australian palaeontologist Richard Roberts and colleagues dated 28 major fossil sites across the continent, and were able to provide a precise date for megafaunal extinction. They found most disappear from the fossil record by 80,000 years ago but \"Diprotodon\"; the giant wombat \"Phascolonus\"; \"Thylacoleo\"; and the short-faced kangaroos \"Procoptodon\", \"Protemnodon\", and \"Simosthenurus\" was identified at Ned's Gully, Queensland, and Kudjal Yolgah Cave, Western Australia, which they dated to respectively 47,000 and 46,000 years ago. Thus, all of the Australian megafauna died out probably between about 50,000 and 41,000 years ago. There also seems to have been a diverse assemblage of megafauna just before their extinction, and all populations across at least western and eastern Australia died out at about the same time. As of 2021, there is still no solid evidence of megafauna surviving past approximately 40,000 years ago; their latest occurrence, including \"Diprotodon\", is recorded at South Walker Creek mine in the north-east at about 40,100 \u00b1 1,700 years ago.\nAt the time Roberts \"et al.\" published their paper, the earliest evidence of human activity in Australia was 56\u00b14 thousand years old, which is close to their calculated date for the megafauna extinction; they hypothesised human hunting had eradicated the last megafauna within about 10,000 years of coexistence. Human hunting had earlier been blamed for the extinction of North American and New Zealand megafauna. Human activity was then generally regarded as the main driver of Australian megafaunal extinction, especially because the megafauna had survived multiple extreme drought periods during glacial periods. At the time, there did not seem to be any evidence of unusually extreme climate during this period. Due to the slowness of marsupial reproduction, even limited megafaunal hunting may have severely weakened the population.\nIn 2005, American geologist Gifford Miller noticed fire abruptly becomes more common about 45,000 years ago; he ascribed this increase to aboriginal fire-stick farmers, who would have regularly started controlled burns to clear highly productive forests and grasslands. Miller said this radically altered the vegetational landscape and promulgated the expanse of the modern-day fire-resilient scrub at the expense of the megafauna. Subsequent studies had difficulty firmly linking controlled burns with major ecological collapse. The frequency of fire could have also increased as a consequence of megafaunal extinction because total plant consumption rapidly fell, leading to faster fuel buildup.\nIn 2017, the human-occupied Madjedbebe rock shelter on the northern Australian coast was dated to about 65,000 years ago, which if correct would mean humans and megafauna had coexisted for over 20,000 years. Other authors have considered this dating questionable. In the 2010s, several ecological studies were published in support of major drought conditions coinciding with the final megafaunal extinctions. Their demise may have been the result of a combination of climatic change, human hunting, and human-driven landscape changes.\nCultural significance.\nFossil evidence.\nDespite the role the first Aboriginal Australians are speculated to have had in the extinction of \"Diprotodon\" and other mammalian megafauna in Australia, there is little evidence humans used them at all in the 20,000 years of coexistence. No fossils of mammalian megafauna suggestive of human butchery or cooking have been found.\nIn 1984, Gail Paton discovered an upper-right \"Diprotodon\" incisor (2I) bearing 28 visible cut marks in Spring Creek, south-western Victoria; Ron Vanderwald and Richard Fullager studied the incisor, which was split in half longitudinally, seemingly while the bone was still fresh but it was glued together before Vanderwald and Fullager could inspect it. Each piece measures in length. The marks are aligned in a straight line, and measure in length, in width, and in depth. They determined it was inconsistent with bite marks from scavenging \"Thylacoleo\" or mice, and concluded it was incised by humans with flint as a counting system or a random doodle. This specimen became one of the most-cited pieces of evidence humans and megafauna directly interacted until a 2020 re-analysis by Australian palaeoanthropologist Michelle Langley identified the engraver as most-likely a tiger quoll.\nIn 2016, Australian archaeologist Giles Hamm and colleagues unearthed a partial right radius belonging to a young \"Diprotodon\" in the Warratyi rock shelter. Because it lacks carnivore damage and the rock shelter is up a sheer face \"Diprotodon\" is unlikely to have climbed, they said humans were responsible for taking the bone to the site.\nMythology.\nWhen the first massive fossils in Australia were dug up, it was not clear what animals they might have represented because there were no serious scientists on the continent. Local residents guessed some may have been the remains of rhinos or elephants. European settlers, the most-vocal of whom was Reverend John Dunmore Lang, forwarded these fossils as evidence of the Genesis flood narrative. Aboriginal Australians also attempted to fit the finds into their own religious ideas, quickly associating \"Diprotodon\" with the bunyip, a large, carnivorous, lake monster. Many ethnologists and palaeontologists of the time believed the bunyip to be a tribal memory of the lumbering giant creature that probably frequented marshlands, though at the time it was uncertain whether \"Diprotodon\" and other megafauna were still extant because the Australian continent had not yet been fully explored by Euopeans. Scientific investigation into the bunyip was stigmatised after a purported bunyip skull was sensationalised in 1846, and was put on display at the Australian Museum. The following year, however, Owen recognised it as the skull of a foal, and was surprised the burgeoning Australian scientific community could have erred so egregiously.\nIn 1892, Canadian geologist Henry Yorke Lyell Brown reported Aboriginal Australians identified \"Diprotodon\" fossils from Lake Eyre as those of the Rainbow Serpent, which he thought was a giant, bottom-dwelling fish. This notion became somewhat popularised after English geologist John Walter Gregory, who believed the god was a horned, scaly creature, conjectured it was a chimaera of \"Diprotodon\"\u2014which he believed had a horn\u2014and a crocodile. Later workers continued to report some link between the Rainbow Serpent and either \"Diprotodon\" or crocodiles.\nThese kinds of suppositions are not testable and require stories to survive in oral tradition for tens of thousands of years. If Pleistocene megafauna are the basis of some aboriginal mythology, it is unclear if the stories were based on the creatures when they were alive or their fossils being discovered long after their extinction.\nRock art representations.\nAboriginal Australians decorated caves with paintings and drawings of several creatures but the identities of the subjects are often unclear. In 1907, Australian anthropologist Herbert Basedow found footprint petroglyphs in Yunta Springs and Wilkindinna, South Australia, which he believed were those of \"Diprotodon\". In 1988, Australian historian Percy Trezise presented what he thought was a Quinkan depiction of \"Diprotodon\" to the First Congress of the Australian Rock Art Research Association. Both of these claims have their faults because the depictions bear several features that are inconsistent with what is known about \"Diprotodon\". Unlike the more-naturalistic artwork of Early European modern humans, which are more easily identifiable as various animals, aboriginal artwork is much more stylistic and is mostly uninterpretable by an outsider. The subjects of aboriginal paintings can be mythological beings from the Dreaming rather than a corporeal subject.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8718", "revid": "244946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8718", "title": "Dirk Benedict", "text": "American actor (b. 1945)\nDirk Benedict (born Dirk Niewoehner; March 1, 1945) is an American film, television and stage actor, and author. He is best known for playing the characters Lieutenant Starbuck in the original \"Battlestar Galactica\" film and television series and Templeton \"Faceman\" Peck in \"The A-Team\" television series. He is the author of \"Confessions of a Kamikaze Cowboy\" and \"And Then We Went Fishing\".\nEarly life.\nBenedict was born Dirk Niewoehner in Helena, Montana, the son of George Edward Niewoehner, a lawyer, and his wife Priscilla Mella (n\u00e9e Metzger), an accountant. He grew up in White Sulphur Springs, Montana. He graduated from Whitman College in 1967.\nBenedict allegedly chose his stage name from a serving of Eggs Benedict he had prior to his acting career. He is of German extraction.\nCareer.\nBenedict's film debut was in the 1972 film \"Georgia, Georgia\". When the New York run for \"Butterflies Are Free\" ended, he received an offer to repeat his performance in Hawaii, opposite Barbara Rush. While there, he appeared as a guest lead on \"Hawaii Five-O\". The producers of a horror film called \"Sssssss\" (1973) saw Benedict's performance in \"Hawaii Five-O\" and promptly cast him as the lead in that movie. He next played the psychotic wife-beating husband of Twiggy in her American film debut, \"W\" (1974). Benedict starred in the television series \"Chopper One\", which aired for one season in 1974. He made two appearances in \"Charlie's Angels\". He also appeared on the \"Donny &amp; Marie\" variety show.\nBenedict's career break came in 1978 when he appeared as Lieutenant Starbuck in the movie and television series \"Battlestar Galactica\". The same year Benedict starred in the TV film \"Cruise into Terror\", and appeared in the ensemble movie \"Scavenger Hunt\" the following year.\n1980s and 1990s.\nIn 1980, Benedict starred alongside Linda Blair in an action-comedy movie called \"Ruckus\". In 1983, Dirk gained further popularity as con man Templeton \"Faceman\" Peck in 1980s action television series \"The A-Team\". He played \"Face\" from 1982\u00a0(1982) to 1986\u00a0(1986), although the series didn't air until January 1983, and the final episode wasn't shown until 1987 rebroadcasts. The episode \"Steel\" includes a scene at Universal Studios where Face is seen looking bemused as a Cylon walks by him as an in-joke to his previous role in \"Battlestar Galactica\". The clip is incorporated into the series' opening credit sequence from season 3 onward.\nIn 1986, Benedict starred as low-life band manager Harry Smilac in the movie \"Body Slam\" along with Lou Albano, Roddy Piper, and cameo appearances by Freddie Blassie, Ric Flair, and Bruno Sammartino. His character Smilac ends up managing the pro-wrestler \"Quick Rick\" Roberts (Piper) and faces opposition by Captain Lou and his wrestling tag-team \"the Cannibals\".\nIn 1987, Benedict took the title role of Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\" at the Abbey Theatre in Manhattan. Both his performance and the entire production were lambasted by critics. Benedict starred in the 1989 TV film \"Trenchcoat in Paradise\".\nIn 1991, Benedict starred in \"Blue Tornado,\" playing Alex, call sign Fireball, an Italian Air Force fighter pilot. Benedict published an autobiography, \"Confessions of a Kamikaze Cowboy: A True Story of Discovery, Acting, Health, Illness, Recovery, and Life\" (Avery Publishing ). In 1993, Benedict starred in \"Shadow Force\".\nBenedict also appeared as Jake Barnes in the 1996 action-adventure film \"Alaska\".\n2000s and 2010s.\nIn 2000, Benedict wrote and directed his first screenplay, \"Cahoots\". Benedict appeared in the 2006 German film \"Goldene Zeiten\" (\"Golden Times\") in a dual role, playing an American former TV star as well as a German lookalike who impersonates him.\nIn 2006, he wrote an online essay criticizing the then-airing \"Battlestar Galactica\" re-imagined series and, especially, its casting of a woman as his character, Starbuck, writing that \"the war against masculinity has been won\" and that \"a television show based on hope, spiritual faith, and family is unimagined and regurgitated as a show of despair, sexual violence and family dysfunction\".\nHe appeared as a contestant on the 2007 UK series of \"Celebrity Big Brother 5\", which he placed 3rd. He arrived on launch night in a replica of the \"A-Team\" van, smoking a cigar and accompanied by the \"A-Team\" theme tune.\nIn 2010, Benedict starred in a stage production of \"Prescription: Murder\" playing Lieutenant Columbo for the Middle Ground Theatre Company in the UK. Benedict also made a cameo appearance in the 2010 film adaptation of \"The A-Team\" as Pensacola Prisoner Milt.\nIn 2019, Benedict took on the role of Jack Strange in the B movie \"Space Ninjas\", written and directed by Scott McQuaid. Dirk plays an eccentric TV host of a show called \"Stranger Than Fiction\", which is like a hybrid of \"The Twilight Zone\" and \"The X-Files\". The movie is a sci-fi comedy horror that follows a bunch of high school students trying to survive the night of a Space Ninja invasion.\nPersonal life.\nCancer.\nIn the 1970s, Benedict survived a prostate tumor, which he refused to have tested for malignancy. Having rejected conventional medical treatment, he credited his survival to the adoption of a macrobiotic diet recommended to him by actress Gloria Swanson.\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1986, he married Toni Hudson, an actress with whom he has two sons, George and Roland. Hudson had previously appeared as Dana in the fourth season \"A-Team\" episode titled \"Blood, Sweat and Cheers\". They divorced in 1995.\nIn 1998, Benedict learned that he also has another son, John Talbert (born 1968), from an earlier relationship, who had been placed for adoption. With the help of his adoptive parents, Talbert discovered and contacted his birth parents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8724", "revid": "45382375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8724", "title": "Doppler effect", "text": "Frequency change of a wave for observer relative to its source\nThe Doppler effect or Doppler shift (or simply Doppler, when in context) is the apparent change in frequency of a wave in relation to an observer moving relative to the wave source. It is named after the Austrian physicist Christian Doppler, who described the phenomenon in 1842.\nA common example of Doppler shift is the change of pitch heard when a vehicle sounding a horn approaches and recedes from an observer. Compared to the emitted frequency, the received frequency is higher during the approach, identical at the instant of passing by, and lower during the recession.\nThe reason for the Doppler effect is that when the source of the waves is moving towards the observer, each successive wave crest is emitted from a position closer to the observer than the crest of the previous wave. Therefore, each wave takes slightly less time to reach the observer than the previous wave. Hence, the time between the arrivals of successive wave crests at the observer is reduced, causing an increase in the frequency. While they are traveling, the distance between successive wave fronts is reduced, so the waves \"bunch together\". Conversely, if the source of waves is moving away from the observer, each wave is emitted from a position farther from the observer than the previous wave, so the arrival time between successive waves is increased, reducing the frequency. The distance between successive wave fronts is then increased, so the waves \"spread out\". \nFor waves that propagate in a medium, such as sound waves, the velocity of the observer and of the source are relative to the medium in which the waves are transmitted. The total Doppler effect may therefore result from motion of the source, motion of the observer, motion of the medium, or any combination thereof. For waves propagating in vacuum, such as electromagnetic waves or gravitational waves, only the difference in velocity between the observer and the source needs to be considered. If this relative speed is not negligible compared to the speed of light, a more complicated relativistic Doppler effect arises.\nHistory.\nDoppler first proposed this effect in 1842 in his treatise \"\u00dcber das farbige Licht der Doppelsterne und einiger anderer Gestirne des Himmels\" (On the coloured light of the binary stars and some other stars of the heavens). The hypothesis was tested for sound waves by Buys Ballot in 1845. He confirmed that the sound's pitch was higher than the emitted frequency when the sound source approached him, and lower than the emitted frequency when the sound source receded from him. Hippolyte Fizeau discovered independently the same phenomenon on electromagnetic waves in 1848 (in France, the effect is sometimes called \"effet Doppler-Fizeau\" but that name was not adopted by the rest of the world as Fizeau's discovery was six years after Doppler's proposal). In Britain, John Scott Russell made an experimental study of the Doppler effect (1848).\nGeneral.\nIn classical physics, where the speeds of source and the receiver relative to the medium are lower than the speed of waves in the medium, the relationship between observed frequency formula_1 and emitted frequency formula_2 is given by:\nformula_3\nwhere\nNote this relationship predicts that the frequency will decrease if either source or receiver is moving away from the other.\nEquivalently, under the assumption that the source is either directly approaching or receding from the observer:\nformula_9\nwhere \nIf the source approaches the observer at an angle (but still with a constant speed), the observed frequency that is first heard is higher than the object's emitted frequency. Thereafter, there is a monotonic decrease in the observed frequency as it gets closer to the observer, through equality when it is coming from a direction perpendicular to the relative motion (and was emitted at the point of closest approach; but when the wave is received, the source and observer will no longer be at their closest), and a continued monotonic decrease as it recedes from the observer. When the observer is very close to the path of the object, the transition from high to low frequency is very abrupt. When the observer is far from the path of the object, the transition from high to low frequency is gradual.\nIf the speeds formula_7 and formula_14 are small compared to the speed of the wave, the relationship between observed frequency formula_1 and emitted frequency formula_2 is approximately\nwhere\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nGiven formula_19\nwe divide for formula_6\nformula_21\nSince formula_22 we can substitute the geometric expansion:\nformula_23\nConsequences.\nWith an observer stationary relative to the medium, if a moving source is emitting waves with an actual frequency formula_24 (in this case, the wavelength is changed, the transmission velocity of the wave keeps constant; note that the \"transmission velocity\" of the wave does not depend on the \"velocity of the source\"), then the observer detects waves with a frequency formula_1 given by\nformula_26\nA similar analysis for a moving \"observer\" and a stationary source (in this case, the wavelength keeps constant, but due to the motion, the rate at which the observer receives waves and hence the \"transmission velocity\" of the wave [with respect to the observer] is changed) yields the observed frequency:\nformula_27\nAssuming a stationary observer and a source moving at the speed of sound, the Doppler equation predicts a perceived momentary infinite frequency by an observer in front of a source that is traveling at the speed of sound. All the peaks are at the same place, so the wavelength is zero and the frequency is infinite. This overlay of all the waves produces a shock wave which for sound waves is known as a sonic boom.\nWhen the source moves faster than the wave speed the source outruns the wave. The equation gives negative frequency values, which have no physical sense in this context (no sound at all will be heard by the observer until the source passes past them).\nLord Rayleigh predicted the following effect in his classic book on sound: if the observer were moving from the (stationary) source at twice the speed of sound, a musical piece \"previously\" emitted by that source would be heard in correct tempo and pitch, but as if played \"backwards\".\nApplications.\nAcoustic Doppler current profiler.\nAn acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP) is a hydroacoustic current meter similar to a sonar, used to measure water current velocities over a depth range using the Doppler effect of sound waves scattered back from particles within the water column. The term ADCP is a generic term for all acoustic current profilers, although the abbreviation originates from an instrument series introduced by RD Instruments in the 1980s. The working frequencies range of ADCPs range from 38\u00a0kHz to several Megahertz. The device used in the air for wind speed profiling using sound is known as SODAR and works with the same underlying principles.\nRobotics.\nDynamic real-time path planning in robotics to aid the movement of robots in a sophisticated environment with moving obstacles often take help of Doppler effect. Such applications are specially used for competitive robotics where the environment is constantly changing, such as robosoccer.\nSirens.\nA siren on a passing emergency vehicle will start out higher than its stationary pitch, slide down as it passes, and continue lower than its stationary pitch as it recedes from the observer. Astronomer John Dobson explained the effect thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The reason the siren slides is because it doesn't hit you.\nIn other words, if the siren approached the observer directly, the pitch would remain constant, at a higher than stationary pitch, until the vehicle hit him, and then immediately jump to a new lower pitch. Because the vehicle passes by the observer, the radial speed does not remain constant, but instead varies as a function of the angle between his line of sight and the siren's velocity:\nformula_28\nwhere formula_29 is the angle between the object's forward velocity and the line of sight from the object to the observer.\nAstronomy.\nThe Doppler effect for electromagnetic waves such as light is of widespread use in astronomy to measure the speed at which stars and galaxies are approaching or receding from us, resulting in so called blueshift or redshift, respectively. This may be used to detect if an apparently single star is, in reality, a close binary, to measure the rotational speed of stars and galaxies, or to detect exoplanets. This effect typically happens on a very small scale; there would not be a noticeable difference in visible light to the unaided eye.\nThe use of the Doppler effect in astronomy depends on knowledge of precise frequencies of discrete lines in the spectra of stars.\nAmong the nearby stars, the largest radial velocities with respect to the Sun are +308\u00a0km/s (BD-15\u00b04041, also known as LHS 52, 81.7 light-years away) and \u2212260\u00a0km/s (Woolley 9722, also known as Wolf 1106 and LHS 64, 78.2 light-years away). Positive radial speed means the star is receding from the Sun, negative that it is approaching.\nRedshift is also used to measure the expansion of space, but this is not truly a Doppler effect. Rather, redshifting due to the expansion of space is known as cosmological redshift, which can be derived purely from the Robertson-Walker metric under the formalism of general relativity. Having said this, it also happens that there \"are\" detectable Doppler effects on cosmological scales, which, if incorrectly interpreted as cosmological in origin, lead to the observation of redshift-space distortions.\nRadar.\nThe Doppler effect is used in some types of radar, to measure the velocity of detected objects. A radar beam is fired at a moving target \u2014 e.g. a motor car, as police use radar to detect speeding motorists \u2014 as it approaches or recedes from the radar source. Each successive radar wave has to travel farther to reach the car, before being reflected and re-detected near the source. As each wave has to move farther, the gap between each wave increases, increasing the wavelength. In some situations, the radar beam is fired at the moving car as it approaches, in which case each successive wave travels a lesser distance, decreasing the wavelength. In either situation, calculations from the Doppler effect accurately determine the car's speed. Moreover, the proximity fuze, developed during World War II, relies upon Doppler radar to detonate explosives at the correct time, height, distance, etc.\nBecause the Doppler shift affects the wave incident upon the target as well as the wave reflected back to the radar, the change in frequency observed by a radar due to a target moving at relative speed formula_30 is twice that from the same target emitting a wave:\nformula_31\nMedical.\nAn echocardiogram can, within certain limits, produce an accurate assessment of the direction of blood flow and the velocity of blood and cardiac tissue at any arbitrary point using the Doppler effect. One of the limitations is that the ultrasound beam should be as parallel to the blood flow as possible. Velocity measurements allow assessment of cardiac valve areas and function, abnormal communications between the left and right side of the heart, leaking of blood through the valves (valvular regurgitation), and calculation of the cardiac output. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound using gas-filled microbubble contrast media can be used to improve velocity or other flow-related medical measurements.\nAlthough \"Doppler\" has become synonymous with \"velocity measurement\" in medical imaging, in many cases it is not the frequency shift (Doppler shift) of the received signal that is measured, but the phase shift (\"when\" the received signal arrives).\nVelocity measurements of blood flow are also used in other fields of medical ultrasonography, such as obstetric ultrasonography and neurology. Velocity measurement of blood flow in arteries and veins based on Doppler effect is an effective tool for diagnosis of vascular problems like stenosis.\nFlow measurement.\nInstruments such as the laser Doppler velocimeter (LDV), and acoustic Doppler velocimeter (ADV) have been developed to measure velocities in a fluid flow. The LDV emits a light beam and the ADV emits an ultrasonic acoustic burst, and measure the Doppler shift in wavelengths of reflections from particles moving with the flow. The actual flow is computed as a function of the water velocity and phase. This technique allows non-intrusive flow measurements, at high precision and high frequency.\nVelocity profile measurement.\nDeveloped originally for velocity measurements in medical applications (blood flow), Ultrasonic Doppler Velocimetry (UDV) can measure in real time complete velocity profile in almost any liquids containing particles in suspension such as dust, gas bubbles, emulsions. Flows can be pulsating, oscillating, laminar or turbulent, stationary or transient. This technique is fully non-invasive.\nSatellites.\nSatellite navigation.\nThe Doppler shift can be exploited for satellite navigation such as in Transit and DORIS. \nSatellite communication.\nDoppler also needs to be compensated in satellite communication. \nFast moving satellites can have a Doppler shift of dozens of kilohertz relative to a ground station. The speed, thus magnitude of Doppler effect, changes due to earth curvature. Dynamic Doppler compensation, where the frequency of a signal is changed progressively during transmission, is used so the satellite receives a constant frequency signal. After realizing that the Doppler shift had not been considered before launch of the Huygens probe of the 2005 Cassini\u2013Huygens mission, the probe trajectory was altered to approach Titan in such a way that its transmissions traveled perpendicular to its direction of motion relative to Cassini, greatly reducing the Doppler shift.\nDoppler shift of the direct path can be estimated by the following formula:\nformula_32\nwhere formula_33 is the speed of the mobile station, formula_34 is the wavelength of the carrier, formula_35 is the elevation angle of the satellite and formula_29 is the driving direction with respect to the satellite.\nThe additional Doppler shift due to the satellite moving can be described as:\nformula_37\nwhere formula_38 is the relative speed of the satellite.\nAudio.\nThe Leslie speaker, most commonly associated with and predominantly used with the famous Hammond organ, takes advantage of the Doppler effect by using an electric motor to rotate an acoustic horn around a loudspeaker, sending its sound in a circle. This results at the listener's ear in rapidly fluctuating frequencies of a keyboard note.\nVibration measurement.\nA laser Doppler vibrometer (LDV) is a non-contact instrument for measuring vibration. The laser beam from the LDV is directed at the surface of interest, and the vibration amplitude and frequency are extracted from the Doppler shift of the laser beam frequency due to the motion of the surface.\nDevelopmental biology.\nDuring the segmentation of vertebrate embryos, waves of gene expression sweep across the presomitic mesoderm, the tissue from which the precursors of the vertebrae (somites) are formed. A new somite is formed upon arrival of a wave at the anterior end of the presomitic mesoderm. In zebrafish, it has been shown that the shortening of the presomitic mesoderm during segmentation leads to a Doppler-like effect as the anterior end of the tissue moves into the waves. This effect contributes to the period of segmentation.\nInverse Doppler effect.\nSince 1968 scientists such as Victor Veselago have speculated about the possibility of an inverse Doppler effect. The size of the Doppler shift depends on the refractive index of the medium a wave is traveling through. But some materials are capable of negative refraction, which should lead to a Doppler shift that works in a direction opposite that of a conventional Doppler shift. The first experiment that detected this effect was conducted by Nigel Seddon and Trevor Bearpark in Bristol, United Kingdom in 2003. Later, the inverse Doppler effect was observed in some inhomogeneous materials, and predicted inside a Vavilov\u2013Cherenkov cone.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8725", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8725", "title": "Desmodromic", "text": ""}
{"id": "8727", "revid": "10472410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8727", "title": "\u0394T (timekeeping)", "text": "Measure of variation of solar time from atomic time\nIn precise timekeeping, \u0394\"T (Delta \"T, delta-\"T, delta\"T, or D\"T\") is a measure of the cumulative effect of the departure of the Earth's rotation period from the fixed-length day of International Atomic Time (86,400 seconds). Formally, \u0394\"T\" is the time difference \u0394\"T\" = TT \u2212 UT between Universal Time (UT, defined by Earth's rotation) and Terrestrial Time (TT, independent of Earth's rotation). The value of \u0394T for the start of 1902 was approximately zero; for 2002 it was about 64 seconds. So Earth's rotations over that century took about 64 seconds longer than would be required for days of atomic time. As well as this long-term drift in the length of the day there are short-term fluctuations in the length of day (\u0394\"\u03c4\") which are dealt with separately.\nSince 2017, the length of the day has happened to be very close to the conventional value, and \u0394T has remained within a second of 69 seconds\nCalculation.\nEarth's rotational speed is \"\u03bd\" = \u2009, and a day corresponds to one period \"P\" =. A rotational acceleration gives a rate of change of the period of = \u2212\u2009, which is usually expressed as \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03bd\"\u2009 = \u2212\u2009. This has units of 1/time, and is commonly quoted as milliseconds-per-day per century (written as ms/day/cy, understood as (ms/day)/cy). Integrating \"\u03b1\" gives an expression for \u0394\"T\" against time.\nUniversal time.\nUniversal Time is a time scale based on the Earth's rotation, which is somewhat irregular over short periods (days up to a century), thus any time based on it cannot have an accuracy better than 1 in 108. However, a larger, more consistent effect has been observed over many centuries: Earth's rate of rotation is inexorably slowing down. This observed change in the rate of rotation is attributable to two primary forces, one decreasing and one increasing the Earth's rate of rotation. Over the long term, the dominating force is tidal friction, which is slowing the rate of rotation, contributing about \"\u03b1\" = +2.3 ms/day/cy or = +2.3 ms/cy, which is equal to the very small fractional change day/day. The most important force acting in the opposite direction, to speed up the rate, is believed to be a result of the melting of continental ice sheets at the end of the last glacial period. This removed their tremendous weight, allowing the land under them to begin to rebound upward in the polar regions, an effect that is still occurring today and will continue until isostatic equilibrium is reached. This \"post-glacial rebound\" brings mass closer to the rotational axis of the Earth, which makes the Earth spin faster, according to the law of conservation of angular momentum, similar to an ice skater pulling their arms in to spin faster. Models estimate this effect to contribute about \u22120.6\u00a0ms/day/cy. Combining these two effects, the net acceleration (actually a deceleration) of the rotation of the Earth, or the change in the length of the mean solar day (LOD), is +1.7\u00a0ms/day/cy or +62 s/cy2 or +46.5 ns/day2. This matches the average rate derived from astronomical records over the past 27 centuries.\nTerrestrial time.\nTerrestrial Time is a theoretical uniform time scale, defined to provide continuity with the former Ephemeris Time (ET). ET was an independent time-variable, proposed (and its adoption agreed) in the period 1948\u201352 with the intent of forming a gravitationally uniform time scale as far as was feasible at that time, and depending for its definition on Simon Newcomb's \"Tables of the Sun\" (1895), interpreted in a new way to accommodate certain observed discrepancies. Newcomb's tables formed the basis of all astronomical ephemerides of the Sun from 1900 through 1983: they were originally expressed (and published) in terms of Greenwich Mean Time and the mean solar day, but later, in respect of the period 1960\u20131983, they were treated as expressed in terms of ET, in accordance with the adopted ET proposal of 1948\u201352. ET, in turn, can now be seen (in light of modern results) as close to the average mean solar time between 1750 and 1890 (centered on 1820), because that was the period during which the observations on which Newcomb's tables were based were performed. While TT is strictly uniform (being based on the SI second, every second is the same as every other second), it is in practice realised by International Atomic Time (TAI) with an accuracy of about 1 part in 1014.\nEarth's rate of rotation.\nEarth's rate of rotation must be integrated to obtain time, which is Earth's angular position (specifically, the orientation of the meridian of Greenwich relative to the fictitious mean sun). Integrating +1.7\u00a0ms/d/cy and centering the resulting parabola on the year 1820 yields (to a first approximation) 32 \u00d7 () - 20 seconds for \u0394\"T\". Smoothed historical measurements of \u0394\"T\" using total solar eclipses are about +17190\u00a0s in the year \u2212500 (501\u00a0BC), +10580\u00a0s in 0 (1\u00a0BC), +5710\u00a0s in 500, +1570 s in 1000, and +200\u00a0 s in 1500. After the invention of the telescope, measurements were made by observing occultations of stars by the Moon, which allowed the derivation of more closely spaced and more accurate values for \u0394\"T\". \u0394\"T\" continued to decrease until it reached a plateau of +11\u00a0\u00b1\u00a06\u00a0s between 1680 and 1866. For about three decades immediately before 1902 it was negative, reaching \u22126.64\u00a0s. Then it increased to +63.83\u00a0s in January 2000 and +68.97\u00a0s in January 2018 and +69.361 s in January 2020, after even a slight decrease from 69.358 s in July 2019 to 69.338 s in September and October 2019 and a new increase in November and December 2019. This will require the addition of an ever-greater number of leap seconds to UTC as long as UTC tracks UT1 with one-second adjustments. (The SI second as now used for UTC, when adopted, was already a little shorter than the current value of the second of mean solar time.) Physically, the meridian of Greenwich in Universal Time is almost always to the east of the meridian in Terrestrial Time, both in the past and in the future. +17190\u00a0s or about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+3\u20444\u00a0h corresponds to 71.625\u00b0E. This means that in the year \u2212500 (501\u00a0BC), Earth's faster rotation would cause a total solar eclipse to occur 71.625\u00b0 to the east of the location calculated using the uniform TT.\nValues prior to 1955.\nAll values of \u0394\"T\" before 1955 depend on observations of the Moon, either via eclipses or occultations. The angular momentum lost by the Earth due to friction induced by the Moon's tidal effect is transferred to the Moon, increasing its angular momentum, which means that its moment arm (approximately its distance from the Earth, i.e. precisely the semi-major axis of the Moon's orbit) is increased (for the time being about +3.8\u00a0cm/year), which via Kepler's laws of planetary motion causes the Moon to revolve around the Earth at a slower rate. The cited values of \u0394\"T\" assume that the lunar acceleration (actually a deceleration, that is a negative acceleration) due to this effect is = \u221226\u2033/cy2, where n is the mean sidereal angular motion of the Moon. This is close to the best estimate for as of 2002 of \u221225.858\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.003\u2033/cy2, so \u0394\"T\" need not be recalculated given the uncertainties and smoothing applied to its current values. Nowadays, UT is the observed orientation of the Earth relative to an inertial reference frame formed by extra-galactic radio sources, modified by an adopted ratio between sidereal time and solar time. Its measurement by several observatories is coordinated by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS).\nGeological evidence.\nTidal deceleration rates have varied over the history of the Earth-Moon system. Analysis of layering in fossil mollusc shells from 70 million years ago, in the Late Cretaceous period, shows that there were 372 days a year, and thus that the day was about 23.5 hours long then. Based on geological studies of \"tidal rhythmites,\" the day was 21.9\u00b10.4 hours long 620 million years ago and there were 13.1\u00b10.1 synodic months/year and 400\u00b17 solar days/year. The average recession rate of the Moon between then and now has been 2.17\u00b10.31\u00a0cm/year, which is about half the present rate. The present high rate may be due to near resonance between natural ocean frequencies and tidal frequencies.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8728", "revid": "38604124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8728", "title": "December 22", "text": "Day of the yearDecember 22 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8729", "revid": "42395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8729", "title": "David Deutsch", "text": "British theoretical physicist\nDavid Elieser Deutsch ( ; born 18 May 1953) is a British physicist at the University of Oxford. He is a visiting professor in the Department of Atomic and Laser Physics at the Centre for Quantum Computation (CQC) in the Clarendon Laboratory of the University of Oxford. He pioneered the field of quantum computation by formulating a description for a quantum Turing machine, as well as specifying an algorithm designed to run on a quantum computer. He has also proposed the use of entangled states and Bell's theorem for quantum key distribution and is a proponent of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.\nEarly life and education.\nDeutsch was born into a Jewish family in Haifa, Israel on 18 May 1953, the son of Oskar and Tikva Deutsch. In London, David attended Geneva House school in Cricklewood (his parents owned and ran the Alma restaurant on Cricklewood Broadway), followed by William Ellis School in Highgate (then a voluntary aided school in north London) before reading Natural Sciences at Clare College, Cambridge and taking Part III of the Mathematical Tripos. He went on to Wolfson College, Oxford for his doctorate in theoretical physics and wrote his thesis on quantum field theory in curved space-time supervised by Dennis Sciama and Philip Candelas.\nCareer and research.\nHis work on quantum algorithms began with a 1985 paper, later expanded in 1992 along with Richard Jozsa to produce the Deutsch\u2013Jozsa algorithm, one of the first examples of a quantum algorithm that is exponentially faster than any possible deterministic classical algorithm. In his 1985 paper, he also suggests the use of entangled states and Bell's theorem for quantum key distribution. In his nomination for election as a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2008, his contributions were described as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[having] laid the foundations of the quantum theory of computation, and has subsequently made or participated in many of the most important advances in the field, including the discovery of the first quantum algorithms, the theory of quantum logic gates and quantum computational networks, the first quantum error-correction scheme, and several fundamental quantum universality results. He has set the agenda for worldwide research efforts in this new, interdisciplinary field, made progress in understanding its philosophical implications (via a variant of the many-universes interpretation) and made it comprehensible to the general public, notably in his book The Fabric of Reality.\nSince 2012, he has been working on constructor theory, an attempt at generalizing the quantum theory of computation to cover not just computation but all physical processes. Together with Chiara Marletto, he published a paper in December 2014 entitled \"Constructor theory of information\", that conjectures that information can be expressed solely in terms of which transformations of physical systems are possible and which are impossible.\n\"The Fabric of Reality\".\nIn his 1997 book \"The Fabric of Reality\", Deutsch details his \"Theory of Everything\". It aims not at the reduction of everything to particle physics, but rather mutual support among multiversal, computational, epistemological, and evolutionary principles. His theory of everything is somewhat emergentist rather than reductive. There are four strands to his theory:\nInvariants.\nIn a 2009 TED talk, Deutsch expounded a criterion for scientific explanation, which is to formulate invariants: \"State an explanation [publicly, so that it can be dated and verified by others later] that remains invariant [in the face of apparent change, new information, or unexpected conditions]\".\n \"A bad explanation is easy to vary.\"\n \"The search for hard-to-vary explanations is the origin of all progress\"\n \"That the truth consists of hard-to-vary assertions about reality is the most important fact about the physical world.\"\nInvariance as a fundamental aspect of a scientific account of reality had long been part of philosophy of science: for example, Friedel Weinert's book \"The Scientist as Philosopher\" (2004) noted the presence of the theme in many writings from around 1900 onward, such as works by Henri Poincar\u00e9 (1902), Ernst Cassirer (1920), Max Born (1949 and 1953), Paul Dirac (1958), Olivier Costa de Beauregard (1966), Eugene Wigner (1967), Lawrence Sklar (1974), Michael Friedman (1983), John D. Norton (1992), Nicholas Maxwell (1993), Alan Cook (1994), Alistair Cameron Crombie (1994), Margaret Morrison (1995), Richard Feynman (1997), Robert Nozick (2001), and Tim Maudlin (2002).\n\"The Beginning of Infinity\".\nDeutsch's second book, \"The Beginning of Infinity: Explanations that Transform the World\", was published on 31 March 2011. In this book, he views the European Enlightenment of the 17th and 18th centuries as near the beginning of a potentially unending sequence of purposeful knowledge creation. He examines the nature of knowledge, memes, and how and why creativity evolved in humans.\nAwards and honours.\n\"The Fabric of Reality\" was shortlisted for the Rhone-Poulenc science book award in 1998. Deutsch was awarded the Dirac Prize of the Institute of Physics in 1998, and the Edge of Computation Science Prize in 2005. In 2017, he received the Dirac Medal of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP). Deutsch is linked to Paul Dirac through his doctoral advisor Dennis Sciama, whose doctoral advisor was Dirac. Deutsch was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2008. In 2020 he was awarded an Honorary Fellowship of the Cybernetics Society. In 2018, he received the Micius Quantum Prize. In 2021, he was awarded the Isaac Newton Medal and Prize.\nOn 22\u00a0September 2022, he was awarded the Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics (sharing it with 3 others).\nPersonal life.\nDeutsch is a founding member of the parenting and educational method \"Taking Children Seriously\". Deutsch supported Brexit, with his advocacy regularly being quoted by the then government adviser, Dominic Cummings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8730", "revid": "18162346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8730", "title": "Volkssturm", "text": "Nazi German militia of World War II\nMilitary unit\nThe (]; \"people's storm\") was a lev\u00e9e en masse national militia established by Nazi Germany during the last months of World War II. It was set up by the Nazi Party on the orders of Adolf Hitler and established on 25 September 1944. It was staffed by conscripting males between the ages of 16 and 60 years, who were not already serving in some military unit. The \"Volkssturm\" comprised one of the final components of the total war promulgated by Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels, part of a Nazi endeavor to overcome their enemies' military strength through force of will. \"Volkssturm\" units fought unsuccessful battles against the Allied forces at the end of the war and on several occasions, its members participated in atrocities accompanied by German civilians and the Hitler Youth, which were overseen by members of the SS or Gau leaders.\nOrigins and organization.\nThe \"Volkssturm\" drew inspiration from the Prussian \"Landsturm\" of 1813\u20131815, that fought in the liberation wars against Napoleon, mainly as guerrilla forces. Plans to form a \"Landsturm\" national militia in eastern Germany as a last resort to boost fighting strength were first proposed in 1944 by General Heinz Guderian, chief of the General Staff. The Army did not have enough men to resist the Soviet onslaught. So, additional categories of men were called into service, including those in non-essential jobs, those previously deemed unfit, over-age, or under-age, and those recovering from wounds. The \"Volkssturm\" had existed, on paper, since around 1925, but it was only after Hitler ordered Martin Bormann to recruit six million men for this militia that the group became a physical reality. While the regime formally established the \"Volkssturm\" on 25 September, it was not announced to the public until 16 October 1944. The official launch date was two days later, 18 October 1944 and was chosen by Heinrich Himmler to evoke parallels with the popular uprising which, according to popular legend, ended French rule over Germany and culminated in the Battle of Leipzig on the same date in 1813. Despite the appeal for this last-ditch effort, the intended strength of \"six million\" members was never attained.\nJoseph Goebbels and other propagandists depicted the \"Volkssturm\" as an outburst of enthusiasm and the will to resist. Historian Daniel Blatman writes that the \"Volkssturm\" was portrayed as the \"incarnation\" of the greater \"Volksgemeinschaft\", whereby \"all differences in social status, origin, or age vanish and unite all people on the basis of race. It was the service framework for members of the local community, who had been raised together and lived side by side, and now bore arms together in order to defend the community.\" In some regards, the \"Volkssturm\" was the culmination of Goebbels' \"total war\" speech of February 1943 and its formation was \"given a big build-up\" in the November 1944 newsreel episode of \"Die Deutsche Wochenschau\". Consistent messages of final victory from various Nazi media outlets accompanying the \"Volkssturm's\" creation provided a psychological rallying point for the civilian population. While it had some marginal effect on morale, it was undermined by the recruits' visible lack of uniforms and weaponry. Nazi themes of death, transcendence, and commemoration were given full play to encourage the fight. Many German civilians realized that this was a desperate attempt to turn the course of the war. Sardonic old men would remark, \"We old monkeys are the F\u00fchrer\u2019s newest weapon\" (in German this rhymes: \"Wir alten Affen sind des F\u00fchrers neue Waffen\"). A popular joke about the \"Volkssturm\" went \"Why is the \"Volkssturm\" Germany's most precious resource? Because its members have silver in their hair, gold in their mouths, and lead in their bones.\"\nFor these militia units to be effective, they needed not only strength in numbers, but also fanaticism. During the early stages of \"Volkssturm\" planning, it became apparent that units lacking morale would lack combat effectiveness. To generate fanaticism, \"Volkssturm\" units were placed under direct command of the local Nazi party officials, the \"Gauleiter\" and \"Kreisleiter\". The new \"Volkssturm\" was also to become a nationwide organization, with Heinrich Himmler, as Replacement Army commander, responsible for armament and training. Though nominally under party control, \"Volkssturm\" units were placed under \"Wehrmacht\" command when engaged in action. Aware that a \"people's army\" would not be able to withstand the onslaught of the modern army wielded by the Allies, Hitler issued the following order towards the end of 1944:\n Experience in the East has shown that \"Volkssturm\", emergency and reserve units have little fighting value when left to themselves, and can be quickly destroyed. The fighting value of these units, which are for the most part strong in numbers, but weak in the armaments required for modern battle, is immeasurably higher when they go into action with troops of the regular army in the field. I, therefore, order: where \"Volkssturm\", emergency, and reserve units are available, together with regular units, in any battle sector, mixed battle-groups (brigades) will be formed under unified command, so as to give the \"Volkssturm\", emergency, and reserve units stiffening and support.\nWith the Nazi Party in charge of organizing the \"Volkssturm\", each \"Gauleiter\", or Nazi Party District Leader, was charged with the leadership, enrollment, and organization of the \"Volkssturm\" in their district. The largest \"Volkssturm\" unit seems to have corresponded to the next smaller territorial subdivision of the Nazi Party organization\u2014the \"Kreis\". The basic unit was a battalion of 642 men. Units were mostly composed of members of the Hitler Youth, invalids, the elderly, or men who had previously been considered unfit for military service. On 12 February 1945, the Nazis conscripted German women and girls into the auxiliaries of the \"Volkssturm\". Correspondingly, girls as young as 14 years were trained in the use of small arms, panzerfaust, machine guns, and hand grenades from December 1944 through May 1945.\nMunicipal organization:\nEach \"Gauleiter\" and \"Kreisleiter\" had a \"Volkssturm\" Chief of Staff.\nFrom the militia's inception until the spring of 1945, Himmler and Bormann engaged in a power-struggle over the jurisdictional control over the \"Volkssturm\" regarding security and police powers in Germany and the occupied territories; a contest which Himmler and his SS more or less won on one level (police and security), but lost to Bormann on another (mobilizing reserve forces). Historian David Yelton described the situation as two ranking officers at the helm of a sinking ship fighting over command.\nBenito Mussolini suggested, through his son Vittorio, then general secretary of the Republican Fascist party's German branch, that 30,000 Italians should be added to the \"Volkssturm\" in defense of Germany. However, no evidence exists that this offer was implemented.\nUniforms and insignia.\nThe \"Volkssturm\" \"uniform\" was only a black armband with the German words \"Deutscher Volkssturm Wehrmacht\" (\"German People's Storm Armed Forces\"). The German government tried to issue as many of its members as possible with military uniforms of all sorts, ranging from \"Feldgrau\" to camouflage types. A telling example of the \"Volkssturm's\" piecemeal outfitting occurred in the Rhineland, where one unit was provided with \"pre-war black SS uniforms, brown Organization Todt coats, blue Air Force auxiliary caps, and French steel helmets.\" Most members of the \"Volkssturm\", especially elderly members, had no uniform and were not supplied, so they generally wore either work uniforms (including railway workers, policemen and firemen), Hitler Youth uniforms, old uniforms or their parts from the time of the First World War or their civilian clothing and usually carried with them their own personal rucksacks, blankets, cooking-equipment, etc.\nRanks.\nThe simple paramilitary insignia of the \"Volkssturm\" were as follows:\nTraining and impact.\nTypically, members of the \"Volkssturm\" received only very basic military training. It included a brief indoctrination and training on the use of basic weapons such as the Karabiner 98k rifle and \"Panzerfaust\". Because of continuous fighting and weapon shortages, weapon training was often minimal. There was also a lack of instructors, meaning that weapons training was sometimes done by World War I veterans drafted into service themselves. Often \"Volkssturm\" members were only able to familiarize themselves with their weapons when in actual combat.\nThere was no standardization of any kind and units were issued only what equipment was available. This was true of every form of equipment\u2014\"Volkssturm\" members were required to bring their own uniforms and culinary equipment etc. This resulted in the units looking very ragged and, instead of boosting civilian morale, it often reminded people of Germany's desperate state. Armament was equally haphazard: though some Karabiner 98ks were on hand, members were also issued older Gewehr 98s, Steyr-Mannlicher M1895s, 19th-century Gewehr 71s, and Steyr-Mannlicher M1888s, as well as Dreyse M1907 pistols. In addition there was a plethora of Soviet, British, Belgian, French, Italian, and other weapons that had been captured by German forces during the war. The Germans had also developed cheap but reasonably effective \"Volkssturm\" weapons, such as MP 3008 machine pistols and \"Volkssturmgewehr\" rifles. These were completely stamped and machine-pressed constructions (in the 1940s, industrial processes were much cruder than today, so a firearm needed great amounts of semi-artisanal work to be actually reliable). The \"Volkssturm\" troops were nominally supplied when and where possible by both the \"Wehrmacht\" and the SS. By the end of January 1945, the \"Volkssturm\" had only accumulated 40,500 rifles and 2,900 machine guns amid this mish-mash of foreign and outdated assemblage of weapons.\nWhen units had completed their training and received armament, members took a customary oath to Hitler and were then dispatched into combat. Teenagers and middle-aged men were sent to separate training camps, some of whom received as little as ten to fourteen days of training before being sent to fight. Unlike most English-speaking countries, Germany had universal military service for all young men for several generations, so many of the older members would have had at least basic military training from when they served in the German Army and many would have been veterans of the First World War. \"Volkssturm\" units were supposed to be used only in their own districts, but many were sent directly to the front lines. Ultimately, it was their charge to confront the overwhelming power of the British, Canadian, Soviet, American, and French armies alongside \"Wehrmacht\" forces to either turn the tide of the war or set a shining example for future generations of Germans and expunge the defeat of 1918 by fighting to the last, dying before surrendering. It was an apocalyptic goal which some of those assigned to the \"Volkssturm\" took to heart. Unremittingly fanatical members of the \"Volkssturm\" refused to abandon the Nazi ethos unto the dying days of Nazi Germany, and in a number of instances took brutal \"police actions\" against German civilians deemed defeatists or cowards.\nOn some occasions, members of the \"Volkssturm\" showed tremendous courage and a determined will to resist, more so even than soldiers in the \"Wehrmacht\". The \"Volkssturm\" battalion 25/235 for instance, started out with 400 men but fought on until there were only 10 men remaining. Fighting at K\u00fcstrin between 30 January to 29 March 1945, militia units made up mostly of the \"Volkssturm\" resisted for nearly two months. Losses were upwards of 60 percent for the \"Volkssturm\" at Kolberg, roughly 1900 of them died at Breslau, and during the Battle of K\u00f6nigsberg (Kaliningrad), another 2400 members of the \"Volkssturm\" were killed. At other times along the western front particularly, \"Volkssturm\" troops would cast their arms aside and disappear into the chaos. Youthful ardor and fanaticism among Hitler Youth members fighting with the \"Volkssturm\" or an insatiable sense of duty from old men proved tragic sometimes. An example shared by historian Stephen Fritz is instructive in this case:\nIn one representative village just north of Bad Windsheim, the Herbolzheim \"Volkssturm\" unit, with its customary composition of elderly men and young boys under the influence of a few regular army soldiers, foolishly declared the town a fortress and laid mines in the streets. As American troops approached in midmorning on April 12, shots from the village rang out. Angered, the Americans commenced a two-hour artillery barrage complemented by aerial attacks that gutted the town with incendiary and high-explosive bombs. With their village engulfed in flames, the civilian inhabitants, mostly the elderly, women, and children, fled in search of shelter to the surrounding fields, all the while under American fire.\nNot every \"Volkssturm\" unit was suicidal or apocalyptic in outlook as the war drew closer to its end. Many of them lost their enthusiasm for the fight when it became clear that the Allies had won, prompting them to lay down their weapons and surrender \u2013 they also feared being captured by Allied forces and tortured or executed as partisans. Duty to their communities and sparing them from horrors like at Bad Windsheim also played a part in their capitulation, as did self-preservation.\nBattle for Berlin.\nTheir most extensive use was during the Battle of Berlin, where \"Volkssturm\" units fought in many parts of the city. This battle was particularly devastating to its formations; however, many members fought to the death out of fear of being captured by the Soviets, holding out to the very end, which was in keeping with their covenant. The \"Volkssturm\" had a strength of about 60,000 in the Berlin area, formed into 92 battalions, of which about 30 battalions of \"Volkssturm I\" (those with some weapons) were sent to forward positions, while those of \"Volkssturm II\" (those without weapons) remained in the inner city. One of the few substantive fighting units left to defend Berlin was the LVI Panzer Corps, which occupied the southeastern sector of the town, whereas the remaining parts of the city were being defended by what remained of the SS, the \"Volkssturm\", and the Hitler Youth formations. Nonetheless, a force of over 2.5 million Soviet troops, equipped with 6,250 tanks and over 40,000 artillery pieces were assigned to capture the city, and the diminished remnants of the \"Wehrmacht\" were no match for them. Meanwhile, Hitler denounced every perceived \"betrayal\" to the inhabitants of the \"F\u00fchrerbunker\". Not eager to die what was thought to be a pointless death, many older members of the \"Volkssturm\" looked for places to hide from the approaching Soviet Army. Juxtaposed against the tragic image of Berlin holding out against all odds was the frequent exodus and capitulation of \"Wehrmacht\" soldiers and members of the \"Volkssturm\" in southern and western Germany.\nOne notable and unusual \"Volkssturm\" unit in the Battle for Berlin was the 3/115 Siemensstadt Battalion. It comprised 770 men, mainly First World War veterans in their 50s who were reasonably fit factory workers, with experienced officers. Unlike most \"Volkssturm\" units it was quite well equipped and trained. It was formed into three rifle companies, a support company (with two infantry support guns, four infantry mortars and heavy machine guns), and a heavy weapons company (with four Soviet M-20 howitzers and a French De Bange 220\u00a0mm mortar). The battalion first engaged Soviet troops at Friedrichsfelde on 21 April and saw the heaviest fighting over the following two days. It held out until 2 May, by which time it was down to just 50 rifles and two light machine guns. The survivors fell back to join other \"Volkssturm\" units. 26 men from the battalion were awarded the Iron Cross. Allied bombing and Soviet artillery had reduced Berlin to rubble; meanwhile the final stand in Berlin dwindled to fighting against highly trained, battle-hardened Soviet troops on the brink of final victory, who viewed resistance fighters like the \"Volkssturm\" as terrorists in much the same way the Wehrmacht once had viewed potential partisans during Operation Barbarossa. Red Army soldiers called the Hitler Youth formations and members of the \"Volkssturm\" still fighting to the end in Berlin \"totals\" for being part of Germany's total mobilization effort.\nRole in atrocities.\nOn several occasions, members of the \"Volkssturm\" participated in atrocities. During January 1945, thousands of prisoners were evacuated and force-marched from several smaller concentrations camps\u2014which included Jesau, Seerappen, Schippenbeil, Gerdauen, and Helgenbeil\u2014near K\u00f6nigsberg, many dying along the way. Upon reaching Palmnicken some 2,500 to 3,000 prisoners of the 5,000 that originally began the journey, were lodged in a factory. Mayor and local Nazi party chief, Kurt Friedrichs, wanted the SS to send these prisoners on their way since the Red Army was not far away. When local \"Volkssturm\" leader Hans Feyerabend was ordered to transport the suffering prisoners out of the town, he refused to carry out the order and was heard exclaiming that he would not permit a massacre like the one at Katyn forest. Feyerabend even assigned \"Volkssturm\" guards to keep watch on the local Nazi party members, but this proved fruitless when Friedrich armed a group of Hitler Youth and likewise summoned the local SD elements, whose leaders then commanded the \"Volkssturm\" to help evacuate the prisoners. On 30 January 1945, after the \"Volkssturm\" left with Friedrich in charge, Feyerabend committed suicide; then between 30 January and 1 February the prisoners were murdered by the remaining assemblage of SS guards, Hitler Youth, and the local \"Volkssturm\" unit. \nWhen prisoners fell sick with typhus in the Styria Gau during February\u2013March 1945, SS men, Hitler Youth, and \"Volkssturm\" units systematically murdered them. Under the orders of Loeben-district Kreisleiter, Otto Christandl, \"Volkssturm\" units in nearby Graz and Eisenerz assisted the Gestapo and Ukrainian Waffen-SS men in evacuating between 6,000 and 8,000 prisoners\u2014being marched towards Mauthausen\u2014from their region, many of whom were murdered during the journey when they collapsed from exhaustion. \nSometime in early April 1945 as Allied forces approached the Mittelwerk facilities\u2014where V2 rockets were being produced\u2014the slave laborers from the Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp were force-marched from the western Harz by a collection of guards drawn from the military, the Hitler Youth, and the \"Volkssturm\". Approximately 40 kilometers north of Magdeburg in the village of Mieste, this motley assemblage of guards locked a thousand of these prisoners in a barn and burned them alive at the instruction of a local Nazi Party leader; this event came to be known as the Gardelegen massacre. At the town of Celle in Lower Saxony around the same time, members of the SS, SA, local police, Hitler Youth, and \"Volkssturm\" were aided by locals to \"hunt down and shoot\" prisoners who had fled into the local woodland after their transport train was bombed.\nInterrogated members of the \"Volkssturm\"\u2014when questioned as to where the regular forces had gone\u2014revealed that German soldiers surrendered to the Americans and British instead of the Red Army for fear of reprisals related to the atrocities they had committed in the Soviet Union.\nFinal phase.\nWhile Iron Crosses were being handed out in places like Berlin, other cities and towns like Parchim and Mecklenburg witnessed old elites, acting as military commandants over the Hitler Youth and \"Volkssturm\", asserting themselves and demanding that the defensive fighting stop so as to spare lives and property. Despite their efforts, the last four months of the war were an exercise in futility for the \"Volkssturm\", and the Nazi leadership's insistence to continue the fight to the bitter end contributed to an additional 1.23 million (approximated) deaths, half of them German military personnel and the other half from the \"Volkssturm\".\nIn many small towns, when leading members of the \"Volkssturm\" refused to fight on against the superior forces of the Allies\u2014part of an attempt to circumvent the \"total destruction\" of their home regions\u2014they were tried and \"summarily hanged\" by party activists. Thousands were killed like this in Franken during the spring of 1945.\nSee also.\nOther nations:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8731", "revid": "1151392840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8731", "title": "Director's cut", "text": "Edited media representing the director's approved edit\nA director's cut is an edited version of a film (or video game, television episode, music video, or commercial) that is supposed to represent the director's own approved edit in contrast to the theatrical release. \"Cut\" explicitly refers to the process of film and game editing; in preparing a film for release, the director's cut is preceded by the assembly and rough editor's cut and usually followed by the final cut meant for the public film release and video game release.\nDirector's cuts of film are not generally released to the public because on most films the director does not have the final cut privilege. Those with money invested in the film, such as the production companies, distributors, or studios, may make changes intended to make the film more profitable at the box office. This sometimes means a happier ending or less ambiguity, or excluding scenes that would earn a more audience-restricting rating, but more often means that the film is simply shortened to provide more screenings per day.\nWith the rise of home video, the phrase became more generically used as a marketing term (including media such as comic books and music albums, neither of which actually have directors), and the most commonly seen form of director's cut is a cut where extra scenes and characters are added in, often making the director's cut considerably longer than the final cut.\nOrigin of the phrase.\nTraditionally, the \"director's cut\" is not, by definition, the director's ideal or preferred cut. The editing process of a film is broken into stages: First is the assembly/rough cut, where all selected takes are put together in the order in which they should appear in the film. Next, the editor's cut is reduced from the rough cut; the editor may be guided by their own tastes or following notes from the director or producers. Eventually is the final cut, which actually gets released or broadcast. In between the editor's cut and the final cut can come any number of fine cuts, including the director's cut. The director's cut may include unsatisfactory takes, a preliminary soundtrack, a lack of desired pick-up shots etc., which the director would not like to be shown but uses as a placeholder until satisfactory replacements can be inserted. This is still how the term is used within the film industry, as well as commercials, television, and music videos.\nInception.\nThe trend of releasing alternate cuts of films for artistic reasons became prominent in the 1970s; in 1974, the \"director's cut\" of \"The Wild Bunch\" was shown theatrically in Los Angeles to sold-out audiences. The theatrical release of the film had cut 10 minutes to get an R rating, but this cut was hailed as superior and has now become the definitive one. Other early examples include George Lucas's first two films being re-released following the success of \"Star Wars\", in cuts which more closely resembled his vision, or Peter Bogdanovich re-cutting \"The Last Picture Show\" several times. Charlie Chaplin also re-released all of his films in the 1970s, several of which were re-cut (Chaplin's re-release of \"The Gold Rush\" in the 1940s is almost certainly the earliest prominent example of a director's re-cut film being released to the public). A theatrical re-release of \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" used the phrase \"Special Edition\" to describe a cut which was closer to Spielberg's intent but had a compromised ending demanded by the studio. \nAs the home video industry rose in the early 1980s, video releases of director's cuts were sometimes created for the small but dedicated cult fan market. Los Angeles cable station Z Channel is also cited as significant in the popularization of alternate cuts. Early examples of films released in this manner include Michael Cimino's \"Heaven's Gate\", where a longer cut was recalled from theatres but subsequently shown on cable and eventually released to home video; James Cameron's \"Aliens\", where a video release restored 20 minutes the studio had insisted on cutting; James Cameron's \"The Abyss\", where Cameron voluntarily made cuts to the theatrical version for pacing but restored them for a video release, and most famously, Ridley Scott's \"Blade Runner\", where an alternate workprint version was released to fan acclaim, ultimately resulting in the 1992 recut. Scott later recut the film once more, releasing a version dubbed \"The Final Cut\" in 2007. This was the final re-cut and the first in which Scott maintained creative control over the final product, leading to The Final Cut being considered the definitive version of the film.\nCriticism.\nOnce distributors discovered that consumers would buy alternate versions of films, it became common for films to receive multiple releases. There is no standardization for labelling, leading to so-called \"director's cuts\" of films despite where the director prefers the theatrically released version, or when the director had actual final cut privilege. These were often assembled by simply restoring deleted scenes, sometimes adding as much as a half-hour to the length of the film without regard to pacing and storytelling.\nAs a result, the \"director's cut\" is often considered a mixed bag, with an equal share of supporters and detractors (including Peter Jackson and James Cameron for the latter; each preferring the phrases \"special\" and \"extended\" edition). Roger Ebert approved of the use of the label in unsuccessful films that had been tampered with by studio executives, such as Sergio Leone's original cut of \"Once Upon a Time in America\", and the moderately successful theatrical version of \"Daredevil\", which were altered by studio interference for their theatrical release. Other well-received director's cuts include Ridley Scott's \"Kingdom of Heaven\" (with \"Empire\" magazine stating: \"The added 45 minutes in the Director\u2019s Cut are like pieces missing from a beautiful but incomplete puzzle\"), or Sam Peckinpah's \"Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid\", where the restored 115-minute cut is closer to the director's intent than the theatrical 105-minute cut (the actual director's cut was 122 minutes; it was never completed to Peckinpah's satisfaction, but was used as a guide for the restoration that was done after his death).\nSometimes the term is used a marketing ploy. For example, Ridley Scott states on the director's commentary track of \"Alien\" that the original theatrical release was his \"director's cut\", and that the new version was released as a marketing ploy. Director Peter Bogdanovich, no stranger to director's cuts himself, cites \"Red River\" as an example where &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;MGM have a version of Howard Hawks's \"Red River\" that they're calling the Director's Cut and it is absolutely not the director's cut. It's a cut the director didn't want, an earlier cut that was junked. They assume because it was longer that it's a director's cut. Capra cut two reels off \"Lost Horizon\" because it didn't work and then someone tried to put it back. There are certainly mistakes and stupidities in reconstructing pictures.\nIn some instances, such as Peter Weir's \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\", Robert Wise's \"\", John Cassavetes's \"The Killing of a Chinese Bookie\", Blake Edwards's \"Darling Lili\" and Francis Ford Coppola's , changes made to a director's cut resulted in a very similar runtime or a shorter, more compact cut. This generally happens when a distributor insists that a film be completed to meet a release date, but sometimes it is the result of removing scenes that the distributor insisted on inserting, as opposed to restoring scenes they insisted on cutting.\nAnother way that released director's cuts can be compromised is when directors were never allowed to even shoot their vision, and thus when the film is re-cut, they must make do with the footage that exists. Examples of this include Terry Zwigoff's \"Bad Santa\", Brian Helgeland's \"Payback\", and most notably the Richard Donner re-cut of \"Superman II\". Donner completed about 75 per cent of the shooting of the sequel during the shooting of the first one but was fired from the project. of the film includes, among other things, screen test footage of stars Christopher Reeve and Margot Kidder, footage used in the first film, and entire scenes that were shot by replacement director Richard Lester which Donner dislikes but were required for story purposes.\nExtended cuts and special editions.\nSeparate to director's cuts are alternate cuts released as \"special editions\" or \"extended cuts\". These versions are often put together for home video for fans, and should not be confused with 'director's cuts'. For example, despite releasing extended versions of his \"The Lord of the Rings\" trilogy, Peter Jackson told IGN in 2019 that \u201cthe theatrical versions are the definitive versions, I regard the extended cuts as being a novelty for the fans that really want to see the extra material.\u201d \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The traditional definition of the term 'Director's Cut' suggests the restoration of a director's original vision, free of any creative limitations. It suggests that the filmmaker has finally overcome the interference of heavy-handed studio executives, and that the film has been restored to its original, untampered form. Such is not the case with \"Alien\": The Director's Cut. It's a completely different beast.\"\n\u2014Ridley Scott\nJames Cameron has shared similar sentiments regarding the special editions of his films, \"What I put into theaters is the Director's Cut. Nothing was cut that I didn't want cut. All the extra scenes we've added back in are just a bonus for the fans.\" Similar statements were made by Ridley Scott for the 2003 'director's cut' of \"Alien\". \nSuch alternate versions sometimes include changes to the special effects in addition to different editing, such as George Lucas's \"Star Wars\" films, and Steven Spielberg's \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\".\nExtended or special editions can also apply to films that have been extended for television or cut out to fill time slots and long advertisement breaks, against the explicit wishes of the director, such as the TV versions of \"Dune\" (1984), \"The Warriors\" (1979), \"Superman\" (1978) and the \"Harry Potter\" films. \nExamples of alternate cuts.\n\"The Lord of the Rings\" film series directed by Peter Jackson saw an \"Extended Edition\" release for each of the three films ' (2001), ' (2002), and \" (2003) featuring an additional 30 minutes, 46 minutes and 52 minutes respectively of new scenes, special effects and music alongside fan-club credits.\n\" directed by Zack Snyder had an \"Ultimate Edition,\" which added back 31 minutes of footage cut for the theatrical release and received an R rating, released digitally on 28 June 2016, and on Blu-ray on 19 July 2016. The extended director's cut received more positive critical reviews than the theatrically released film.\nThe film \"Justice League\" which suffered a very troubled production, was begun by Snyder, who completed a pre-postproduction director's cut but had to step down before completing the project due to his daughter's death. Joss Whedon was hired by the films' distributor Warner Bros to complete the film, which was however heavily re-shot, re-edited and released in 2017 with Snyder retaining the directorial credit, to negative reception from general audience, fans and critics alike and box office failure. Following a global fan campaign to which the director and members of the cast and crew showed support, Snyder was allowed to return and complete the project the way he intended it and a 4-hour version of the film dubbed \"Zack Snyder's Justice League\" with some additionally shot scenes at the end was released on March 18, 2021 on HBO Max to much favorable reviews and acclaim. Snyder originally teased a 214-minute cut of the film that was supposed to be the theatrical version released in 2017 if he did not step down from the project.\nThe film \"Caligula\" exists in at least 10 different officially released versions, ranging from a sub-90-minute television edit version of TV-14 (later TV-MA) for cable television to an unrated full pornographic version exceeding 3.5 hours. This is believed to be the largest amount of distinct versions of a single film. Among major studio films, the record is believed to be held by \"Blade Runner\"; the magazine \"Video Watchdog\" counted no less than seven distinct versions in a 1993 issue, before director Ridley Scott later released a \"Final Cut\" in 2007 to acclaim from critics including Roger Ebert who included it on his great movies list, The release of \"Blade Runner: The Final Cut\" brings the supposed grand total to eight differing versions of \"Blade Runner\". \nUpon its release on DVD and Blu-ray in 2019, \"\" featured an extended cut with seven minutes of additional footage. This is the first time since \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\" that a Wizarding World film has had one. \nAn animated example of an extended cut without the approval of the director was 1983's \"Twice Upon a Time\", which was extended to have more profanity (supervised by co-writer and producer Bill Couturi\u00e9) as opposed to co-director John Korty's original.\nThe Coen Brothers' \"Blood Simple\" is one of few examples that demonstrate director's cuts are not necessarily longer.\nMusic videos.\nThe music video for the 2006 Academy Award-nominated song \"Listen\", performed by Beyonc\u00e9, received a director's cut by Diane Martel. This version of the video was later included on Knowles' \"B'Day Anthology Video Album\" (2007). Linkin Park has a director's cut version for their music video \"Faint\" (directed by Mark Romanek) in which one of the band members spray paints the words \"En Proceso\" on a wall, as well as Hoobastank also having one for 2004's \"The Reason\" which omits the woman getting hit by the car. Britney Spears' music video for 2007's \"Gimme More\" was first released as a director's cut on iTunes, with the official video released 3 days later. Many other director's cut music videos contain sexual content that can't be shown on TV thus creating alternative scenes, such as Thirty Seconds to Mars's \"Hurricane\", and in some cases, alternative videos, such as in the case of Spears' 2008 video for \"Womanizer\".\nExpanded usage in pop culture.\nAs the trend became more widely recognized, the term \"director's cut\" became increasingly used as a colloquialism to refer to an expanded version of other things, including video games, music, and comic books. This confusing usage only served to further reduce the artistic value of a director's cut, and it is currently rarely used in those ways.\nVideo games.\nFor video games, these expanded versions, also referred as \"complete editions\", will have additions to the gameplay or additional game modes and features outside the main portion of the game. \nAs is the case with certain high-profile Japanese-produced games, the game designers may take the liberty to revise their product for the overseas market with additional features during the localization process. These features are later added back to the native market in a re-release of a game in what is often referred as the international version of the game. This was the case with the overseas versions of \"Final Fantasy VII\", \"Metal Gear Solid\" and \"Rogue Galaxy\", which contained additional features (such as new difficulty settings for \"Metal Gear Solid\"), resulting in re-released versions of those respective games in Japan (\"Final Fantasy VII International\", ' and \"Rogue Galaxy: Director's Cut\").In the case of ' and ', the American versions were released first, followed by the Japanese versions and then the European versions, with each regional release offering new content not found in the previous one. All of the added content from the Japanese and European versions of those games were included in the expanded editions titled ' and \".\nThey also, similar to movies, will occasionally include extra, uncensored or alternate versions of cutscenes, as was the case with \". In markets with strict censorship, a later relaxing of those laws occasional will result in the game being rereleased with the \"Special/Uncut Edition\" tag added to differentiate between the originally released censored version and the current uncensored edition.\nSeveral of the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" games have also received director's cuts and have used the term \"extension\", though \"remake\" and \"third version\" are also often used by many fans. These include ' (Japan only), \"Pok\u00e9mon Yellow\" (for \"Pok\u00e9mon Red\" and \"Green\"/\"Blue\"), \"Pok\u00e9mon Crystal\" (for \"Pok\u00e9mon Gold\" and \"Silver\"), \"Pok\u00e9mon Emerald\" (for \"Pok\u00e9mon Ruby\" and \"Sapphire\"), \"Pok\u00e9mon Platinum\" (for 'Pok\u00e9mon Diamond\" and \"Pearl\"\") and \"Pok\u00e9mon Ultra Sun and Ultra Moon\".\nFor the PlayStation 5, only Ghost of Tsushima and Death Stranding receive expanded features on both games.\nMusic.\n\"Director's cuts\" in music are rarely released. A few exceptions include Guided by Voices' 1994 album \"Bee Thousand\", which was re-released as a three disc vinyl LP director's cut in 2004, and Fall Out Boy's 2003 album \"Take This to Your Grave\", which was re-released as a Director's cut in 2005 with two extra tracks.\nIn 2011 British singer Kate Bush released the album titled \"Director's Cut\". It is made up of songs from her earlier albums \"The Sensual World\" and \"The Red Shoes\" which have been remixed and restructured, three of which were re-recorded completely.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8733", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8733", "title": "Digital video", "text": "Digital electronic representation of moving visual images\nDigital video is an electronic representation of moving visual images (video) in the form of encoded digital data. This is in contrast to analog video, which represents moving visual images in the form of analog signals. Digital video comprises a series of digital images displayed in rapid succession, usually at 24 frames per second. Digital video has many advantages such as easy copying, multicasting, sharing and storage.\nDigital video was first introduced commercially in 1986 with the Sony D1 format, which recorded an uncompressed standard-definition component video signal in digital form. In addition to uncompressed formats, popular compressed digital video formats today include H.264 and MPEG-4. Modern interconnect standards used for playback of digital video include HDMI, DisplayPort, Digital Visual Interface (DVI) and serial digital interface (SDI).\nDigital video can be copied and reproduced with no degradation in quality. In contrast, when analog sources are copied, they experience generation loss. Digital video can be stored on digital media such as Blu-ray Disc, on computer data storage, or streamed over the Internet to end users who watch content on a desktop computer screen or a digital smart TV. Today, digital video content such as TV shows and movies also include a digital audio soundtrack.\nHistory.\nDigital video cameras.\nThe basis for digital video cameras are metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor (MOS) image sensors. The first practical semiconductor image sensor was the charge-coupled device (CCD), invented in 1969 by Willard S. Boyle, who won a Nobel Prize for his work in physics. Following the commercialization of CCD sensors during the late 1970s to early 1980s, the entertainment industry slowly began transitioning to digital imaging and digital video over from analog video the next two decades. The CCD was followed by the CMOS active-pixel sensor (CMOS sensor), developed in the 1990s. CMOS are beneficial because of their small size, high speed, and low power usage. CMOS are most commonly found today in the digital cameras in iPhones, used as the image censor for the device.\nDigital video coding.\nIn the 1970s, pulse-code modulation (PCM) induced the birth of digital video coding, demanding high bitrates of 45-140 Mbps for standard-definition (SD) content. By the 1980s, the discrete cosine transform (DCT) became the standard for digital video compression.\nThe first digital video coding standard was H.120, created by the (International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee) or CCITT (now ITU-T) in 1984. H.120 was not practical due to weak performance. H.120 was based on differential pulse-code modulation (DPCM), a compression algorithm that was inefficient for video coding. During the late 1980s, a number of companies began experimenting with DCT, a much more efficient form of compression for video coding. The CCITT received 14 proposals for DCT-based video compression formats, in contrast to a single proposal based on vector quantization (VQ) compression. The H.261 standard was developed based on DCT compression, becoming first practical video coding standard. Since H.261, DCT compression has been adopted by all the major video coding standards that followed.\nMPEG-1, developed by the Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG), followed in 1991, and it was designed to compress VHS-quality video. It was succeeded in 1994 by MPEG-2/H.262, which became the standard video format for DVD and SD digital television. It was followed by MPEG-4/H.263 in 1999, and then in 2003 it was followed by H.264/MPEG-4 AVC, which has become the most widely used video coding standard.\nDigital video production.\nStarting in the late 1970s to the early 1980s, video production equipment that was digital in its internal workings was introduced. These included time base correctors (TBC) and digital video effects (DVE) units. They operated by taking a standard analog composite video input and digitizing it internally. This made it easier to either correct or enhance the video signal, as in the case of a TBC, or to manipulate and add effects to the video, in the case of a DVE unit. The digitized and processed video information was then converted back to standard analog video for output.\nLater on in the 1970s, manufacturers of professional video broadcast equipment, such as Bosch (through their Fernseh division) and Ampex developed prototype digital videotape recorders (VTR) in their research and development labs. Bosch's machine used a modified 1-inch type B videotape transport and recorded an early form of CCIR 601 digital video. Ampex's prototype digital video recorder used a modified 2-inch quadruplex videotape VTR (an Ampex AVR-3) fitted with custom digital video electronics and a special \"octaplex\" 8-head headwheel (regular analog 2\" quad machines only used 4 heads). Like standard 2\" quad, the audio on the Ampex prototype digital machine, nicknamed \"Annie\" by its developers, still recorded the audio in analog as linear tracks on the tape. None of these machines from these manufacturers were ever marketed commercially.\nDigital video was first introduced commercially in 1986 with the Sony D1 format, which recorded an uncompressed standard definition component video signal in digital form. Component video connections required 3 cables, but most television facilities were wired for composite NTSC or PAL video using one cable. Due to this incompatibility the cost of the recorder, D1 was used primarily by large television networks and other component-video capable video studios.\nIn 1988, Sony and Ampex co-developed and released the D2 digital videocassette format, which recorded video digitally without compression in ITU-601 format, much like D1. In comparison, D2 had the major difference of encoding the video in composite form to the NTSC standard, thereby only requiring single-cable composite video connections to and from a D2 VCR. This made it a perfect fit for the majority of television facilities at the time. D2 was a successful format in the television broadcast industry throughout the late '80s and the '90s. D2 was also widely used in that era as the master tape format for mastering laserdiscs.\nD1 &amp; D2 would eventually be replaced by cheaper systems using video compression, most notably Sony's Digital Betacam, that were introduced into the network's television studios. Other examples of digital video formats utilizing compression were Ampex's DCT (the first to employ such when introduced in 1992), the industry-standard DV and MiniDV and its professional variations, Sony's DVCAM and Panasonic's DVCPRO, and Betacam SX, a lower-cost variant of Digital Betacam using MPEG-2 compression.\nOne of the first digital video products to run on personal computers was \"PACo: The PICS Animation Compiler\" from The Company of Science &amp; Art in Providence, RI. It was developed starting in 1990 and first shipped in May 1991. PACo could stream unlimited-length video with synchronized sound from a single file (with the \".CAV\" file extension) on CD-ROM. Creation required a Mac, and playback was possible on Macs, PCs, and Sun SPARCstations.\nQuickTime, Apple Computer's multimedia framework, was released in June 1991. Audio Video Interleave from Microsoft followed in 1992. Initial consumer-level content creation tools were crude, requiring an analog video source to be digitized to a computer-readable format. While low-quality at first, consumer digital video increased rapidly in quality, first with the introduction of playback standards such as MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 (adopted for use in television transmission and DVD media), and the introduction of the DV tape format allowing recordings in the format to be transferred directly to digital video files using a FireWire port on an editing computer. This simplified the process, allowing non-linear editing systems (NLE) to be deployed cheaply and widely on desktop computers with no external playback or recording equipment needed.\nThe widespread adoption of digital video and accompanying compression formats has reduced the bandwidth needed for a high-definition video signal (with HDV and AVCHD, as well as several commercial variants such as DVCPRO-HD, all using less bandwidth than a standard definition analog signal). These savings have increased the number of channels available on cable television and direct broadcast satellite systems, created opportunities for spectrum reallocation of terrestrial television broadcast frequencies, and made tapeless camcorders based on flash memory possible, among other innovations and efficiencies.\nDigital video and culture.\nCulturally, digital video has allowed video and film to become widely available and popular, beneficial to entertainment, education, and research. Digital video is increasingly common in schools, with students and teachers taking an interest in learning how to use it in relevant ways. Digital video also has healthcare applications, allowing doctors to track infant heart rates and oxygen levels.\nIn addition, the switch from analog to digital video impacted media in various ways, such as in how businesses use cameras for surveillance. Closed circuit television (CCTV) switched to using digital video recorders (DVR), presenting the issue of how to store recordings for evidence collection. Today, digital video is able to be compressed in order to save storage space.\nDigital television.\nDigital Television, also known as DTV, is the production and transmission of digital video from networks to consumers. This technique uses digital encoding instead of analog signals used prior to the 1950s. As compared to analog methods, DTV is faster and provides more capabilities and options for data to be transmitted and shared.\nOverview.\nDigital video comprises a series of digital images displayed in rapid succession. In the context of video, these images are called frames. The rate at which frames are displayed is known as the frame rate and is measured in frames per second (FPS). Every frame is a digital image and so comprises a formation of pixels. The color of a pixel is represented by a fixed number of bits of that color where the information of the color is stored within the image. For example, 8-bit captures 256 levels per channel, and 10-bit captures 1,024 levels per channel. The more bits, the more subtle variations of colors can be reproduced. This is called the color depth, or bit depth, of the video.\nInterlacing.\nIn interlaced video each \"frame\" is composed of two halves of an image. The first half contains only the odd-numbered lines of a full frame. The second half contains only the even-numbered lines. These halves are referred to individually as \"fields\". Two consecutive fields compose a full frame. If an interlaced video has a frame rate of 30 frames per second the field rate is 60 fields per second, though both part of interlaced video, frames per second and fields per second are separate numbers.\nBit rate and BPP.\nBy definition, bit rate is a measurement of the rate of information content from the digital video stream. In the case of uncompressed video, bit rate corresponds directly to the quality of the video because bit rate is proportional to every property that affects the video quality. Bit rate is an important property when transmitting video because the transmission link must be capable of supporting that bit rate. Bit rate is also important when dealing with the storage of video because, as shown above, the video size is proportional to the bit rate and the duration. Video compression is used to greatly reduce the bit rate while having little effect on quality.\nBits per pixel (BPP) is a measure of the efficiency of compression. A true-color video with no compression at all may have a BPP of 24 bits/pixel. Chroma subsampling can reduce the BPP to 16 or 12 bits/pixel. Applying JPEG compression on every frame can reduce the BPP to 8 or even 1\u00a0bits/pixel. Applying video compression algorithms like MPEG1, MPEG2 or MPEG4 allows for fractional BPP values to exist.\nConstant bit rate versus variable bit rate.\nBPP represents the \"average\" bits per pixel. There are compression algorithms that keep the BPP almost constant throughout the entire duration of the video. In this case, we also get video output with a constant bitrate (CBR). This CBR video is suitable for real-time, non-buffered, fixed bandwidth video streaming (e.g. in videoconferencing). Since not all frames can be compressed at the same level, because quality is more severely impacted for scenes of high complexity, some algorithms try to constantly adjust the BPP. They keep the BPP high while compressing complex scenes and low for less demanding scenes. This way, it provides the best quality at the smallest average bit rate (and the smallest file size, accordingly). This method produces a variable bitrate because it tracks the variations of the BPP.\nTechnical overview.\nStandard film stocks typically record at 24 frames per second. For video, there are two frame rate standards: NTSC, at 30/1.001 (about 29.97) frames per second (about 59.94 fields per second), and PAL, 25 frames per second (50 fields per second). Digital video cameras come in two different image capture formats: interlaced and progressive scan. Interlaced cameras record the image in alternating sets of lines: the odd-numbered lines are scanned, and then the even-numbered lines are scanned, then the odd-numbered lines are scanned again, and so on.\nOne set of odd or even lines is referred to as a \"field\", and a consecutive pairing of two fields of opposite parity is called a \"frame\". Progressive scan cameras record all lines in each frame as a single unit. Thus, interlaced video captures the scene motion twice as often as progressive video does for the same frame rate. Progressive scan generally produces a slightly sharper image, however, motion may not be as smooth as interlaced video.\nDigital video can be copied with no generation loss; which degrades quality in analog systems. However, a change in parameters like frame size, or a change of the digital format can decrease the quality of the video due to image scaling and transcoding losses. Digital video can be manipulated and edited on non-linear editing systems.\nDigital video has a significantly lower cost than 35\u00a0mm film. In comparison to the high cost of film stock, the digital media used for digital video recording, such as flash memory or hard disk drive is very inexpensive. Digital video also allows footage to be viewed on location without the expensive and time-consuming chemical processing required by film. Network transfer of digital video makes physical deliveries of tapes and film reels unnecessary. \nDigital television (including higher quality HDTV) was introduced in most developed countries in early 2000s. Today, digital video is used in modern mobile phones and video conferencing systems. Digital video is used for Internet distribution of media, including streaming video and peer-to-peer movie distribution.\nMany types of video compression exist for serving digital video over the internet and on optical disks. The file sizes of digital video used for professional editing are generally not practical for these purposes, and the video requires further compression with codecs to be used for recreational purposes.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], the highest image resolution demonstrated for digital video generation is 132.7 megapixels (15360 x 8640 pixels). The highest speed is attained in industrial and scientific high-speed cameras that are capable of filming 1024x1024 video at up to 1 million frames per second for brief periods of recording.\nTechnical properties.\nLive digital video consumes bandwidth. Recorded digital video consumes data storage. The amount of bandwidth or storage required is determined by the frame size, color depth and frame rate. Each pixel consumes a number of bits determined by the color depth. The data required to represent a frame of data is determined by multiplying by the number of pixels in the image. The bandwidth is determined by multiplying the storage requirement for a frame by the frame rate. The overall storage requirements for a program can then be determined by multiplying bandwidth by the duration of the program.\nThese calculations are accurate for uncompressed video, but due to the relatively high bit rate of uncompressed video, video compression is extensively used. In the case of compressed video, each frame requires only a small percentage of the original bits. This reduces the data or bandwidth consumption by a factor of 5 to 12 times when using lossless compression, but more commonly, lossy compression is used due to its reduction of data consumption by factors of 20 to 200. Note that it is not necessary that all frames are equally compressed by the same percentage. Instead, consider the \"average\" factor of compression for \"all\" the frames taken together.\nInterfaces and cables.\nPurpose-built digital video interfaces\nGeneral-purpose interfaces use to carry digital video\nThe following interface has been designed for carrying MPEG-Transport compressed video:\nCompressed video is also carried using UDP-IP over Ethernet. Two approaches exist for this:\nOther methods of carrying video over IP\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "8735", "revid": "10560860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8735", "title": "BIND", "text": "DNS server software\nBIND () is a suite of software for interacting with the Domain Name System (DNS). Its most prominent component, named (pronounced \"name-dee\": , short for \"name daemon\"), performs both of the main DNS server roles, acting as an authoritative name server for DNS zones and as a recursive resolver in the network. As of 2015, it is the most widely used domain name server software, and is the \"de facto\" standard on Unix-like operating systems. Also contained in the suite are various administration tools such as nsupdate and dig, and a DNS resolver interface library.\nThe software was originally designed at the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) in the early 1980s. The name originates as an acronym of \"Berkeley Internet Name Domain\", reflecting the application's use within UCB. The latest version is BIND 9, first released in 2000 and still actively maintained by the Internet Systems Consortium (ISC) with new releases issued several times a year.\nKey features.\nBIND 9 is intended to be fully compliant with the IETF DNS standards and draft standards. Important features of BIND 9 include: TSIG, nsupdate, IPv6, RNDC (remote name daemon control), views, multiprocessor support, Response Rate Limiting (RRL), DNSSEC, and broad portability. RNDC enables remote configuration updates, using a shared secret to provide encryption for local and remote terminals during each session.\nDatabase support.\nWhile earlier versions of BIND offered no mechanism to store and retrieve zone data in anything other than flat text files, in 2007 BIND 9.4 DLZ provided a compile-time option for zone storage in a variety of database formats including LDAP, Berkeley DB, PostgreSQL, MySQL, and ODBC.\nBIND 10 planned to make the data store modular, so that a variety of databases may be connected.\nIn 2016 ISC added support for the 'dyndb' interface, contributed by RedHat, with BIND version 9.11.0.\nSecurity.\nSecurity issues that are discovered in BIND 9 are patched and publicly disclosed in keeping with common principles of open source software. A complete list of security defects that have been discovered and disclosed in BIND9 is maintained by Internet Systems Consortium, the current authors of the software.\nThe BIND 4 and BIND 8 releases both had serious security vulnerabilities. Use of these ancient versions, or any un-maintained, non-supported version is strongly discouraged. BIND 9 was a complete rewrite, in part to mitigate these ongoing security issues. The downloads page on the ISC web site clearly shows which versions are currently maintained and which are end of life.\nHistory.\nBIND was originally written by four graduate students at the Computer Systems Research Group (CSRG) at the University of California, Berkeley, Douglas Terry, Mark Painter, David Riggle and Songnian Zhou, in the early 1980s as a result of a DARPA grant. The acronym \"BIND\" is for \"Berkeley Internet Name Domain\", from a technical paper published in 1984. It was first released with Berkeley Software Distribution 4.3BSD.\nVersions of BIND through 4.8.3 were maintained by the CSRG.\nPaul Vixie of Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) took over BIND development in 1988, releasing versions 4.9 and 4.9.1. Vixie continued to work on BIND after leaving DEC. BIND Version 4.9.2 was sponsored by Vixie Enterprises. Vixie eventually founded the Internet Software Consortium (ISC), which became the entity responsible for BIND versions starting with 4.9.3.\nBIND 8 was released by ISC in May 1997.\nVersion 9 was developed by Nominum, Inc. under an ISC outsourcing contract, and the first version was released 9 October 2000. It was written from scratch in part to address the architectural difficulties with auditing the earlier BIND code bases, and also to support DNSSEC (DNS Security Extensions). The development of BIND 9 took place under a combination of commercial and military contracts. Most of the features of BIND 9 were funded by UNIX vendors who wanted to ensure that BIND stayed competitive with Microsoft's DNS offerings; the DNSSEC features were funded by the US military, which regarded DNS security as important. BIND 9 was released in September 2000.\nIn 2009, ISC started an effort to develop a new version of the software suite, initially called BIND10. In addition to DNS service, the BIND10 suite also included IPv4 and IPv6 DHCP server components. In April 2014, with BIND10 release 1.2.0 the ISC concluded its involvement in the project and renamed it to \"Bundy\", moving the source code repository to GitHub for further development by outside public efforts. ISC discontinued its involvement in the project due to cost-cutting measures. The development of DHCP components was split off to become a new Kea project.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8736", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8736", "title": "Djbdns", "text": "The djbdns software package is a DNS implementation. It was created by Daniel J. Bernstein in response to his frustrations with repeated security holes in the widely used BIND DNS software. As a challenge, Bernstein offered a $1000 prize for the first person to find a security hole in djbdns, which was awarded in March 2009 to Matthew Dempsky.\nAs of 2004[ [update]], djbdns's tinydns component was the second most popular DNS server in terms of the number of domains for which it was the authoritative server, and third most popular in terms of the number of DNS hosts running it.\ndjbdns has never been vulnerable to the widespread cache poisoning vulnerability reported in July 2008, but it has been discovered that it is vulnerable to a related attack.\nThe source code has not been centrally managed since its release in 2001, and was released into the public domain in 2007. As of March 2009, there are a number of forks, one of which is dbndns (part of the Debian Project), and more than a dozen patches to modify the released version.\nWhile djbdns does not directly support DNSSEC, there are third party patches to add DNSSEC support to djbdns' authoritative-only tinydns component.\nComponents.\nThe djbdns software consists of servers, clients, and miscellaneous configuration tools.\nDesign.\nIn djbdns, different features and services are split off into separate programs. For example, zone transfers, zone file parsing, caching, and recursive resolving are implemented as separate programs. The result of these design decisions is a reduction in code size and complexity of the daemon program that provides the core function of answering lookup requests. Bernstein asserts that this is true to the spirit of the Unix operating system, and makes security verification much simpler.\nCopyright status.\nOn December 28, 2007, Bernstein released djbdns into the public domain. Previously the package was distributed free of charge as license-free software. However this did not permit the distribution of modified versions of djbdns, which was one of the core principles of open-source software. Consequently, it was not included in those Linux distributions which required all components to be open-source.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8741", "revid": "43388307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8741", "title": "Dylan (programming language)", "text": "Dylan is a multi-paradigm programming language that includes support for functional and object-oriented programming (OOP), and is dynamic and reflective while providing a programming model designed to support generating efficient machine code, including fine-grained control over dynamic and static behaviors. It was created in the early 1990s by a group led by Apple Computer.\nDylan derives from Scheme and Common Lisp and adds an integrated object system derived from the Common Lisp Object System (CLOS). In Dylan, all values (including numbers, characters, functions, and classes) are first-class objects. Dylan supports multiple inheritance, polymorphism, multiple dispatch, keyword arguments, object introspection, pattern-based syntax extension macros, and many other advanced features. Programs can express fine-grained control over dynamism, admitting programs that occupy a continuum between dynamic and static programming and supporting evolutionary development (allowing for rapid prototyping followed by incremental refinement and optimization).\nDylan's main design goal is to be a dynamic language well-suited for developing commercial software. Dylan attempts to address potential performance issues by introducing \"natural\" limits to the full flexibility of Lisp systems, allowing the compiler to clearly understand compilable units, such as libraries.\nDylan derives much of its semantics from Scheme and other Lisps; some Dylan implementations were initially built within extant Lisp systems. However, Dylan has an ALGOL-like syntax instead of a Lisp-like prefix syntax.\nHistory.\nDylan was created in the early 1990s by a group led by Apple Computer. At one time in its development, it was intended for use with the Apple Newton computer, but the Dylan implementation did not reach sufficient maturity in time, and Newton instead used a mix of C and the NewtonScript developed by Walter Smith. Apple ended their Dylan development effort in 1995, though they made a \"technology release\" version available (Apple Dylan TR1) that included an advanced integrated development environment (IDE).\nTwo other groups contributed to the design of the language and developed implementations: Harlequin released a commercial IDE for Microsoft Windows and Carnegie Mellon University released an open source compiler for Unix systems called Gwydion Dylan. Both of these implementations are now open source. The Harlequin implementation is now named Open Dylan and is maintained by a group of volunteers, the Dylan Hackers.\nThe Dylan language was code-named Ralph. James Joaquin chose the name Dylan for \"DYnamic LANguage.\"\nSyntax.\nMany of Dylan's syntax features come from its Lisp heritage. Originally, Dylan used a Lisp-like prefix syntax, which was based on s-expressions. By the time the language design was completed, the syntax was changed to an ALGOL-like syntax, with the expectation that it would be more familiar to a wider audience of programmers. The syntax was designed by Michael Kahl. It is described in great detail in the Dylan Reference Manual.\nLexical syntax.\nDylan is not case sensitive. Dylan's lexical syntax allows the use of a naming convention where hyphen (minus) signs are used to connect the parts of multiple-word identifiers (sometimes called \"lisp-case\" or \"kebab case\"). This convention is common in Lisp languages.\nBesides alphanumeric characters and hyphen-minus signs, Dylan allows a variety of non-alphanumeric characters as part of identifiers. Identifiers may not consist of these non-alphanumeric characters alone. If there is any ambiguity, whitespace is used.\nExample code.\nA simple class with several slots:\ndefine class &lt;point&gt; (&lt;object&gt;)\n slot point-x :: &lt;integer&gt;,\n required-init-keyword: x:;\n slot point-y :: &lt;integer&gt;,\n required-init-keyword: y:;\nend class &lt;point&gt;;\nBy convention, classes are named with less-than and greater-than signs used as angle brackets, e.g. the class named codice_1 in the code example.\nIn codice_2 both codice_3 and codice_1 are optional. This is true for all codice_5 clauses. For example, you may write codice_6 or just codice_5 to terminate an codice_8 statement.\nTo make an instance of codice_1:\nmake(&lt;point&gt;, x: 100, y: 200)\nThe same class, rewritten in the most minimal way possible:\ndefine class &lt;point&gt; (&lt;object&gt;)\n slot point-x;\n slot point-y;\nend;\nThe slots are now both typed as codice_10. The slots must be initialized manually:\nlet p = make(&lt;point&gt;);\npoint-x(p) := 100; // or p.point-x := 100;\npoint-y(p) := 200; // or p.point-y := 200;\nBy convention, constant names begin with \"$\":\ndefine constant $pi :: &lt;double-float&gt; = 3.1415927d0;\nA factorial function:\ndefine function factorial (n :: &lt;integer&gt;) =&gt; (n! :: &lt;integer&gt;)\n case\n n &lt; 0 =&gt; error(\"Can't take factorial of negative integer: %d\\n\", n);\n n = 0 =&gt; 1;\n otherwise =&gt; n * factorial(n - 1);\n end\nend;\nHere, codice_11 and codice_12 are just normal identifiers.\nThere is no explicit return statement. The result of a method or function is the last expression evaluated. It is a common style to leave off the semicolon after an expression in return position.\nModules vs. namespace.\nIn many object-oriented languages, classes are the main means of encapsulation and modularity; each class defines a namespace and controls which definitions are externally visible. Further, classes in many languages define an indivisible unit that must be used as a whole. For example, using a codice_13 concatenation function requires importing and compiling against all of codice_13.\nSome languages, including Dylan, also include a separate, explicit namespace or module system that performs encapsulation in a more general way.\nIn Dylan, the concepts of compile-unit and import-unit are separated, and classes have nothing specifically to do with either. A \"library\" defines items that should be compiled and handled together, while a \"module\" defines a namespace. Classes can be placed together in modules, or cut across them, as the programmer wishes. Often the complete definition for a class does not exist in a single module, but is spread across several that are optionally collected together. Different programs can have different definitions of the same class, including only what they need.\nFor example, consider an add-on library for regex support on codice_13. In some languages, for the functionality to be included in strings, the functionality must be added to the codice_13 namespace. As soon as this occurs, the codice_13 class becomes larger, and functions that don't need to use regex still must \"pay\" for it in increased library size. For this reason, these sorts of add-ons are typically placed in their own namespaces and objects. The downside to this approach is that the new functions are no longer a \"part of\" codice_13; instead, it is isolated in its own set of functions that must be called separately. Instead of codice_19, which would be the natural organization from an OO viewpoint, something like codice_20 is used, which effectively reverses the ordering.\nUnder Dylan, many interfaces can be defined for the same code, for instance the String concatenation method could be placed in both the String interface, and the \"concat\" interface which collects together all of the different concatenation functions from various classes. This is more commonly used in math libraries, where functions tend to be applicable to widely differing object types.\nA more practical use of the interface construct is to build public and private versions of a module, something that other languages include as a \"bolt on\" feature that invariably causes problems and adds syntax. Under Dylan, every function call can be simply placed in the \"Private\" or \"Development\" interface, and collect up publicly accessible functions in codice_21. Under Java or C++ the visibility of an object is defined in the code, meaning that to support a similar change, a programmer would be forced to rewrite the definitions fully, and could not have two versions at the same time.\nClasses.\nClasses in Dylan describe codice_22 (data members, fields, ivars, etc.) of objects in a fashion similar to most OO languages. All access to slots is via methods, as in Smalltalk. Default getter and setter methods are automatically generated based on the slot names. In contrast with most other OO languages, other methods applicable to the class are often defined outside of the class, and thus class definitions in Dylan typically include the definition of the storage only. For instance:\ndefine class &lt;window&gt; (&lt;view&gt;)\n slot title :: &lt;string&gt; = \"untitled\", init-keyword: title:;\n slot position :: &lt;point&gt;, required-init-keyword: position:;\nend class;\nIn this example, the class \"codice_23\" is defined. The &lt;class name&gt; syntax is convention only, to make the class names stand out\u2014the angle brackets are merely part of the class name. In contrast, in some languages the convention is to capitalize the first letter of the class name or to prefix the name with a \"C\" or \"T\" (for example). codice_23 inherits from a single class, codice_25, and contains two slots, codice_26 holding a string for the window title, and codice_27 holding an X-Y point for a corner of the window. In this example, the title has been given a default value, while the position has not. The optional \"init-keyword\" syntax allows the programmer to specify the initial value of the slot when instantiating an object of the class.\nIn languages such as C++ or Java, the class would also define its interface. In this case the definition above has no explicit instructions, so in both languages access to the slots and methods is considered codice_28, meaning they can be used only by subclasses. To allow unrelated code to use the window instances, they must be declared codice_29.\nIn Dylan, these sorts of visibility rules are not considered part of the code, but of the module/interface system. This adds considerable flexibility. For instance, one interface used during early development could declare everything public, whereas one used in testing and deployment could limit this. With C++ or Java these changes would require changes to the source code, so people won't do it, whereas in Dylan this is a fully unrelated concept.\nAlthough this example does not use it, Dylan also supports multiple inheritance.\nMethods and generic functions.\nIn Dylan, methods are not intrinsically associated with any specific class; methods can be thought of as existing outside of classes. Like CLOS, Dylan is based on multiple dispatch (multimethods), where the specific method to be called is chosen based on the types of all its arguments. The method need not be known at compile time, the understanding being that the required function may be available, or not, based on a user's preferences.\nUnder Java the same methods would be isolated in a specific class. To use that functionality the programmer is forced to \"import\" that class and refer to it explicitly to call the method. If that class is unavailable, or unknown at compile time, the application simply won't compile.\nIn Dylan, code is isolated from storage in \"functions\". Many classes have methods that call their own functions, thereby looking and feeling like most other OO languages. However code may also be located in \"generic functions\", meaning they are not attached to a specific class, and can be called natively by anyone. Linking a specific generic function to a method in a class is accomplished thusly:\ndefine method turn-blue (w :: &lt;window&gt;)\n w.color := $blue;\nend method;\nThis definition is similar to those in other languages, and would likely be encapsulated within the codice_23 class. Note the := setter call, which is syntactic sugar for codice_31.\nThe utility of generic methods comes into its own when you consider more \"generic\" examples. For instance, one common function in most languages is the codice_32, which returns some human-readable form for the object. For instance, a window might return its title and its position in parens, while a string would return itself. In Dylan these methods could all be collected into a single module called \"codice_32\", thereby removing this code from the definition of the class itself. If a specific object did not support a codice_32, it could be easily added in the codice_32 module.\nExtensibility.\nThis whole concept might strike some readers as very odd. The code to handle codice_32 for a window isn't defined in codice_23? This might not make any sense until you consider how Dylan handles the call of the codice_32. In most languages when the program is compiled the codice_32 for codice_23 is looked up and replaced with a pointer (more or less) to the method. In Dylan this occurs when the program is first run; the runtime builds a table of method-name/parameters details and looks up methods dynamically via this table. That means that a function for a specific method can be located anywhere, not just in the compile-time unit. In the end the programmer is given considerable flexibility in terms of where to place their code, collecting it along class lines where appropriate, and functional lines where it's not.\nThe implication here is that a programmer can add functionality to existing classes by defining functions in a separate file. For instance, you might wish to add spell checking to all codice_41s, which in C++ or Java would require access to the source code of the string class\u2014and such basic classes are rarely given out in source form. In Dylan (and other \"extensible languages\") the spell checking method could be added in the codice_42 module, defining all of the classes on which it can be applied via the codice_43 construct. In this case the actual functionality might be defined in a single generic function, which takes a string and returns the errors. When the codice_42 module is compiled into your program, all strings (and other objects) will get the added functionality.\nApple Dylan.\nApple Dylan is the implementation of Dylan produced by Apple Computer. It was originally developed for the Apple Newton product.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8742", "revid": "1142202434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8742", "title": "Dublin Core", "text": "Standardized set of metadata elements\nThe Dublin Core, also known as the Dublin Core Metadata Element Set (DCMES), is a set of fifteen main metadata items for describing digital or physical resources. The Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI) is responsible for formulating the Dublin \nCore; DCMI is a project of the Association for Information Science and Technology (ASIS&amp;T), a non-profit organization. \nDublin Core has been formally standardized internationally as ISO 15836 by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and as IETF RFC 5013 by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), \nas well as in the U.S. as ANSI/NISO Z39.85 by the National Information Standards Organization (NISO). \nThe core properties are part of a larger set of DCMI Metadata Terms. \"Dublin Core\" is also used as an adjective for Dublin Core metadata, a style of metadata that draws on multiple Resource Description Framework (RDF) vocabularies, packaged and constrained in Dublin Core application profiles.\nThe resources described using the Dublin Core may be digital resources (video, images, web pages, etc.) as well as physical resources such as books or works of art.\nDublin Core metadata may be used for multiple purposes, from simple resource description to combining metadata vocabularies of different metadata standards, to providing interoperability for metadata vocabularies in the linked data cloud and Semantic Web implementations.\nBackground.\n\"Dublin\" refers to Dublin, Ohio, USA where the schema originated during the 1995 invitational OCLC/NCSA Metadata Workshop, hosted by the OCLC (known at that time as Online Computer Library Center), a library consortium based in Dublin, and the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA). \"Core\" refers to the metadata terms as \"broad and generic being usable for describing a wide range of resources\". The semantics of Dublin Core were established and are maintained by an international, cross-disciplinary group of professionals from librarianship, computer science, text encoding, museums, and other related fields of scholarship and practice.\nIn 1999, the first Dublin Core encoding standard was in HTML. Starting in 2000, the Dublin Core community focused on \"application profiles\" \u2013 the idea that metadata records would use Dublin Core together with other specialized vocabularies to meet particular implementation requirements. During that time, the World Wide Web Consortium's work on a generic data model for metadata, the Resource Description Framework (RDF), was maturing. As part of an extended set of DCMI metadata terms, Dublin Core became one of the most popular vocabularies for use with RDF, more recently in the context of the linked data movement.\nThe Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI) provides an open forum for the development of interoperable online metadata standards for a broad range of purposes and of business models. DCMI's activities include consensus-driven working groups, global conferences and workshops, standards liaison, and educational efforts to promote widespread acceptance of metadata standards and practices. In 2008, DCMI separated from OCLC and incorporated as an independent entity.\nCurrently, any and all changes that are made to the Dublin Core standard, are reviewed by a DCMI Usage Board within the context of a DCMI Namespace Policy (DCMI-NAMESPACE). This policy describes how terms are assigned and also sets limits on the amount of editorial changes allowed to the labels, definitions, and usage comments.\nLevels of the standard.\nThe Dublin Core standard originally included two levels: Simple and Qualified. \"Simple Dublin Core\" comprised 15 elements; \"Qualified Dublin Core\" included three additional elements (Audience, Provenance and RightsHolder), as well as a group of element refinements (also called qualifiers) that could refine the semantics of the elements in ways that may be useful in resource discovery.\nSince 2012, the two have been incorporated into the \"DCMI Metadata Terms\" as a single set of terms using the RDF data model. The full set of elements is found under the namespace http://purl.org/dc/terms/. Because the definition of the terms often contains domains and ranges, which may not be compatible with the pre-RDF definitions used for the original 15 Dublin Core elements, there is a separate namespace for the original 15 elements as previously defined: http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/.\nDublin Core Metadata Element Set.\nThe original DCMES Version 1.1 consists of 15 metadata elements, defined this way in the original specification:\nEach Dublin Core element is optional and may be repeated. The DCMI has established standard ways to refine elements and encourage the use of encoding and vocabulary schemes. There is no prescribed order in Dublin Core for presenting or using the elements. The Dublin Core became a NISO standards, Z39.85, and IETF RFC 5013 in 2007, ISO 15836 standard in 2009 and is used as a base-level data element set for the description of learning resources in the ISO/IEC 19788-2 Metadata for learning resources (MLR) \u2013 Part 2: Dublin Core elements, prepared by the ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 36.\nFull information on element definitions and term relationships can be found in the Dublin Core Metadata Registry.\n \n \nExample of use [and mention] by WebCite.\nOn the \"archive form\" web page for WebCite it says, in part: \"Metadata (optional): These are Dublin Core elements. [...]\".\nQualified Dublin Core.\n(Superseded in 2008 by the DCMI Metadata Terms.) Subsequent to the specification of the original 15 elements, an ongoing process to develop exemplary terms extending or refining the DCMES was begun. The additional terms were identified, generally in working groups of the DCMI, and judged by the DCMI Usage Board to be in conformance with principles of good practice for the qualification of Dublin Core metadata elements.\nElement refinements make the meaning of an element narrower or more specific. A refined element shares the meaning of the unqualified element, but with a more restricted scope. The guiding principle for the qualification of Dublin Core elements, colloquially known as the \"Dumb-Down Principle\", states that an application that does not understand a specific element refinement term should be able to ignore the qualifier and treat the metadata value as if it were an unqualified (broader) element. While this may result in some loss of specificity, the remaining element value (without the qualifier) should continue to be generally correct and useful for discovery.\nIn addition to element refinements, Qualified Dublin Core includes a set of recommended encoding schemes, designed to aid in the interpretation of an element value. These schemes include controlled vocabularies and formal notations or parsing rules. A value expressed using an encoding scheme may thus be a token selected from a controlled vocabulary (for example, a term from a classification system or set of subject headings) or a string formatted in accordance with a formal notation, for example, \"2000-12-31\" as the ISO standard expression of a date. If an encoding scheme is not understood by an application, the value may still be useful to a \"human reader\".\nAudience, Provenance and RightsHolder are elements, but not part of the Simple Dublin Core 15 elements. Use Audience, Provenance and RightsHolder only when using Qualified Dublin Core. DCMI also maintains a small, general vocabulary recommended for use within the element Type. This vocabulary currently consists of 12 terms.\nDCMI Metadata Terms.\nThe DCMI Metadata Terms lists the current set of the Dublin Core vocabulary. This set includes the fifteen terms of the DCMES (in \"italic\"), as well as the qualified terms. Each term has a unique URI in the namespace http://purl.org/dc/terms, and all are defined as RDF properties.\nSyntax.\nSyntax choices for metadata expressed with the Dublin Core elements depend on context. Dublin Core concepts and semantics are designed to be syntax independent and apply to a variety of contexts, as long as the metadata is in a form suitable for interpretation by both machines and people.\nThe Dublin Core Abstract Model provides a reference model against which particular Dublin Core encoding guidelines can be compared, independent of any particular encoding syntax. Such a reference model helps implementers get a better understanding of the kinds of descriptions they are trying to encode and facilitates the development of better mappings and translations between different syntaxes.\nNotable applications.\nOne Document Type Definition based on Dublin Core is the Open Source Metadata Framework (OMF) specification. OMF is in turn used by Rarian (superseding ScrollKeeper), which is used by the GNOME desktop and KDE help browsers and the ScrollServer documentation server.\nPBCore is also based on Dublin Core. The Zope CMF's Metadata products, used by the Plone, ERP5, the Nuxeo CPS Content management systems, SimpleDL, and Fedora Commons also implement Dublin Core. The EPUB e-book format uses Dublin Core metadata in the OPF file.\nThe Australian Government Locator Service (AGLS) metadata standard is an application profile of Dublin Core.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8743", "revid": "28398017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8743", "title": "Document Object Model", "text": "Convention for representing and interacting with objects in HTML, XHTML, and XML documents\n \nThe Document Object Model (DOM) is a cross-platform and language-independent interface that treats an HTML or XML document as a tree structure wherein each node is an object representing a part of the document. The DOM represents a document with a logical tree. Each branch of the tree ends in a node, and each node contains objects. DOM methods allow programmatic access to the tree; with them one can change the structure, style or content of a document. Nodes can have event handlers (also known as event listeners) attached to them. Once an event is triggered, the event handlers get executed.\nThe principal standardization of the DOM was handled by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), which last developed a recommendation in 2004. WHATWG took over the development of the standard, publishing it as a living document. The W3C now publishes stable snapshots of the WHATWG standard.\nIn HTML DOM (Document Object Model), every element is a node:\nHistory.\nThe history of the Document Object Model is intertwined with the history of the \"browser wars\" of the late 1990s between Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer, as well as with that of JavaScript and JScript, the first scripting languages to be widely implemented in the JavaScript engines of web browsers.\nJavaScript was released by Netscape Communications in 1995 within Netscape Navigator 2.0. Netscape's competitor, Microsoft, released Internet Explorer 3.0 the following year with a reimplementation of JavaScript called JScript. JavaScript and JScript let web developers create web pages with client-side interactivity. The limited facilities for detecting user-generated events and modifying the HTML document in the first generation of these languages eventually became known as \"DOM Level 0\" or \"Legacy DOM.\" No independent standard was developed for DOM Level 0, but it was partly described in the specifications for HTML 4.\nLegacy DOM was limited in the kinds of elements that could be accessed. Form, link and image elements could be referenced with a hierarchical name that began with the root document object. A hierarchical name could make use of either the names or the sequential index of the traversed elements. For example, a form input element could be accessed as either codice_1 or codice_2.\nThe Legacy DOM enabled client-side form validation and simple interface interactivity like creating tooltips.\nIn 1997, Netscape and Microsoft released version 4.0 of Netscape Navigator and Internet Explorer respectively, adding support for Dynamic HTML (DHTML) functionality enabling changes to a loaded HTML document. DHTML required extensions to the rudimentary document object that was available in the Legacy DOM implementations. Although the Legacy DOM implementations were largely compatible since JScript was based on JavaScript, the DHTML DOM extensions were developed in parallel by each browser maker and remained incompatible. These versions of the DOM became known as the \"Intermediate DOM\".\nAfter the standardization of ECMAScript, the W3C DOM Working Group began drafting a standard DOM specification. The completed specification, known as \"DOM Level 1\", became a W3C Recommendation in late 1998. By 2005, large parts of W3C DOM were well-supported by common ECMAScript-enabled browsers, including Internet Explorer 6 (from 2001), Opera, Safari and Gecko-based browsers (like Mozilla, Firefox, SeaMonkey and Camino).\nStandards.\nThe W3C DOM Working Group published its final recommendation and subsequently disbanded in 2004. Development efforts migrated to the WHATWG, which continues to maintain a living standard. In 2009, the Web Applications group reorganized DOM activities at the W3C. In 2013, due to a lack of progress and the impending release of HTML5, the DOM Level 4 specification was reassigned to the HTML Working Group to expedite its completion. Meanwhile, in 2015, the Web Applications group was disbanded and DOM stewardship passed to the Web Platform group. Beginning with the publication of DOM Level 4 in 2015, the W3C creates new recommendations based on snapshots of the WHATWG standard.\nApplications.\nWeb browsers.\nTo render a document such as a HTML page, most web browsers use an internal model similar to the DOM. The nodes of every document are organized in a tree structure, called the \"DOM tree\", with the topmost node named as \"Document object\". When an HTML page is rendered in browsers, the browser downloads the HTML into local memory and automatically parses it to display the page on screen. However, the DOM does not necessarily need to be represented as a tree, and some browsers have used other internal models.\nJavaScript.\nWhen a web page is loaded, the browser creates a Document Object Model of the page, which is an object oriented representation of an HTML document that acts as an interface between JavaScript and the document itself. This allows the creation of dynamic web pages, because within a page JavaScript can:\nDOM tree structure.\nA Document Object Model (DOM) tree is a hierarchical representation of an HTML or XML document. It consists of a root node, which is the document itself, and a series of child nodes that represent the elements, attributes, and text content of the document. Each node in the tree has a parent node, except for the root node, and can have multiple child nodes.\nElements as Nodes.\nElements in an HTML or XML document are represented as nodes in the DOM tree. Each element node has a tag name, attributes, and can contain other element nodes or text nodes as children. For example, an HTML document with the following structure:\n&lt;html&gt;\n &lt;head&gt;\n &lt;title&gt;My Website&lt;/title&gt;\n &lt;/head&gt;\n &lt;body&gt;\n &lt;h1&gt;Welcome&lt;/h1&gt;\n &lt;p&gt;This is my website.&lt;/p&gt;\n &lt;/body&gt;\n&lt;/html&gt;\nwill be represented in the DOM tree as:\n- Document (root)\n - html\n - head\n - title\n - \"My Website\"\n - body\n - h1\n - \"Welcome\"\n - p\n - \"This is my website.\"\nText Nodes.\nText content within an element is represented as a text node in the DOM tree. Text nodes do not have attributes or child nodes, and are always leaf nodes in the tree. For example, the text content \"My Website\" in the title element and \"Welcome\" in the h1 element in the above example are both represented as text nodes.\nAttributes as properties.\nAttributes of an element are represented as properties of the element node in the DOM tree. For example, an element with the following HTML:\n&lt;a href=\"https://example.com\"&gt;Link&lt;/a&gt;\nwill be represented in the DOM tree as:\n- a\n - href: \"https://example.com\"\n - \"Link\"\nManipulating the DOM tree.\nThe DOM tree can be manipulated using JavaScript or other programming languages. Common tasks include navigating the tree, adding, removing, and modifying nodes, and getting and setting the properties of nodes. The DOM API provides a set of methods and properties to perform these operations, such as codice_3, codice_5, codice_6, and codice_7.\n// Create the root element\nvar root = document.createElement(\"root\");\n// Create a child element\nvar child = document.createElement(\"child\");\n// Add the child element to the root element\nroot.appendChild(child);\nAnother way to create a DOM structure is using the innerHTML property to insert HTML code as a string, creating the elements and children in the process. For example:\ndocument.getElementById(\"root\").innerHTML = \"&lt;child&gt;&lt;/child&gt;\";\nAnother method is to use a JavaScript library or framework such as jQuery, AngularJS, React, Vue.js, etc. These libraries provide a more convenient and efficient way to create, manipulate and interact with the DOM.\nIt's also possible to create a DOM structure from an XML or JSON data, using JavaScript methods to parse the data and create the nodes accordingly.\nIt's important to note that creating a DOM structure does not necessarily mean that it will be displayed in the web page, it only exists in memory and should be appended to the document body or a specific container to be rendered.\nIn summary, creating a DOM structure involves creating individual nodes and organizing them in a hierarchical structure using JavaScript or other programming languages, and it can be done using several methods depending on the use case and the developer's preference.\nImplementations.\nBecause the DOM supports navigation in any direction (e.g., parent and previous sibling) and allows for arbitrary modifications, an implementation must at least buffer the document that has been read so far (or some parsed form of it).\nLayout engines.\nWeb browsers rely on layout engines to parse HTML into a DOM. Some layout engines, such as Trident/MSHTML, are associated primarily or exclusively with a particular browser, such as Internet Explorer. Others, including Blink, WebKit, and Gecko, are shared by a number of browsers, such as Google Chrome, Opera, Safari, and Firefox. The different layout engines implement the DOM standards to varying degrees of compliance.\nLibraries.\nDOM implementations:\nAPIs that expose DOM implementations:\nInspection tools:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8745", "revid": "45382375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8745", "title": "Design pattern", "text": "Re-usable form of a solution to a design problem\nA design pattern is the re-usable form of a solution to a design problem. The idea was introduced by the architect Christopher Alexander and has been adapted for various other disciplines, particularly software engineering.\nDetails.\nAn organized collection of design patterns that relate to a particular field is called a pattern language. This language gives a common terminology for discussing the situations designers are faced with.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The elements of this language are entities called patterns. Each pattern describes a problem that occurs over and over again in our environment, and then describes the core of the solution to that problem, in such a way that you can use this solution a million times over, without ever doing it the same way twice.\nDocumenting a pattern requires explaining why a particular situation causes problems, and how the components of the pattern relate to each other to give the solution. Christopher Alexander describes common design problems as arising from \"conflicting forces\"\u2014such as the conflict between wanting a room to be sunny and wanting it not to overheat on summer afternoons. A pattern would not tell the designer how many windows to put in the room; instead, it would propose a set of values to guide the designer toward a decision that is best for their particular application. Alexander, for example, suggests that enough windows should be included to direct light all around the room. He considers this a good solution because he believes it increases the enjoyment of the room by its occupants. Other authors might come to different conclusions, if they place higher value on heating costs, or material costs. These values, used by the pattern's author to determine which solution is \"best\", must also be documented within the pattern.\nPattern documentation should also explain when it is applicable. Since two houses may be very different from one another, a design pattern for houses must be broad enough to apply to both of them, but not so vague that it doesn't help the designer make decisions. The range of situations in which a pattern can be used is called its context. Some examples might be \"all houses\", \"all two-story houses\", or \"all places where people spend time\".\nFor instance, in Christopher Alexander's work, bus stops and waiting rooms in a surgery center are both within the context for the pattern \"A PLACE TO WAIT\".\nExamples.\nBusiness models also have design patterns. See .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8748", "revid": "41315924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8748", "title": "N,N-Dimethyltryptamine", "text": "Chemical compound\nN\",\"N\"-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT or N\",\"N\"-DMT, SPL026) is a substituted tryptamine that occurs in many plants and animals, including humans, and which is both a derivative and a structural analog of tryptamine. DMT is used as a psychedelic drug and prepared by various cultures for ritual purposes as an entheogen. \nDMT has a rapid onset, intense effects, and a relatively short duration of action. For those reasons, DMT was known as the \"businessman's trip\" during the 1960s in the United States, as a user could access the full depth of a psychedelic experience in considerably less time than with other substances such as LSD or psilocybin mushrooms. DMT can be inhaled, ingested, or injected and its effects depend on the dose, as well as the mode of administration. When inhaled or injected, the effects last a short period of time: about five to 15 minutes. Effects can last three hours or more when orally ingested along with a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI), such as the ayahuasca brew of many native Amazonian tribes. DMT can produce vivid \"projections\" of mystical experiences involving euphoria and dynamic pseudohallucinations of geometric forms.\nDMT is a functional analog and structural analog of other psychedelic tryptamines such as \"O\"-acetylpsilocin (4-AcO-DMT), psilocybin (4-PO-DMT), psilocin (4-HO-DMT), \"O\"-methylbufotenin (5-MeO-DMT), and bufotenin (5-HO-DMT). Parts of the structure of DMT occur within some important biomolecules like serotonin and melatonin, making them structural analogs of DMT.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHuman consumption.\nDMT is produced in many species of plants often in conjunction with its close chemical relatives 5-methoxy-\"N\",\"N\"-dimethyltryptamine (5-MeO-DMT) and bufotenin (5-OH-DMT). DMT-containing plants are commonly used in indigenous Amazonian shamanic practices. It is usually one of the main active constituents of the drink ayahuasca; however, ayahuasca is sometimes brewed with plants that do not produce DMT. It occurs as the primary psychoactive alkaloid in several plants including \"Mimosa tenuiflora\", \"Diplopterys cabrerana\", and \"Psychotria viridis\". DMT is found as a minor alkaloid in snuff made from Virola bark resin in which 5-MeO-DMT is the main active alkaloid. DMT is also found as a minor alkaloid in bark, pods, and beans of \"Anadenanthera peregrina\" and \"Anadenanthera colubrina\" used to make Yopo and Vilca snuff, in which bufotenin is the main active alkaloid. Psilocin and its precursor psilocybin, an active chemical in many psilocybin mushrooms, are structurally similar to DMT.\nThe psychotropic effects of DMT were first studied scientifically by the Hungarian chemist and psychologist Stephen Sz\u00e1ra, who performed research with volunteers in the mid-1950s. Sz\u00e1ra, who later worked for the United States National Institutes of Health, had turned his attention to DMT after his order for LSD from the Swiss company Sandoz Laboratories was rejected on the grounds that the powerful psychotropic could be dangerous in the hands of a communist country.\nDMT is generally not active orally unless it is combined with a monoamine oxidase inhibitor such as a reversible inhibitor of monoamine oxidase A (RIMA), for example, harmaline. Without a MAOI, the body quickly metabolizes orally administered DMT, and it therefore has no hallucinogenic effect unless the dose exceeds the body's monoamine oxidase's metabolic capacity. Other means of consumption such as vaporizing, injecting, or insufflating the drug can produce powerful hallucinations for a short time (usually less than half an hour), as the DMT reaches the brain before it can be metabolized by the body's natural monoamine oxidase. Taking an MAOI prior to vaporizing or injecting DMT prolongs and enhances the effects.\nClinical use research.\nDimethyltryptamine (DMT), an endogenous ligand of sigma-1 receptors (Sig-1Rs), acts against systemic hypoxia. Research demonstrates DMT reduces the number of apoptotic and ferroptotic cells in mammalian forebrain and supports astrocyte survival in an ischemic environment. According to these data, DMT may be considered as adjuvant pharmacological therapy in the management of acute cerebral ischemia.\nDMT is studied as a potential treatment for Parkinson\u2019s disease in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial.\nSPL026 (DMT fumarate) is currently undergoing phase II clinical trials investigating its use alongside supportive psychotherapy as a potential treatment Major Depressive Disorder. Additionally, a safety study is underway to investigate the effects of combining SSRIs with SPL026.\nNeuropharmacology.\nRecently, researchers discovered that \"N\",\"N\"-dimethyltryptamine is a potent psychoplastogen, a compound capable of promoting rapid and sustained neuroplasticity that may have wide-ranging therapeutic benefit. \nQuantities of dimethyltryptamine and \"O\"-methylbufotenin were found present in the cerebrospinal fluid of humans in a psychiatric study.\nEffects.\nSubjective psychedelic experiences.\nSubjective experiences of DMT includes profound time-dilatory, visual, auditory, tactile, and proprioceptive distortions and hallucinations, and other experiences that, by most firsthand accounts, defy verbal or visual description. Examples include perceiving hyperbolic geometry or seeing Escher-like impossible objects.\nSeveral scientific experimental studies have tried to measure subjective experiences of altered states of consciousness induced by drugs under highly controlled and safe conditions.\nRick Strassman and his colleagues conducted a five-year-long DMT study at the University of New Mexico in the 1990s. The results provided insight about the quality of subjective psychedelic experiences. In this study participants received the DMT dosage via intravenous injection and the findings suggested that different psychedelic experiences can occur, depending on the level of dosage. Lower doses (0.01 and 0.05\u00a0mg/kg) produced some aesthetic and emotional responses, but not hallucinogenic experiences (e.g., 0.05\u00a0mg/kg had mild mood elevating and calming properties). In contrast, responses produced by higher doses (0.2 and 0.4\u00a0mg/kg) researchers labeled as \"hallucinogenic\" that elicited \"intensely colored, rapidly moving display of visual images, formed, abstract or both\". Comparing to other sensory modalities the most affected was the visual. Participants reported visual hallucinations, fewer auditory hallucinations and specific physical sensations progressing to a sense of bodily dissociation, as well as to experiences of euphoria, calm, fear, and anxiety. These dose-dependent effects match well with anonymously posted \"trip reports\" online, where users report \"breakthroughs\" above certain doses.\nStrassman also stressed the importance of the context where the drug has been taken. He claimed that DMT has no beneficial effects of itself, rather the context when and where people take it plays an important role.\nIt appears that DMT can induce a state or feeling where the person believes to \"communicate with other intelligent lifeforms\" (see \"machine elves\"). High doses of DMT produce a state that involves a sense of \"another intelligence\" that people sometimes describe as \"super-intelligent\", but \"emotionally detached\".\nA 1995 study by Adolf Dittrich and Daniel Lamparter found that the DMT-induced altered state of consciousness (ASC) is strongly influenced by habitual rather than situative factors. In the study, researchers used three dimensions of the APZ questionnaire to examine ASC. The first dimension, oceanic boundlessness (OB), refers to dissolution of ego boundaries and is mostly associated with positive emotions. The second dimension, anxious ego-dissolution (AED), represents a disordering of thoughts and decreases in autonomy and self-control. Last, visionary restructuralization (VR) refers to auditory/visual illusions and hallucinations. Results showed strong effects within the first and third dimensions for all conditions, especially with DMT, and suggested strong intrastability of elicited reactions independently of the condition for the OB and VR scales.\nReported encounters with external entities.\nEntities perceived during DMT inebriation have been represented in diverse forms of psychedelic art. The term \"machine elf\" was coined by ethnobotanist Terence McKenna for the entities he encountered in DMT \"hyperspace\", also using terms like \"fractal elves\", or \"self-transforming machine elves\". McKenna first encountered the \"machine elves\" after smoking DMT in Berkeley in 1965. His subsequent speculations regarding the hyperdimensional space in which they were encountered have inspired a great many artists and musicians, and the meaning of DMT entities has been a subject of considerable debate among participants in a networked cultural underground, enthused by McKenna's effusive accounts of DMT hyperspace. Cliff Pickover has also written about the \"machine elf\" experience, in the book \"Sex, Drugs, Einstein, &amp; Elves\". Strassman noted similarities between self-reports of his DMT study participants' encounters with these \"entities\", and mythological descriptions of figures such as \u1e24ayyot haq-Qodesh in ancient religions, including both angels and demons. Strassman also argues for a similarity in his study participants' descriptions of mechanized wheels, gears and machinery in these encounters, with those described in visions of encounters with the Living Creatures and Ophanim of the Hebrew Bible, noting they may stem from a common neuropsychopharmacological experience.\nStrassman argues that the more positive of the \"external entities\" encountered in DMT experiences should be understood as analogous to certain forms of angels: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The medieval Jewish philosophers whom I rely upon for understanding the Hebrew Bible text and its concept of prophecy portray angels as God's intermediaries. That is, they perform a certain function for God. Within the context of my DMT research, I believe that the beings that volunteers see could be conceived of as angelic \u2013 that is, previously invisible, incorporeal spiritual forces that are engarbed or enclothed in a particular form \u2013 determined by the psychological and spiritual development of the volunteers \u2013 bringing a particular message or experience to that volunteer.\nStrassman's experimental participants also note that some other entities can subjectively resemble creatures more like insects and aliens. As a result, Strassman writes these experiences among his experimental participants \"also left me feeling confused and concerned about where the spirit molecule was leading us. It was at this point that I began to wonder if I was getting in over my head with this research.\"\nHallucinations of strange creatures had been reported by Stephen Szara in a 1958 study in psychotic patients, in which he described how one of his subjects under the influence of DMT had experienced \"strange creatures, dwarves or something\" at the beginning of a DMT trip.\nOther researchers of the entities seemingly encountered by DMT users describe them as \"entities\" or \"beings\" in humanoid as well as animal form, with descriptions of \"little people\" being common (non-human gnomes, elves, imps, etc.). Strassman and others have speculated that this form of hallucination may be the cause of alien abduction and extraterrestrial encounter experiences, which may occur through endogenously-occurring DMT.\nLikening them to descriptions of rattling and chattering auditory phenomena described in encounters with the Hayyoth in the Book of Ezekiel, Rick Strassman notes that participants in his studies, when reporting encounters with the alleged entities, have also described loud auditory hallucinations, such as one subject reporting typically \"the elves laughing or talking at high volume, chattering, twittering\".\nNear-death experience.\nA 2018 study found significant relationships between a DMT experience and a near-death experience. A 2019 large-scale study pointed that ketamine, \"Salvia divinorum\", and DMT (and other classical psychedelic substances) may be linked to near-death experiences due to the semantic similarity of reports associated with the use of psychoactive compounds and NDE narratives, but the study concluded that with the current data it is neither possible to corroborate nor refute the hypothesis that the release of an endogenous ketamine-like neuroprotective agent underlies NDE phenomenology.\nPhysiological response.\nAccording to a dose-response study in human subjects, dimethyltryptamine administered intravenously slightly elevated blood pressure, heart rate, pupil diameter, and rectal temperature, in addition to elevating blood concentrations of \"beta\"-endorphin, corticotropin, cortisol, and prolactin; growth hormone blood levels rise equally in response to all doses of DMT, and melatonin levels were unaffected.\"\nConjecture regarding endogenous effects.\nIn the 1950s, the endogenous production of psychoactive agents was considered to be a potential explanation for the hallucinatory symptoms of some psychiatric diseases; this is known as the transmethylation hypothesis. Several speculative and yet untested hypotheses suggest that endogenous DMT is produced in the human brain and is involved in certain psychological and neurological states. DMT is naturally occurring in small amounts in rat brain, human cerebrospinal fluid, and other tissues of humans and other mammals. Further, mRNA for the enzyme necessary for the production of DMT, INMT, are expressed in the human cerebral cortex, choroid plexus, and pineal gland, suggesting an endogenous role in the human brain. In 2011, Nicholas V. Cozzi, of the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, concluded that INMT, an enzyme that is associated with the biosynthesis of DMT and endogenous hallucinogens, is present in the primate (rhesus macaque) pineal gland, retinal ganglion neurons, and spinal cord. Neurobiologist Andrew Gallimore (2013) suggested that while DMT might not have a modern neural function, it may have been an ancestral neuromodulator once secreted in psychedelic concentrations during REM sleep, a function now lost.\nAdverse effects.\nMental disorders.\nDMT may trigger adverse psychological reactions, known colloquially as a \"bad trip\", such as intense fear, paranoia, anxiety, panic attacks, and substance-induced psychosis, particularly in predisposed individuals.\nAddiction and dependence liability.\nDMT, like other serotonergic psychedelics, is considered to be non-addictive with low abuse potential. A study examining substance use disorder for DSM-IV reported that almost no hallucinogens produced dependence, unlike psychoactive drugs of other classes such as stimulants and depressants. At present, there have been no studies that report abstinence syndrome with termination of DMT, and dependence potential of DMT and the risk of sustained psychological disturbance may be minimal when used infrequently; however, the physiological dependence potential of DMT and ayahuasca has not yet been documented convincingly.\nTolerance.\nUnlike other classical psychedelics, studies report that DMT did not exhibit tolerance upon repeated administration of twice a day sessions, separated by 5 hours, for 5 consecutive days; field reports suggests a refractory period of only 15 to 30 minutes, while the plasma levels of DMT was nearly undetectable 30 minutes after intravenous administration. Another study of four closely spaced DMT infusion sessions with 30 minute intervals also suggests no tolerance buildup to the psychological effects of the compound, while heart rate responses and neuroendocrine effects were diminished with repeated administration. A fully hallucinogenic dose of DMT did not demonstrate cross-tolerance to human subjects who are highly tolerant to LSD; researches suggest that DMT exhibits unique pharmacological properties compared to other classical psychedelics.\nLong-term use.\nThere have been no serious adverse effects reported on long-term use of DMT, apart from acute cardiovascular events. Repeated and one-time administration of DMT produces marked changes in the cardiovascular system, with an increase in systolic and diastolic blood pressure; although the changes were not statistically significant, a robust trend towards significance was observed for systolic blood pressure at high doses.\nDrug-interactions.\nDMT is inactive when ingested orally due to metabolism by MAO, and beta-Carbolines in DMT-containing drinks such as ayahuasca have been found to contain MAOIs, in particular, harmine and harmaline. Life-threatening lethalities such as serotonin syndrome (SS) may occur when MAOIs are combined with certain serotonergic medications such as SSRI antidepressants. Serotonin syndrome has also been reported with tricyclic antidepressants, opiates, analgesic, and antimigraine drugs; it is advised to exercise caution when an individual had used dextromethorphan (DXM), MDMA, ginseng, or \"St. John\u2019s wort\" recently.\nChronic use of SSRIs, TCAs, and MAOIs diminish subjective effects of psychedelics due to presumed SSRI-induced 5-HT2A receptors downregulation and MAOI-induced 5-HT2A receptor desensitization. The interaction between psychedelics and antipsychotics and anticonvulsant are not well documented, however reports reveal that co-use of psychedelics with mood stabilizers such as lithium may provoke seizure and dissociative effects in individuals with bipolar disorder.\nRoutes of administration.\nInhalation.\nA standard dose for vaporized DMT is 20\u201360\u00a0milligrams, depending highly on the efficiency of vaporization as well as body weight and personal variation. In general, this is inhaled in a few successive breaths, but lower doses can be used if the user can inhale it in fewer breaths (ideally one). The effects last for a short period of time, usually 5 to 15 minutes, dependent on the dose. The onset after inhalation is very fast (less than 45 seconds) and peak effects are reached within a minute. In the 1960s, DMT was known as a \"businessman's trip\" in the US because of the relatively short duration (and rapid onset) of action when inhaled. DMT can be inhaled using a bong, typically when sandwiched between layers of plant matter, using a specially designed pipe, or by using an e-cigarette once it has been dissolved in propylene glycol and/or vegetable glycerin. Some users have also started using vaporizers meant for cannabis extracts (\"wax pens\") for ease of temperature control when vaporizing crystals. A DMT-infused smoking blend is called Changa, and is typically used in pipes or other utensils meant for smoking dried plant matter.\nIntravenous injection.\nIn a study conducted from 1990 through 1995, University of New Mexico psychiatrist Rick Strassman found that some volunteers injected with high doses of DMT reported experiences with perceived alien entities. Usually, the reported entities were experienced as the inhabitants of a perceived independent reality that the subjects reported visiting while under the influence of DMT.\nOral.\nDMT is broken down by the enzyme monoamine oxidase through a process called deamination, and is quickly inactivated orally unless combined with a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI). The traditional South American beverage ayahuasca is derived by boiling \"Banisteriopsis caapi\" with leaves of one or more plants containing DMT, such as \"Psychotria viridis\", \"Psychotria carthagenensis\", or \"Diplopterys cabrerana\". The \"Banisteriopsis caapi\" contains harmala alkaloids, a highly active reversible inihibitors of monoamine oxidase A (RIMAs), rendering the DMT orally active by protecting it from deamination. A variety of different recipes are used to make the brew depending on the purpose of the ayahuasca session, or local availability of ingredients. Two common sources of DMT in the western US are reed canary grass (\"Phalaris arundinacea\") and Harding grass (\"Phalaris aquatica\"). These invasive grasses contain low levels of DMT and other alkaloids but also contain gramine, which is toxic and difficult to separate. In addition, Jurema (\"Mimosa tenuiflora\") shows evidence of DMT content: the pink layer in the inner rootbark of this small tree contains a high concentration of \"N\",\"N\"-DMT.\nTaken orally with an RIMA, DMT produces a long-lasting (over three hours), slow, deep metaphysical experience similar to that of psilocybin mushrooms, but more intense.\nThe intensity of orally administered DMT depends on the type and dose of MAOI administered alongside it. When ingested with 120mg of harmine (a RIMA and member of the harmala alkaloids), 20mg of DMT was reported to have psychoactive effects by author and ethnobotanist Jonathan Ott. Ott reported that to produce a visionary state, the threshold oral dose was 30mg DMT alongside 120mg harmine. This is not necessarily indicative of a standard dose, as dose-dependent effects may vary due to individual variations in drug metabolism.\nHistory.\nNaturally occurring substances (of both vegetable and animal origin) containing DMT have been used in South America since pre-Columbian times.\nDMT was first synthesized in 1931 by German chemist Richard Helmuth Fredrick Manske. In general, its discovery as a natural product is credited to Brazilian chemist and microbiologist Oswaldo Gon\u00e7alves de Lima, who isolated an alkaloid he named \"nigerina\" (nigerine) from the root bark of \"Mimosa tenuiflora\" in 1946. However, in a careful review of the case Jonathan Ott shows that the empirical formula for nigerine determined by Gon\u00e7alves de Lima, which notably contains an atom of oxygen, can match only a partial, \"impure\" or \"contaminated\" form of DMT. It was only in 1959, when Gon\u00e7alves de Lima provided American chemists a sample of \"Mimosa tenuiflora\" roots, that DMT was unequivocally identified in this plant material. Less ambiguous is the case of isolation and formal identification of DMT in 1955 in seeds and pods of \"Anadenanthera peregrina\" by a team of American chemists led by Evan Horning (1916\u20131993). Since 1955, DMT has been found in a host of organisms: in at least fifty plant species belonging to ten families, and in at least four animal species, including one gorgonian and three mammalian species (including humans).\nIn terms of a scientific understanding, the hallucinogenic properties of DMT were not uncovered until 1956 by Hungarian chemist and psychiatrist Stephen Szara. In his paper \u201cDimethyltryptamin: Its Metabolism in Man;\nthe Relation of its Psychotic Effect to the\nSerotonin Metabolism\u201d, Szara employed synthetic DMT, synthesized by the method of Speeter and Anthony, which was then administered to 20 volunteers by intramuscular injection. Urine samples were collected from these volunteers for the identification of DMT metabolites. This is considered to be the converging link between the chemical structure DMT to its cultural consumption as a psychoactive and religious sacrament.\nAnother historical milestone is the discovery of DMT in plants frequently used by Amazonian natives as additive to the vine \"Banisteriopsis caapi\" to make ayahuasca decoctions. In 1957, American chemists Francis Hochstein and Anita Paradies identified DMT in an \"aqueous extract\" of leaves of a plant they named \"Prestonia amazonicum\" [\"sic\"] and described as \"commonly mixed\" with \"B. caapi\". The lack of a proper botanical identification of \"Prestonia amazonica\" in this study led American ethnobotanist Richard Evans Schultes (1915\u20132001) and other scientists to raise serious doubts about the claimed plant identity. The mistake likely led the writer William Burroughs to regard the DMT he experimented with in Tangier in 1961 as \"Prestonia\". Better evidence was produced in 1965 by French pharmacologist Jacques Poisson, who isolated DMT as a sole alkaloid from leaves, provided and used by Aguaruna Indians, identified as having come from the vine \"Diplopterys cabrerana\" (then known as \"Banisteriopsis rusbyana\"). Published in 1970, the first identification of DMT in the plant \"Psychotria viridis\", another common additive of ayahuasca, was made by a team of American researchers led by pharmacologist Ara der Marderosian. Not only did they detect DMT in leaves of \"P. viridis\" obtained from Kaxinaw\u00e1 indigenous people, but they also were the first to identify it in a sample of an ayahuasca decoction, prepared by the same indigenous people.\nLegal status.\nInternational law.\nInternationally DMT is illegal, but ayahuasca and DMT brews and preparations are lawful. DMT is controlled by the Convention on Psychotropic Substances at the international level. The Convention makes it illegal to possess, buy, purchase, sell, to retail and to dispense without a licence.\nBy country and continent.\nIn some countries ayahuasca is a forbidden or controlled or regulated substance while in other countries it is not a controlled substance or its production, consumption, and sale, is allowed to various degrees.\nNorth America.\nIn 2017 the Santo Daime Church C\u00e9u do Montr\u00e9al received religious exemption to use Ayahuasca as a sacrament in their rituals.\nIn December 2004, the Supreme Court lifted a stay, thereby allowing the Brazil-based Uni\u00e3o do Vegetal (UDV) church to use a decoction containing DMT in their Christmas services that year. This decoction is a tea made from boiled leaves and vines, known as hoasca within the UDV, and ayahuasca in different cultures. In \"Gonzales v. O Centro Esp\u00edrita Beneficente Uni\u00e3o do Vegetal\", the Supreme Court heard arguments on 1 November 2005, and unanimously ruled in February 2006 that the U.S. federal government must allow the UDV to import and consume the tea for religious ceremonies under the 1993 Religious Freedom Restoration Act.\nIn September 2008, the three Santo Daime churches filed suit in federal court to gain legal status to import DMT-containing ayahuasca tea. The case, \"Church of the Holy Light of the Queen v. Mukasey\", presided over by Judge Owen M. Panner, was ruled in favor of the Santo Daime church. As of 21 March 2009, a federal judge says members of the church in Ashland can import, distribute and brew ayahuasca. U.S. District Judge Owen Panner issued a permanent injunction barring the government from prohibiting or penalizing the sacramental use of \"Daime tea\". Panner's order said activities of The Church of the Holy Light of the Queen are legal and protected under freedom of religion. His order prohibits the federal government from interfering with and prosecuting church members who follow a list of regulations set out in his order.\nChemistry.\nDMT is commonly handled and stored as a hemifumarate, as other DMT acid salts are extremely hygroscopic and will not readily crystallize. Its freebase form, although less stable than DMT hemifumarate, is favored by recreational users choosing to vaporize the chemical as it has a lower boiling point.\nBiosynthesis.\nDimethyltryptamine is an indole alkaloid derived from the shikimate pathway. Its biosynthesis is relatively simple and summarized in the adjacent picture. In plants, the parent amino acid L-tryptophan is produced endogenously where in animals L-tryptophan is an essential amino acid coming from diet. No matter the source of L-tryptophan, the biosynthesis begins with its decarboxylation by an aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) enzyme (step 1). The resulting decarboxylated tryptophan analog is tryptamine. Tryptamine then undergoes a transmethylation (step 2): the enzyme indolethylamine-\"N\"-methyltransferase (INMT) catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from cofactor \"S\"-adenosylmethionine (SAM), via nucleophilic attack, to tryptamine. This reaction transforms SAM into \"S\"-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), and gives the intermediate product \"N\"-methyltryptamine (NMT). NMT is in turn transmethylated by the same process (step 3) to form the end product \"N\",\"N\"-dimethyltryptamine. Tryptamine transmethylation is regulated by two products of the reaction: SAH, and DMT were shown \"ex vivo\" to be among the most potent inhibitors of rabbit INMT activity.\nThis transmethylation mechanism has been repeatedly and consistently proven by radiolabeling of SAM methyl group with carbon-14 (14C-CH3)SAM.\nLaboratory synthesis.\nDMT can be synthesized through several possible pathways from different starting materials. The two most commonly encountered synthetic routes are through the reaction of indole with oxalyl chloride followed by reaction with dimethylamine and reduction of the carbonyl functionalities with lithium aluminium hydride to form DMT. The second commonly encountered route is through the \"N\",\"N\"-dimethylation of tryptamine using formaldehyde followed by reduction with sodium cyanoborohydride or sodium triacetoxyborohydride. Sodium borohydride can be used but requires a larger excess of reagents and lower temperatures due to it having a higher selectivity for carbonyl groups as opposed to imines. Procedures using sodium cyanoborohydride and sodium triacetoxyborohydride (presumably created \"in situ\" from cyanoborohydride though this may not be the case due to the presence of water or methanol) also result in the creation of cyanated tryptamine and \"beta\"-carboline byproducts of unknown toxicity while using sodium borohydride in absence of acid does not. Bufotenine, a plant extract, can also be synthesized into DMT. \nAlternatively, an excess methyl iodide or methyl tosylate (methyl p-toluenesulfonate) can be used to over-methylate tryptamine, resulting in the creation of a quaternary ammonium salt, which is then dequaternized (demethylated) with ethanolamine to yield DMT.\nClandestine manufacture.\nIn a clandestine setting, DMT is not typically synthesized due to the lack of availability of the starting materials, namely tryptamine and oxalyl chloride. Instead, it is more often extracted from plant sources using a nonpolar hydrocarbon solvent such as naphtha or heptane, and a base such as sodium hydroxide.\nAlternatively, an acid-base extraction is sometimes used instead.\nA variety of plants contain DMT at sufficient levels for being viable sources, but specific plants such as \"Mimosa tenuiflora, Acacia acuminata\" and \"Acacia confusa\" are most often used.\nThe chemicals involved in the extraction are commonly available. The plant material may be illegal to procure in some countries. The end product (DMT) is illegal in most countries.\nEvidence in mammals.\nPublished in \"Science\" in 1961, Julius Axelrod found an \"N\"-methyltransferase enzyme capable of mediating biotransformation of tryptamine into DMT in a rabbit's lung. This finding initiated a still ongoing scientific interest in endogenous DMT production in humans and other mammals. From then on, two major complementary lines of evidence have been investigated: localization and further characterization of the \"N\"-methyltransferase enzyme, and analytical studies\u00a0looking for endogenously produced DMT in body fluids and tissues.\nIn 2013, researchers reported DMT in the pineal gland microdialysate of rodents.\nA study published in 2014 reported the biosynthesis of \"N\",\"N\"-dimethyltryptamine (DMT) in the human melanoma cell line SK-Mel-147 including details on its metabolism by peroxidases.\nIt is assumed that more than half of the amount of DMT produced by the acidophilic cells of the pineal gland is secreted before and during death, the amount being 2.5\u20133.4\u00a0mg/kg. However, this claim by Strassman has been criticized by David Nichols who notes that DMT does not appear to be produced in any meaningful amount by the pineal gland. Removal or calcification of the pineal gland does not induce any of the symptoms caused by removal of DMT. The symptoms presented are consistent solely with reduction in melatonin, which is the pineal gland's known function. Nichols instead suggests that dynorphin and other endorphins are responsible for the reported euphoria experienced by patients during a near-death experience.\nIn 2014, researchers demonstrated the immunomodulatory potential of DMT and 5-MeO-DMT through the Sigma-1 receptor of human immune cells. This immunomodulatory activity may contribute to significant anti-inflammatory effects and tissue regeneration.\nEndogenous DMT.\n\"N\",\"N\"-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT), a psychedelic compound identified endogenously in mammals, is biosynthesized by aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) and indolethylamine-\"N\"-methyltransferase (INMT). Studies have investigated brain expression of INMT transcript in rats and humans, coexpression of INMT and AADC mRNA in rat brain and periphery, and brain concentrations of DMT in rats. INMT transcripts were identified in the cerebral cortex, pineal gland, and choroid plexus of both rats and humans via \"in situ\" hybridization. Notably, INMT mRNA was colocalized with AADC transcript in rat brain tissues, in contrast to rat peripheral tissues where there existed little overlapping expression of INMT with AADC transcripts. Additionally, extracellular concentrations of DMT in the cerebral cortex of normal behaving rats, with or without the pineal gland, were similar to those of canonical monoamine neurotransmitters including serotonin. A significant increase of DMT levels in the rat visual cortex was observed following induction of experimental cardiac arrest, a finding independent of an intact pineal gland. These results show for the first time that the rat brain is capable of synthesizing and releasing DMT at concentrations comparable to known monoamine neurotransmitters and raise the possibility that this phenomenon may occur similarly in human brains.\nThe first claimed detection of mammalian endogenous DMT was published in June 1965: German researchers F. Franzen and H. Gross report to have evidenced and quantified DMT, along with its structural analog bufotenin (5-HO-DMT), in human blood and urine. In an article published four months later, the method used in their study was strongly criticized, and the credibility of their results challenged.\nFew of the analytical methods used prior to 2001 to measure levels of endogenously formed DMT had enough sensitivity and selectivity to produce reliable results. Gas chromatography, preferably coupled to mass spectrometry (GC-MS), is considered a minimum requirement. A study published in 2005 implements the most sensitive and selective method ever used to measure endogenous DMT: liquid chromatography\u2013tandem mass spectrometry with electrospray ionization (LC-ESI-MS/MS) allows for reaching limits of detection (LODs) 12 to 200 fold lower than those attained by the best methods employed in the 1970s. The data summarized in the table below are from studies conforming to the abovementioned requirements (abbreviations used: CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; LOD = limit of detection; \"n\" = number of samples; ng/L and ng/kg = nanograms (10\u22129 g) per litre, and nanograms per kilogram, respectively):\nA 2013 study found DMT in microdialysate obtained from a rat's pineal gland, providing evidence of endogenous DMT in the mammalian brain. In 2019 experiments showed that the rat brain is capable of synthesizing and releasing DMT. These results raise the possibility that this phenomenon may occur similarly in human brains.\nDetection in body fluids.\nDMT may be measured in blood, plasma or urine using chromatographic techniques as a diagnostic tool in clinical poisoning situations or to aid in the medicolegal investigation of suspicious deaths. In general, blood or plasma DMT levels in recreational users of the drug are in the 10\u201330 \u03bcg/L range during the first several hours post-ingestion. Less than 0.1% of an oral dose is eliminated unchanged in the 24-hour urine of humans.\nINMT.\nBefore techniques of molecular biology were used to localize indolethylamine \"N\"-methyltransferase (INMT), characterization and localization went on a par: samples of the biological material where INMT is hypothesized to be active are subject to enzyme assay. Those enzyme assays are performed either with a radiolabeled methyl donor like (14C-CH3)SAM to which known amounts of unlabeled substrates like tryptamine are added or with addition of a radiolabeled substrate like (14C)NMT to demonstrate in vivo formation. As qualitative determination of the radioactively tagged product of the enzymatic reaction is sufficient to characterize INMT existence and activity (or lack of), analytical methods used in INMT assays are not required to be as sensitive as those needed to directly detect and quantify the minute amounts of endogenously formed DMT (see DMT subsection below). The essentially qualitative method thin layer chromatography (TLC) was thus used in a vast majority of studies. Also, robust evidence that INMT can catalyze transmethylation of tryptamine into NMT and DMT could be provided with reverse isotope dilution analysis coupled to mass spectrometry for rabbit and human lung during the early 1970s.\nSelectivity rather than sensitivity proved to be an Achilles' heel for some TLC methods with the discovery in 1974\u20131975 that incubating rat blood cells or brain tissue with (14C-CH3)SAM and NMT as substrate mostly yields tetrahydro-\u03b2-carboline derivatives, and negligible amounts of DMT in brain tissue. It is indeed simultaneously realized that the TLC methods used thus far in almost all published studies on INMT and DMT biosynthesis are incapable to resolve DMT from those tetrahydro-\u03b2-carbolines. These findings are a blow for all previous claims of evidence of INMT activity and DMT biosynthesis in avian and mammalian brain, including in vivo, as they all relied upon use of the problematic TLC methods: their validity is doubted in replication studies that make use of improved TLC methods, and fail to evidence DMT-producing INMT activity in rat and human brain tissues. Published in 1978, the last study attempting to evidence in vivo INMT activity and DMT production in brain (rat) with TLC methods finds biotransformation of radiolabeled tryptamine into DMT to be real but \"insignificant\". Capability of the method used in this latter study to resolve DMT from tetrahydro-\u03b2-carbolines is questioned later.\nTo localize INMT, a qualitative leap is accomplished with use of modern techniques of molecular biology, and of immunohistochemistry. In humans, a gene encoding INMT is determined to be located on chromosome 7. Northern blot analyses reveal INMT messenger RNA (mRNA) to be highly expressed in rabbit lung, and in human thyroid, adrenal gland, and lung. Intermediate levels of expression are found in human heart, skeletal muscle, trachea, stomach, small intestine, pancreas, testis, prostate, placenta, lymph node, and spinal cord. Low to very low levels of expression are noted in rabbit brain, and human thymus, liver, spleen, kidney, colon, ovary, and bone marrow. INMT mRNA expression is absent in human peripheral blood leukocytes, whole brain, and in tissue from 7 specific brain regions (thalamus, subthalamic nucleus, caudate nucleus, hippocampus, amygdala, substantia nigra, and corpus callosum). Immunohistochemistry showed INMT to be present in large amounts in glandular epithelial cells of small and large intestines. In 2011, immunohistochemistry revealed the presence of INMT in primate nervous tissue including retina, spinal cord motor neurons, and pineal gland. A 2020 study using in-situ hybridization, a far more accurate tool than the northern blot analysis, found mRNA coding for INMT expressed in the human cerebral cortex, choroid plexus, and pineal gland.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacokinetics.\nDMT peak level concentrations (\"C\"max) measured in whole blood after intramuscular (IM) injection (0.7\u00a0mg/kg, \"n\" = 11) and in plasma following intravenous (IV) administration (0.4\u00a0mg/kg, \"n\" = 10) of fully psychedelic doses are in the range of around 14 to 154\u00a0\u03bcg/L and 32 to 204\u00a0\u03bcg/L, respectively.\nThe corresponding molar concentrations of DMT are therefore in the range of 0.074\u20130.818\u00a0\u03bcmol/L in whole blood and 0.170\u20131.08\u00a0\u03bcmol in plasma. However, several studies have described active transport and accumulation of DMT into rat and dog brain following peripheral administration.\nSimilar active transport, and accumulation processes likely occur in human brain and may concentrate DMT in brain by several-fold or more (relatively to blood), resulting in local concentrations in the micromolar or higher range. Such concentrations would be commensurate with serotonin brain tissue concentrations, which have been consistently determined to be in the 1.5\u20134\u00a0\u03bcmol/L range.\nClosely coextending with peak psychedelic effects, mean time to reach peak concentrations (\"T\"max) was determined to be 10\u201315 minutes in whole blood after IM injection, and 2 minutes in plasma after IV administration. When taken orally mixed in an ayahuasca decoction, and in freeze-dried ayahuasca gel caps, DMT \"T\"max is considerably delayed: 107.59\u00a0\u00b1\u00a032.5 minutes, and 90\u2013120 minutes, respectively.\nThe pharmacokinetics for vaporizing DMT have not been studied or reported.\nNeurogenesis.\nIn September 2020, an \"in vitro\" and \"in vivo\" study showed that DMT present in the ayahuasca infusion promotes neurogenesis.\nPharmacodynamics.\nDMT binds non-selectively with affinities below 0.6\u00a0\u03bcmol/L to the following serotonin receptors: 5-HT1A, 5-HT1B, 5-HT1D, 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, 5-HT2C, 5-HT6, and 5-HT7. An agonist action has been determined at 5-HT1A, 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C. Its efficacies at other serotonin receptors remain to be determined. Of special interest will be the determination of its efficacy at human 5-HT2B receptor as two \"in vitro\" assays evidenced DMT's high affinity for this receptor: 0.108\u00a0\u00b5mol/L and 0.184\u00a0\u00b5mol/L. This may be of importance because chronic or frequent uses of serotonergic drugs showing preferential high affinity and clear agonism at 5-HT2B receptor have been causally linked to valvular heart disease.\nIt has also been shown to possess affinity for the dopamine D1, \u03b11-adrenergic, \u03b12-adrenergic, imidazoline-1, and \u03c31 receptors. Converging lines of evidence established activation of the \u03c31 receptor at concentrations of 50\u2013100\u00a0\u03bcmol/L. Its efficacies at the other receptor binding sites are unclear. It has also been shown \"in vitro\" to be a substrate for the cell-surface serotonin transporter (SERT) expressed in human platelets, and the rat vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2), which was transiently expressed in fall armyworm Sf9 cells. DMT inhibited SERT-mediated serotonin uptake into platelets at an average concentration of 4.00 \u00b1 0.70\u00a0\u00b5mol/L and VMAT2-mediated serotonin uptake at an average concentration of 93 \u00b1 6.8\u00a0\u00b5mol/L.\nAs with other so-called \"classical hallucinogens\", a large part of DMT psychedelic effects can be attributed to a functionally selective activation of the 5-HT2A receptor. DMT concentrations eliciting 50% of its maximal effect (half maximal effective concentration = EC50 or Kact) at the human 5-HT2A receptor \"in vitro\" are in the 0.118\u20130.983\u00a0\u00b5mol/L range. This range of values coincides well with the range of concentrations measured in blood and plasma after administration of a fully psychedelic dose (see Pharmacokinetics).\nAs DMT has been shown to have slightly better efficacy (EC50) at human serotonin 2C receptor than at the 2A receptor, 5-HT2C is also likely implicated in DMT's overall effects. Other receptors, such as 5-HT1A \u03c31, may also play a role.\nIn 2009, it was hypothesized that DMT may be an endogenous ligand for the \u03c31 receptor. The concentration of DMT needed for \u03c31 activation \"in vitro\" (50\u2013100\u00a0\u00b5mol/L) is similar to the behaviorally active concentration measured in mouse brain of approximately 106\u00a0\u00b5mol/L This is minimally 4 orders of magnitude higher than the average concentrations measured in rat brain tissue or human plasma under basal conditions (see Endogenous DMT), so \u03c31 receptors are likely to be activated only under conditions of high local DMT concentrations. If DMT is stored in synaptic vesicles, such concentrations might occur during vesicular release. To illustrate, while the \"average\" concentration of serotonin in brain tissue is in the 1.5\u20134\u00a0\u00b5mol/L range, the concentration of serotonin in synaptic vesicles was measured at 270 mM. Following vesicular release, the resulting concentration of serotonin in the synaptic cleft, to which serotonin receptors are exposed, is estimated to be about 300\u00a0\u00b5mol/L. Thus, while \"in vitro\" receptor binding affinities, efficacies, and average concentrations in tissue or plasma are useful, they are not likely to predict DMT concentrations in the vesicles or at synaptic or intracellular receptors. Under these conditions, notions of receptor selectivity are moot, and it seems probable that most of the receptors identified as targets for DMT (see above) participate in producing its psychedelic effects.\nSociety and culture.\nBlack market.\nElectronic cigarette cartridges filled with DMT started to be sold on the black market in 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8750", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8750", "title": "Da capo", "text": "Musical term meaning \"from the beginning\"\nDa capo (, , ]) is an Italian musical term that means \"from the beginning\" (literally, \"from the head\"). It is often abbreviated as D.C. The term is a directive to repeat the previous part of music, often used to save space, and thus is an easier way of saying to repeat the music from the beginning.\nIn small pieces, this might be the same thing as a repeat. But in larger works, D.C. might occur after one or more repeats of small sections, indicating a return to the very beginning. The resulting structure of the piece is generally in ternary form. Sometimes, the composer describes the part to be repeated, for example: \"Menuet da capo\". In opera, where an aria of this structure is called a \"da capo aria\", the repeated section is often adorned with grace notes.\nThe word \"Fine\" (Ital. 'end') is generally placed above the stave at the point where the movement ceases after a 'Da capo' repetition. Its place is occasionally taken by a pause (see fermata).\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8751", "revid": "31162627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8751", "title": "Dominatrix", "text": "Woman who takes the dominant role in BDSM activities\nA dominatrix (; plural form\u00a0dominatrixes or dominatrices ), or domme, is a woman who takes the dominant role in BDSM activities. A dominatrix can be of any sexual orientation, but this does not necessarily limit the genders of her submissive partners. Dominatrices are popularly known for inflicting physical pain on their submissive subjects, but this is not done in every case. In some instances erotic humiliation is used, such as verbal humiliation or the assignment of humiliating tasks. Dominatrices also make use of other forms of servitude. A dominatrix is typically a paid professional (\"pro-domme\") as the term \"dominatrix\" is little-used within the non-professional BDSM scene.\nPractices of domination common to many BDSM and other various sexual relationships are also prevalent, such as various forms of body worship, vagina worship, ass worship, fellatio, foot worship; tease and denial; corporal punishment including spanking, breast torture, caning, whipping; orgasm denial; and as well as verbal humiliation, face slapping, hair pulling, dripping hot wax on the genitals, spitting, golden showers, \"forced\" chastity, cock and ball torture, and pussy torture.\nTerminology and etymology.\n\"Dominatrix\" is the feminine form of the Latin \"dominator\", a ruler or lord, and was originally used in a non-sexual sense. Its use in English dates back to at least 1561. Its earliest recorded use in the prevalent modern sense, as a female dominant in sadomasochism, dates to 1961. It was initially coined to describe a woman who provides punishment-for-pay as one of the case studies within Bruce Roger's pulp paperback \"The Bizarre Lovemakers\". The term was taken up shortly after by the Myron Kosloff title \"Dominatrix\" (with art by Eric Stanton) in 1968, and entered more popular mainstream knowledge following the 1976 film \"Dominatrix Without Mercy\".\nThe term \"domme\" is likely a coined pseudo-French feminine inflection of the slang \"dom\" (short for \"dominant\"). The use of \"domme\", \"dominatrix\", \"dom\", or \"dominant\" by any woman in a dominant role is chosen mostly by personal preference and the conventions of the local BDSM scene. The term mistress or dominant mistress is sometimes also used. Female dominance (also known as female domination or femdom) is a BDSM activity in which the dominant partner is female. However, while the term \"mistress\" is often used in the media, members of the BDSM community often avoid it, as it can be confused with \"mistress\" in the sense of a woman who has an illicit relationship with a married man, a term which has the negative implication of cheating on a partner. Since there is a large overlap between the BDSM and polyamory communities, where ethical conduct is a prime concern, any such relationship is a source of disapproval.\nAlthough the term \"dominatrix\" was not used, the classic example in literature of the female dominant-male submissive relationship is portrayed in the 1870 novella \"Venus in Furs\" by Austrian writer Leopold von Sacher-Masoch. The term \"masochism\" was later derived from the author's name by Richard von Krafft-Ebing in the latter's 1886 forensic study \"Psychopathia Sexualis\".\nHistory.\nThe history of the dominatrix is argued to date back to rituals of the Goddess Inanna (or Ishtar as she was known in Akkadian), in ancient Mesopotamia. Ancient cuneiform texts consisting of \"Hymns to Inanna\" have been cited as examples of the archetype of powerful, sexual female displaying dominating behaviors and forcing gods and men into submission to her. The pseudonymous archaeologist and BDSM historian Anne O. Nomis notes that Inanna's rituals included cross-dressing of cult personnel, and rituals \"imbued with pain and ecstasy, bringing about initiation and journeys of altered consciousness; punishment, moaning, ecstasy, lament and song, participants exhausting themselves with weeping and grief.\"\nThe tale of Phyllis and Aristotle, which became popular and gained numerous versions from the 12th century onwards, tells the story of a dominant woman who seduced and dominated the male intellect of the greatest philosopher. In the story, Phyllis forces Aristotle to kneel on the ground so that she rides on his back while whipping and verbally humiliating him.\nThe profession appears to have originated as a specialization within brothels, before becoming its own unique craft. As far back as the 1590s, flagellation within an erotic setting is recorded. The profession features in erotic prints of the era, such as the British Museum mezzotint \"The Cully Flaug'd\" (c. 1674\u20131702), and in accounts of forbidden books which record the flogging schools and the activities practised.\nWithin the 18th century, female \"Birch Disciplinarians\" advertised their services in a book masked as a collection of lectures or theatrical plays, entitled \"Fashionable Lectures\" (c. 1761). This included the names of 57 women, some actresses and courtesans, who catered to birch discipline fantasies, keeping a room with rods and cat o' nine tails, and charging their clients a Guinea for a \"lecture\".\nThe 19th century is characterised by what Nomis characterises as the \"Golden Age of the Governess\". No fewer than twenty establishments were documented as having existed by the 1840s, supported entirely by flagellation practices and known as \"Houses of Discipline\" distinct from brothels. Amongst the well-known \"dominatrix governesses\" were Mrs Chalmers, Mrs Noyeau, the late Mrs Jones of Hertford Street and London Street, the late Mrs Theresa Berkley, Bessy Burgess of York Square and Mrs Pyree of Burton Crescent. The most famous of these Governess \"female flagellants\" was Theresa Berkley, who operated her establishment on Charlotte Street in the central London district of Marylebone. She is recorded to have used implements such as whips, canes and birches, to chastise and punish her male clients, as well as the Berkley Horse, a specially designed flogging machine, and a pulley suspension system for lifting them off the floor. Such historical use of corporal punishment and suspension, in a setting of domination roleplay, connects very closely to the practices of modern-day professional dominatrices.\nThe \"bizarre style\" (as it came to be called) of leather catsuits, claws, tail whips, and latex rubber only came about in the 20th century, initially within commercial fetish photography, and taken up by dominatrices. Within the mid-20th century, dominatrices operated in a very discreet and underground manner, which has made them difficult to trace within the historical record. A few photographs still exist of the women who ran their domination businesses in London, New York, The Hague and Hamburg's Herbertstra\u00dfe, predominantly in sepia and black-and-white photographs, and scans from magazine articles, copied and re-copied. Amongst these were Miss Doreen of London who was acquainted with John Sutcliffe of \"AtomAge\" fame, whose clients reportedly included Britain's top politicians and businessmen. In New York, the dominatrix Anne Laurence was known within the underground circle of acquaintances during the 1950s, with Monique Von Cleef arriving in the early 1960s, and hitting national headlines when her home was raided by police detectives on 22 December 1965. Von Cleef went on to set up her \"House of Pain\" in The Hague in the 1970s, which became one of the world capitals for dominatrices, reportedly with visiting lawyers, ambassadors, diplomats and politicians. Domenica Niehoff worked as a dominatrix in Hamburg and appeared on talk shows on German television from the 1970s onwards, campaigning for sex workers' rights. Mistress Raven, founder and manager of Pandora's Box, one of New York's best known BDSM studios, was featured in Nick Broomfield's 1996 documentary film \"Fetishes\".\nProfessional dominatrices.\nThe term \"dominatrix\" is mostly used to describe a female professional dominant (or \"pro-domme\") who is paid to engage in BDSM play with a submissive. Professional dominatrices are not prostitutes, despite the sensual and erotic interactions they have. An appointment or roleplay is referred to as a \"session\", and is often conducted in a dedicated professional play space which has been set up with specialist equipment, known as a \"dungeon\". Sessions may also be conducted remotely by letter or telephone, or in the contemporary era of technological connectivity by email, online chat or platforms such as OnlyFans. Most, but not all, clients of female professional dominants are men. Male professional dominants also exist, catering predominantly to the gay male market.\nWomen who engage in female domination typically promote and title themselves under the terms \"dominatrix\", \"mistress\", \"lady\", \"madame\", \"\" (German for \"mistress\") or \"goddess\". In a study of German dominatrices, Andrew Wilson said that the trend for dominatrices choosing names aimed at creating and maintaining an atmosphere in which class, femininity and mystery are key elements of their self-constructed identity.\nSome professional dominatrices set minimum age limits for their clients. Popular requests from clients are for dungeon play including bondage, spanking and cock and ball torture, or for medical play using hoods, gas masks and urethral sounding. Verbal erotic humiliation, such as small penis humiliation, is also popular. There are some professional dominatrices that engage in sexual contact activities such as facesitting, handjobs or fellatio but others disapprove of this. It is not unusual for a dominatrix to consider her profession different from that of an escort and not perform tie and tease or \"happy endings\". Typically professional dominatrices do not have sexual intercourse with their clients, do not become naked with their clients and do not allow their clients to touch them. The Canadian dominatrix Terri-Jean Bedford, who was one of three women who initiated an application in the Ontario Superior Court seeking invalidation of Canada's laws regarding brothels, sought to differentiate for clarity her occupation as a dominatrix rather than a prostitute to the media, due to frequent misunderstanding and conflation by the public of the two terms.\nThat being said, it is now generally accepted that a professional dominatrix is a sex worker, and many of the acts conducted during a session may be interpreted as equally sexual to the participants.\nWhile dominatrices come from many different backgrounds, it has been shown that a considerable number are well-educated. Research into US dominatrices published in 2012 indicated that 39% of the sample studied had received some sort of graduate training.\nA 1985 study suggested that about 30 percent of participants in BDSM subculture were female. A 1994 report indicated that around a quarter of the women who took part in BDSM subculture did so professionally. In a 1995 study of Internet discussion group messages, the preference for the dominant-initiator role was expressed by 11% of messages by heterosexual women, compared to 71% of messages by heterosexual men.\nProfessional dominatrices can be seen advertising their services online and in print publications which carry erotic services advertising, such as contact magazines and fetish magazines that specialise in female domination. The precise number of women actively offering professional domination services is unknown. Most professional dominatrices practice in large metropolitan cities such as New York, Los Angeles, and London, with as many as 200 women working as dominatrices in Los Angeles.\nProfessional dominatrices may take pride or differentiation in their psychological insight into their clients' fetishes and desires, as well as their technical ability to perform complex BDSM practices, such as Japanese shibari, head-scissoring, and other forms of bondage, suspension, torture roleplay, and corporal punishment, and other such practices which require a high degree of knowledge and competency to safely oversee. From a sociological point of view, Danielle Lindemann has stated the \"embattled purity regime\" in which many pro-dommes emphasise their specialist knowledge and professional skills, while distancing themselves from economic criteria for success, in a way which is comparable to avant-garde artists.\nSome dominatrices practice financial domination, or findom, a fetish in which a submissive is aroused by sending money or gifts to a dominatrix at her instruction. In some cases the dominatrix is given control of the submissive's finances or a \"blackmail\" scenario is acted out. In the majority of cases the dominatrix and the submissive do not physically meet. The interactions are typically performed using the Internet, which is also where such services are advertised. Findom was originally a niche service that a traditional dominatrix would offer, but it has become popular with less-experienced online practitioners.\nTo differentiate women who identify as a dominatrix but do not offer paid services, non-professional dominants are occasionally referred to as a \"lifestyle\" dominatrix or Mistress. The term \"lifestyle\" to signify BDSM is occasionally a contention topic in the BDSM community and that some dominatrices may dislike the term. Some professional dominatrices are also \"lifestyle\" dominatrices\u2014i.e., in addition to paid sessions with submissive clients they engage in unpaid recreational sessions or may incorporate power exchange within their own private lives and relationships. However, the term has fallen out of general usage with respect to women who are dominant in their private relationships, and has taken on more and more the connotation of \"professional\". Nathalie Lugand in her 2023 book \"A Psychodynamic Approach to Female Domination in BDSM Relationships\" describes this strict separation as artificial.\nNotable dominatrices.\nCatherine Robbe-Grillet is a lifestyle dominatrix. Born in Paris on September 24, 1930, she then became France's most famous lifestyle dominatrix. She is also a writer and actress, the widow of nouveau roman pioneer and sadist Alain Robbe-Grillet. She currently lives with Beverly Charpentier, a 51-year-old South African woman who is her submissive companion. Although being such a famous dominatrix, she has never accepted payment for her \"ceremonies\". She's quoted as saying \"If someone pays, then they are in charge. I need to remain free. It is important that everyone involved knows that I do it solely for my pleasure.\" \"Catherine is my secret garden,\" Charpentier says. \"I have given myself to her, body and soul. She does whatever she wants, whenever she wants, with either or both, according to her pleasure\u2014and her pleasure is also my pleasure.\" Robbe-Grillet has been criticised for writing about S/M stories. She identifies as a \"pro-sex feminist\" and \"the kind of feminist who supports the right of any man or woman to work as a prostitute, if it is their free choice.\"\nSimone Justice is a BDSM educator who teaches Dommecraft based on her experience as a dominatrix and psychotherapist.\nMiss Lila Sage is an international dominatrix, hypnotherapist, and immersive experience producer. Sage is the creator and host of F\u00e9tische, a live theatrical experience and \"BDSM tasting\".\nImagery.\nThe dominatrix is a symbolic female archetype. In popular culture, the conception of the dominatrix is generally associated with specialized clothing and props used to signify her role as a strong, dominant, sexualised woman. This role is linked to but distinct from images of sexual fetish. During the twentieth century, dominatrix imagery was developed by the work of a number of artists including the costume designer and photographer Charles Guyette, the publisher and film director Irving Klaw, and the illustrators Eric Stanton and Gene Bilbrew who drew for the fetish magazine Exotique.\nOne of the garments associated with the dominatrix is the catsuit. The black leather female catsuit entered dominant fetish culture in the 1950s with the \"AtomAge\" magazine and its connections to fetish fashion designer John Sutcliffe. Its appearance in mainstream culture began when catsuits were worn by strong female protagonists in popular 1960s TV programs like \"The Avengers\" and by comic super-heroines such as Catwoman. The catsuit represented the independence of a woman capable of \"kick-ass\" moves and action, giving complete freedom of movement. At the same time, the one-piece catsuit accentuated and exaggerated the sexualized female form, providing visual access to a woman's body, while simultaneously obstructing physical penetrative access. \"You can look but you can't touch\" is the message, which plays upon the BDSM practice known as \"tease and denial\".\nAnother common image is that of a dominatrix wearing thigh-high boots in leather or shiny PVC, which have long held a fetishistic status and are sometimes called kinky boots, along with very high stiletto heels. Fishnet stockings, seamed hosiery, stockings and garter belts (suspenders) are also used in the representation and attire of dominatrices, to emphasize the form and length of the legs with erotic connotation.\nTight leather corsets are another popular dominatrix garment. Gloves, whether long opera gloves or fingerless gloves, are often a further accessory to emphasize the feminine role. Neck corsets are also sometimes worn.\nDominatrices frequently wear clothing made from fetish fashion materials. Examples include PVC clothing, latex clothing and garments drawn from the leather subculture. In some cases elements of dominatrix attire, such as leather boots and peaked cap, are drawn from Nazi chic, particularly the black SS officer's uniform which has been widely adopted and fetishized by underground gay and BDSM lifestyle groups to satisfy a uniform fetish.\nA dominatrix often uses strong, dominant body language which is comparable to dominant posturing in the animal world. The props she brandishes signify her role as dominatrix, such as a flogger, whip or riding crop as illustrated in the artwork of Bruno Zach in the early 20th century.\nAnother often-depicted characteristic of the dominatrix character is of smoking, either of tobacco cigarettes or cannabis products. While smoking tobacco has been in rapid decline worldwide, depiction of it in BDSM literature and media is increasing, as the negative image of smoking reinforces the \"bad girl\" stereotype associated with a dominatrix.\nPracticing professional dominatrices may draw their attire from the conventional imagery associated with the role, or adapt it to create their own individual style. There is a potential conflict between meeting conventional expectations and a desire for dominant independent self-expression. Some contemporary dominatrices draw upon an eclectic range of strong female archetypes, including the goddess, the female superheroine, the femme fatale, the priestess, the empress, the queen, the governess and the KGB secret agent.\nIn literature.\nThemes associated with the dominatrix character have appeared in literature since the 10th century. Canoness Hroswitha, in her manuscript \"Maria,\" uses the word \"Dominatrix\" for the main character. She is portrayed as an unattainable woman who is too good for any of the men who are in love with her. The theme of \"the unattainable woman\" has been used thoroughly in medieval literature as well, although it differs from a dominatrix. Medieval themes surrounding the unattainable woman concerned issues of social classes and structure, with chivalry being a prime part of a relationship between a man and woman. There are some exceptions to this trend during medieval times. In Cervantes\u2019 \"Don Quixote\" (1605), Celadon is imprisoned by Galatea. Celadon complains that his \"mistress . . . Galatea keeps me on such a short leash\". In Robert Herrick's \"Hesperides\", a book of poems published in 1648, there were three revealing poems \"An Hymne to Love\", \"The Dream\", and \"To Love\" which showcase masculine longing for domination, restraint, discipline. In \"Ulysses\" by James Joyce, the character Leopold Bloom has many fantasies of submission to a lady and to receive whippings by her.\nIn popular culture.\nThere have been a number of depictions of dominatrices in film and television, almost always featuring a professional dominatrix. Depictions of dominatrices in popular culture include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8752", "revid": "34775917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8752", "title": "Flag of Denmark", "text": "National flag\nThe national flag of Denmark (, ]) is red with a white Nordic cross, which means that the cross extends to the edges of the flag and the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side.\nA banner with a white-on-red cross is attested as having been used by the kings of Denmark since the 14th century. An origin legend with considerable impact on Danish national historiography connects the introduction of the flag to the Battle of Lindanise of 1219. \nThe elongated Nordic cross, which represents Christianity, reflects its use as a maritime flag in the 18th century. The flag became popular as a national flag in the early 16th century. Its private use was outlawed in 1834 but again permitted by a regulation of 1854. The flag holds the world record of being the oldest continuously used national flag.\nDescription.\nIn 1748, a regulation defined the correct lengths of the two last fields in the flag as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6\u20444.\nIn May 1893 a new regulation to all chiefs of police stated that the police should not intervene, if the two last fields in the flag were longer than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6\u20444 as long as these did not exceed &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20444, and provided that this was the only rule violated.\nThis regulation is still in effect today and thus the legal proportions of the National flag today are 3:1:3 in width and anywhere between 3:1:4.5 and 3:1:5.25 in length.\nNo official definition of \"Dannebrog r\u00f8d\" exists. The private company \"Dansk Standard\", regulation number 359 (2005), defines the red colour of the flag as Pantone 186c.\nHistory.\n1219 origin legend.\nA tradition recorded in the 16th century traces the origin of the flag to the campaigns of Valdemar II of Denmark (r. 1202\u20131241). The oldest of them is in Christiern Pedersen's \"Danske Kr\u00f8nike\", which is a sequel to Saxo's Gesta Danorum, written 1520\u201323. Here, the flag falls from the sky during one of Valdemar's military campaigns overseas. Pedersen also states that the very same flag was taken into exile by Eric of Pomerania in 1440.\nThe second source is the writing of the Franciscan friar Petrus Olai (Peder Olsen) of Roskilde (died c. 1570). This record describes a battle in 1208 near Fellin during the Estonia campaign of King Valdemar II. The Danes were all but defeated when a lamb-skin banner depicting a white cross fell from the sky and miraculously led to a Danish victory. In a third account, also by Petrus Olai, in \"Danmarks Tolv Herligheder\" (\"Twelve Splendours of Denmark\"), in splendour number nine, the same story is re-told almost verbatim, with a paragraph inserted correcting the year to 1219. Now, the flag is falling from the sky in the Battle of Lindanise, also known as the Battle of Valdemar (Danish: \"Volmerslaget\"), near Lindanise (Tallinn) in Estonia, of 15 June 1219.\nIt is this third account that has been the most influential, and some historians have treated it as the primary account taken from a (lost) source dating to the first half of the 15th century.\nIn Olai's account, the battle was going badly, and defeat seemed imminent. However the Danish Bishop Anders Sunesen, on top of a hill overlooking the battle, prayed to God with his arms raised, and the Danes moved closer to victory the more he prayed. When he raised his arms the Danes surged forward but when his arms grew tired and he let them fall, the Estonians turned the Danes back. Attendants rushed forward to raise his arms once again and the Danes again surged forward. But for a second time he grew so tired that he dropped his arms and the Danes again lost the advantage and were moving closer to defeat. He needed two soldiers to keep his hands up. When the Danes were about to lose, 'Dannebrog' miraculously fell from the sky and the King took it, showed it to the troops, their hearts were filled with courage, and the Danes won the battle.\nThe possible historical nucleus behind this origin legend was extensively discussed by Danish historians in the 19th to 20th centuries. One such example is Adolf Ditlev J\u00f8rgensen, who argued that Bishop Theoderich was the original instigator of the 1218 inquiry from Bishop Albert of Buxhoeveden to King Valdemar II which led to the Danish participation in the Baltic crusades. J\u00f8rgensen speculates that Bishop Theoderich might have carried the Knight Hospitaller's banner in the 1219 battle and that \"the enemy thought this was the King's symbol and mistakenly stormed Bishop Theoderich tent. He claims that the origin of the legend of the falling flag comes from this confusion in the battle.\"\nThe Danish church-historian L. P. Fabricius (1934) ascribes the origin to the 1208 Battle of Fellin, not the Battle of Lindanise in 1219, based on the earliest source available about the story. Fabricius speculated that it might have been Archbishop Andreas Sunes\u00f8n's personal ecclesiastical banner or perhaps even the flag of Archbishop Absalon, under whose initiative and supervision several smaller crusades had already been conducted in Estonia. The banner would then already be known in Estonia. Fabricius repeats J\u00f8rgensen's idea about the flag being planted in front of Bishop Theodorik's tent, which the enemy mistakenly attacked believing it to be the tent of the King.\nA different theory is briefly discussed by Fabricius and elaborated more by Helge Bruhn (1949). Bruhn interprets the story in the context of the widespread tradition of the miraculous appearance of crosses in the sky in Christian legend, specifically comparing such an event attributed to a battle of 10 September 1217 near Alcazar, where it is said that a golden cross on white appeared in the sky, to bring victory to the Christians.\nIn Swedish national historiography of the 18th century, there is a tale paralleling the Danish legend, in which \na golden cross appears in the blue sky during a Swedish battle in Finland in 1157.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe white-on-red cross emblem originates in the age of the Crusades. In the 12th century, it was also used as war flag by the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn the \"Gelre Armorial\", dated c. 1340\u20131370, such a banner is shown alongside the coat of arms of the king of Denmark. This is the earliest known undisputed colour rendering of the Dannebrog. At about the same time, Valdemar IV of Denmark displays a cross in his coat of arms on his \"Dan\u00e6log\" seal (\"Rettertingsseglet\", dated 1356). The image from the Armorial Gelre is nearly identical to an image found in a 15th-century coat of arms book now located in the National Archives of Sweden (\"Riksarkivet\"). The seal of Eric of Pomerania (1398) as king of the Kalmar union displays the arms of Denmark's chief dexter, three lions. In this version, the lions are holding a Dannebrog banner.\nThe reason why the kings of Denmark in the 14th century begin displaying the cross banner in their coats of arms is unknown. Caspar Paludan-M\u00fcller (1873) suggested that it may reflect a banner sent by the pope to support the Danish king during the Livonian Crusade. Adolf Ditlev J\u00f8rgensen (1875) identifies the banner as that of the Knights Hospitaller, which order had a presence in Denmark from the later 12th century.\nSeveral coins, seals, and images exist, both foreign and domestic, from the 13th to 15th centuries and even earlier, showing heraldic designs similar to Dannebrog, alongside the royal coat of arms (three blue lions on a golden shield.)\nThere is a record suggesting that the Danish army had a \"chief banner\" (\"hoffuitbanner\") in the early 16th century. Such a banner is mentioned in 1570 by Niels Hemmings\u00f8n in the context of a 1520 battle between Danes and Swedes near Uppsala as nearly captured by the Swedes but saved by the heroic actions of the banner-carrier Mogens Gyldenstierne and Peder Skram. The legend attributing the miraculous origin of the flag to the campaigns of Valdemar II of Denmark (r. 1202\u20131241) was recorded by Christiern Pedersen and Petrus Olai in the 1520s.\nHans Svaning's \"History of King Hans\" from 1558 to 1559 and Johan Rantzau's \"History about the Last Dithmarschen War\", from 1569, record the further fate of the Danish \"hoffuitbanner\": According to this tradition, the original flag from the Battle of Lindanise was used in the small campaign of 1500 when King Hans tried to conquer Dithmarschen (in western Holstein in the north Germany). The flag was lost in a devastating defeat at the Battle of Hemmingstedt on 17 February 1500. In 1559, King Frederik II recaptured it during his own Dithmarschen campaign.\nIn 1576, the son of \"Johan Rantzau\", Henrik Rantzau, also writes about the war and the fate of the flag, noting that the flag was in a poor condition when returned. He records that the flag after its return to Denmark was placed in the cathedral in Slesvig. Slesvig historian Ulrik Petersen (1656\u20131735) confirms the presence of such a banner in the cathedral in the early 17th century and records that it had crumbled away by about 1660.\nContemporary records describing the battle of Hemmingstedt make no reference to the loss of the original Dannebrog, although the capitulation state that all Danish banners lost in 1500 was to be returned. In a letter dated 22 February 1500 to Oluf Stigs\u00f8n, King John describes the battle but does not mention the loss of an important flag. In fact, the entire letter gives the impression that the lost battle was of limited importance. In 1598, Neocorus wrote that the banner captured in 1500 was brought to the church in W\u00f6hrden and hung there for the next 59 years until it was returned to the Danes as part of the peace settlement in 1559.\nModern period.\nUsed as a maritime flag since the 16th century, the Dannebrog was introduced as a regimental flag in the Danish army in 1785, and for the militia (landev\u00e6rn) in 1801. From 1842, it was used as the flag of the entire army.\nDuring the first half of the 19th century, in parallel to the development of Romantic nationalism in other European countries, the military flag increasingly came to be seen as representing the nation itself. Poems of this period invoking the \"Dannebrog\" were written by B.S. Ingemann, N.F.S. Grundtvig, Oehlenschl\u00e4ger, Chr. Winther and H.C. Andersen. By the 1830s, the military flag had become popular as an unofficial national flag, and its use by private citizens was outlawed in a circular enacted on 7 January 1834.\nIn the national enthusiasm sparked by the First Schleswig War during 1848\u20131850, the flag was still very widely displayed, and the prohibition of private use was repealed in a regulation of 7 July 1854, for the first time allowing Danish citizens to display the Dannebrog (but not the swallow-tailed \"Splitflag\" variant). Special permission to use the \"Splitflag\" was given to individual institutions and private companies, especially after 1870. In 1886, the war ministry introduced a regulation indicating that the flag should be flown from military buildings on thirteen specified days, including royal birthdays, the date of the signing of the Constitution of 5 June 1849 and on days of remembrance for military battles. In 1913, the naval ministry issued its own list of flag days. On 10 April 1915, the hoisting of any \"other\" flag on Danish soil was prohibited. From 1939 until 2012, the yearbook \"Hvem-Hvad-Hvor\" included a list of flag days. As of 2019 flag days can be viewed at the \"Ministry of Justice (Justitsministeriet)\" as well as \"The Denmark Society (Danmarks-Samfundet)\".\nVariants.\nMaritime flag and corresponding Kingdom flag.\n \"Rigets flag\" \u2013 the Danish state flag Also known as the \"Splitflag\".&lt;br&gt; Proportions: 56:107\n The \"Orlogsflag\" \u2013 the Danish naval flag.&lt;br&gt; Proportions: 7:17\nThe size and shape of the civil ensign (\"Koffardiflaget\") for merchant ships is given in the regulation of 11 June 1748, which says: \"A red flag with a white cross with no split end. The white cross must be &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20447 of the flag's height. The two first fields must be square in form and the two outer fields must be &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6\u20444 lengths of those\". The proportions are thus: 3:1:3 vertically and 3:1:4.5 horizontally. This definition are the absolute proportions for the Danish national flag to this day, for both the civil version of the flag (\"\"Stutflaget\"), as well as the merchant flag (\"Handelsflaget\"\"). The civil flag and the merchant flag are identical in colour and design.\nA regulation passed in 1758 required Danish ships sailing in the Mediterranean to carry the royal cypher in the center of the flag in order to distinguish them from Maltese ships, due to the similarity of the flag of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta.\nAccording to the regulation of 11 June 1748 the colour was simply red, which is common known today as \"Dannebrog r\u00f8d\" (\"Dannebrog red\"). The only available red fabric dye in 1748 was made of madder root, which can be processed to produce a brilliant red dye (used historically for British soldiers' jackets). A regulation of 4 May 1927 once again states that Danish merchant ships have to fly flags according to the regulation of 1748.\nThe first regulation regarding the \"Splitflag\" dates from 27 March 1630, in which King Christian IV orders that Norwegian \"Defensionskibe\" (armed merchants ships) may only use the \"Splitflag\" if they are in Danish war service. In 1685 an order, distributed to a number of cities in Slesvig, states that all ships must carry the Danish flag, and in 1690 all merchant ships are forbidden to use the \"Splitflag\", with the exception of ships sailing in the East Indies, West Indies and along the coast of Africa. In 1741 it is confirmed that the regulation of 1690 is still very much in effect; that merchant ships may not use the \"Splitflag\". At the same time the Danish East India Company is allowed to fly the \"Splitflag\" when past the equator.\nSome confusion must have existed regarding the \"Splitflag\". In 1696 the Admiralty presented the King with a proposal for a standard regulating both size and shape of the \"Splitflag\". In the same year a royal resolution defines the proportions of the \"Splitflag\", which in this resolution is called \"Kongeflaget\" (the King's flag), as follows: \"The cross must be &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20447 of the flags height. The two first fields must be square in form with the sides three times the cross width. The two outer fields are rectangular and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 the length of the square fields. The tails are the length of the flag\".\nThese numbers are the basic for the \"Splitflag\", or \"Orlogsflag\", today, though the numbers have been slightly altered. The term \"Orlogsflag\" dates from 1806 and denotes use in the Danish Navy.\nFrom about 1750 to the early 19th century, a number of ships and companies which the government has interests in, received approval to use the \"Splitflag\".\nIn the royal resolution of 25 October 1939 for the Danish Navy, it is stated that the \"Orlogsflag\" is a \"Splitflag\" with a deep red (\"\"dybr\u00f8d\") or madder red (\"krapr\u00f8d\"\") colour. Like the National flag, no nuance is given, but in modern days this is given as 195U. Furthermore, the size and shape is corrected in this resolution to be: \"The cross must be &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20447 of the flag's height. The two first fields must be square in form with the height of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20447 of the flag's height. The two outer fields are rectangular and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20444 the length of the square fields. The tails are &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6\u20444 the length of the rectangular fields\". Thus, if compared to the standard of 1696, both the rectangular fields and the tails have decreased in size.\nThe \"Splitflag\" and \"Orlogsflag\" have similar shapes but different sizes and shades of red. Legally, they are two different flags. The \"Splitflag\" is a Danish flag ending in a swallow-tail, it is \"Dannebrog red\", and is used on land. The \"Orlogsflag\" is an elongated \"Splitflag\" with a deeper red colour and is only used on sea.\nThe \"Orlogsflag\" with no markings, may only be used by the Royal Danish Navy. There are though a few exceptions to this. A few institutions have been allowed to fly the clean \"Orlogsflag\". The same flag with markings has been approved for a few dozen companies and institutions over the years.\nFurthermore, the \"Orlogsflag\" is only described as such if it has no additional markings. Any swallow-tail flag, no matter the colour, is called a \"Splitflag\" provided it bears additional markings.\nRoyal standards.\nThe current version of the royal standard was introduced on 16 November 1972 when the Queen adopted a new version of her personal coat of arms. The royal standard is the flag of Denmark with a swallow-tail and charged with the monarch's coat of arms set in a white square. The centre square is 32 parts in a flag with the ratio 56:107.\n Royal standard of Denmark\nOther flags in the Kingdom of Denmark.\nGreenland and the Faroe Islands are autonomous territories within the Kingdom of Denmark. They have their own official flags.\nSome areas in Denmark have unofficial flags. While they have no legal recognition or regulation, they can be used freely.\nThe regional flags of Bornholm and \u00c6r\u00f8 are occasionally used by locals of those islands and in tourist-related businesses. \nThe proposal for a flag of Jutland has hardly found any actual use, maybe in part due to its peculiar design. \nThe flag of Vendsyssel (Vendelbrog) is seen infrequently, but many locals recognise it. According to an article in the newspaper Nordjyske, the flag had been used in the former insignia of Flight Eskadrille 723 of Aalborg Air Base, in the 1980s.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8753", "revid": "7600237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8753", "title": "Dharma", "text": "Key concept in Indian philosophy and Eastern religions, with multiple meanings\nDharma (; , ] (); ), although there is no direct single-word translation for \"dharma\" in European languages, is commonly translated as \"righteousness\", \"merit\" or \"religious and moral duties\" governing individual conduct. It is a key concept with multiple meanings in Indian religions, such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism and others. \nIn Hinduism, dharma is one of the four components of the \"Puru\u1e63\u0101rtha\", the aims of life, and signifies behaviours that are considered to be in accord with \"\u1e5ata\", the order that makes life and universe possible. It includes duties, rights, laws, conduct, virtues and \"right way of living\". It had a transtemporal validity. \nIn Buddhism, dharma means \"cosmic law and order\", as expressed by the teachings of the Buddha. In Buddhist philosophy, \"dhamma/dharma\" is also the term for \"phenomena\". Dharma in Jainism refers to the teachings of \"Tirthankara\" (\"Jina\") and the body of doctrine pertaining to the purification and moral transformation of human beings. In Sikhism, dharma means the path of righteousness and proper religious practice and one's own moral duties toward God.\nThe concept of dharma was already in use in the historical Vedic religion, and its meaning and conceptual scope have evolved over several millennia. The ancient Tamil moral text \"Tirukku\u1e5fa\u1e37\", despite being a collection of aphoristic teachings on dharma (\"aram\"), artha (\"porul\"), and kama (\"inpam\"), is completely and exclusively based on \"a\u1e5fam\", the Tamil term for dharma. As with the other components of the \"Puru\u1e63\u0101rtha\", the concept of dharma is pan-Indian. The antonym of dharma is \"adharma\".\nEtymology.\nThe word \"dharma\" has roots in the Sanskrit \"dhr-\", which means \"to hold\" or \"to support\", and is related to Latin \"firmus\" (firm, stable). From this, it takes the meaning of \"what is established or firm\", and hence \"law\". It is derived from an older Vedic Sanskrit \"n\"-stem \"dharman-\", with a literal meaning of \"bearer, supporter\", in a religious sense conceived as an aspect of Rta.\nIn the Rigveda, the word appears as an \"n\"-stem, \"\", with a range of meanings encompassing \"something established or firm\" (in the literal sense of prods or poles). Figuratively, it means \"sustainer\" and \"supporter\" (of deities). It is semantically similar to the Greek \"themis\" (\"fixed decree, statute, law\"). \nIn Classical Sanskrit, and in the Vedic Sanskrit of the Atharvaveda, the stem is thematic: \"\" (Devanagari: \u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e). In Prakrit and Pali, it is rendered \"dhamma\". In some contemporary Indian languages and dialects it alternatively occurs as \"dharm\".\nIn the 3rd century BCE the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka translated \"dharma\" into Greek and Aramaic and he used the Greek word \"eusebeia\" (\u03b5\u1f50\u03c3\u03ad\u03b2\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1, piety, spiritual maturity, or godliness) in the Kandahar Bilingual Rock Inscription and the Kandahar Greek Edicts. In the Kandahar Bilingual Rock Inscription he used the Aramaic word (\"\"; truth, rectitude).\nDefinition.\nDharma is a concept of central importance in Indian philosophy and religion. It has multiple meanings in Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism and Jainism. It is difficult to provide a single concise definition for \"dharma\", as the word has a long and varied history and straddles a complex set of meanings and interpretations. There is no equivalent single-word synonym for \"dharma\" in western languages.\nThere have been numerous, conflicting attempts to translate ancient Sanskrit literature with the word \"dharma\" into German, English and French. The concept, claims Paul Horsch, has caused exceptional difficulties for modern commentators and translators. For example, while Grassmann's translation of Rig-Veda identifies seven different meanings of dharma, Karl Friedrich Geldner in his translation of the Rig-Veda employs 20 different translations for dharma, including meanings such as \"law\", \"order\", \"duty\", \"custom\", \"quality\", and \"model\", among others. However, the word \"dharma\" has become a widely accepted loanword in English, and is included in all modern unabridged English dictionaries.\nThe root of the word \"dharma\" is \"dhr\u0325\", which means \"to support, hold, or bear\". It is the thing that regulates the course of change by not participating in change, but that principle which remains constant. Monier-Williams, the widely cited resource for definitions and explanation of Sanskrit words and concepts of Hinduism, offers numerous definitions of the word \"dharma\", such as that which is established or firm, steadfast decree, statute, law, practice, custom, duty, right, justice, virtue, morality, ethics, religion, religious merit, good works, nature, character, quality, property. Yet, each of these definitions is incomplete, while the combination of these translations does not convey the total sense of the word. In common parlance, \"dharma\" means \"right way of living\" and \"path of rightness\". Dharma also has connotations of order, and when combined with the word \"sanatana\", it can also be described as eternal truth.\nThe meaning of the word \"dharma\" depends on the context, and its meaning has evolved as ideas of Hinduism have developed through history. In the earliest texts and ancient myths of Hinduism, \"dharma\" meant cosmic law, the rules that created the universe from chaos, as well as rituals; in later Vedas, Upanishads, Puranas and the Epics, the meaning became refined, richer, and more complex, and the word was applied to diverse contexts.\nIn certain contexts, \"dharma\" designates human behaviours considered necessary for order of things in the universe, principles that prevent chaos, behaviours and action necessary to all life in nature, society, family as well as at the individual level. \"Dharma\" encompasses ideas such as duty, rights, character, vocation, religion, customs and all behaviour considered appropriate, correct or morally upright. For further context, the word \"varnasramdharma\" is often used in its place, defined as dharma specifically related to the stage of life one is in.\nThe antonym of \"dharma\" is \"adharma\" (Sanskrit: \u0905\u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e), meaning that which is \"not dharma\". As with \"dharma\", the word \"adharma\" includes and implies many ideas; in common parlance, adharma means that which is against nature, immoral, unethical, wrong or unlawful.\nIn Buddhism, \"dharma\" incorporates the teachings and doctrines of the founder of Buddhism, the Buddha.\nHistory.\nAccording to Pandurang Vaman Kane, author of the authoritative book \"History of Dharma\u015b\u0101stra\", the word \"dharma\" appears at least fifty-six times in the hymns of the Rigveda, as an adjective or noun. According to Paul Horsch, the word \"dharma\" has its origin in Vedic Hinduism. The hymns of the Rig Veda claim Brahman created the universe from chaos, they hold (dhar-) the earth and sun and stars apart, they support (dhar-) the sky away and distinct from earth, and they stabilise (dhar-) the quaking mountains and plains. \nThe gods, mainly Indra, then deliver and hold order from disorder, harmony from chaos, stability from instability \u2013 actions recited in the Veda with the root of word dharma. In hymns composed after the mythological verses, the word dharma takes expanded meaning as a cosmic principle and appears in verses independent of gods. It evolves into a concept, claims Paul Horsch, that has a dynamic functional sense in Atharvaveda for example, where it becomes the cosmic law that links cause and effect through a subject. Dharma, in these ancient texts, also takes a ritual meaning. The ritual is connected to the cosmic, and \"dharmani\" is equated to ceremonial devotion to the principles that gods used to create order from disorder, the world from chaos. \nPast the ritual and cosmic sense of dharma that link the current world to mythical universe, the concept extends to an ethical-social sense that links human beings to each other and to other life forms. It is here that dharma as a concept of law emerges in Hinduism.\nDharma and related words are found in the oldest Vedic literature of Hinduism, in later Vedas, Upanishads, Puranas, and the Epics; the word dharma also plays a central role in the literature of other Indian religions founded later, such as Buddhism and Jainism. According to Brereton, \"Dharman\" occurs 63 times in Rig-veda; in addition, words related to Dharman also appear in Rig-veda, for example once as dharmakrt, 6 times as \"satyadharman\", and once as \"dharmavant\", 4 times as \"dharman\" and twice as \"dhariman\".\nIndo-European parallels for \"dharma\" are known, but the only Iranian equivalent is Old Persian \"darm\u0101n\" \"remedy\", the meaning of which is rather removed from Indo-Aryan \"dh\u00e1rman\", suggesting that the word \"dharma\" did not have a major role in the Indo-Iranian period, and was principally developed more recently under the Vedic tradition. \nHowever, it is thought that the \"Daena\" of Zoroastrianism, also meaning the \"eternal Law\" or \"religion\", is related to Sanskrit \"dharma\". \nIdeas in parts overlapping to \"Dharma\" are found in other ancient cultures: such as Chinese Tao, Egyptian Maat, Sumerian Me.\nEusebeia and dharma.\nIn the mid-20th century, an inscription of the Indian Emperor Asoka from the year 258 BC was discovered in Afghanistan, the Kandahar Bilingual Rock Inscription. This rock inscription contains Greek and Aramaic text. According to Paul Hacker, on the rock appears a Greek rendering for the Sanskrit word dharma: the word eusebeia. \nScholars of Hellenistic Greece explain eusebeia as a complex concept. Eusebia means not only to venerate gods, but also spiritual maturity, a reverential attitude toward life, and includes the right conduct toward one's parents, siblings and children, the right conduct between husband and wife, and the conduct between biologically unrelated people. This rock inscription, concludes Paul Hacker, suggests dharma in India, about 2300 years ago, was a central concept and meant not only religious ideas, but ideas of right, of good, of one's duty toward the human community.\nRta, maya and dharma.\nThe evolving literature of Hinduism linked \"dharma\" to two other important concepts: \"\u1e5ata\" and \"M\u0101y\u0101\". \u1e5ata in Vedas is the truth and cosmic principle which regulates and coordinates the operation of the universe and everything within it. M\u0101y\u0101 in Rig-veda and later literature means illusion, fraud, deception, magic that misleads and creates disorder, thus is contrary to reality, laws and rules that establish order, predictability and harmony. Paul Horsch suggests \u1e5ata and dharma are parallel concepts, the former being a cosmic principle, the latter being of moral social sphere; while M\u0101y\u0101 and dharma are also correlative concepts, the former being that which corrupts law and moral life, the later being that which strengthens law and moral life.\nDay proposes dharma is a manifestation of \u1e5ata, but suggests \u1e5ata may have been subsumed into a more complex concept of dharma, as the idea developed in ancient India over time in a nonlinear manner. The following verse from the Rigveda is an example where \"rta\" and dharma are linked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;O Indra, lead us on the path of Rta, on the right path over all evils...\nHinduism.\nDharma is an organising principle in Hinduism that applies to human beings in solitude, in their interaction with human beings and nature, as well as between inanimate objects, to all of cosmos and its parts. It refers to the order and customs which make life and universe possible, and includes behaviours, rituals, rules that govern society, and ethics. Hindu dharma includes the religious duties, moral rights and duties of each individual, as well as behaviours that enable social order, right conduct, and those that are virtuous. Dharma, according to Van Buitenen, is that which all existing beings must accept and respect to sustain harmony and order in the world. It is neither the act nor the result, but the natural laws that guide the act and create the result to prevent chaos in the world. It is innate characteristic, that makes the being what it is. It is, claims Van Buitenen, the pursuit and execution of one's nature and true calling, thus playing one's role in cosmic concert. In Hinduism, it is the dharma of the bee to make honey, of cow to give milk, of sun to radiate sunshine, of river to flow. In terms of humanity, dharma is the need for, the effect of and essence of service and interconnectedness of all life.\nIn its true essence, dharma means for a Hindu to \"expand the mind\". Furthermore, it represents the direct connection between the individual and the societal phenomena that bind the society together. In the way societal phenomena affect the conscience of the individual, similarly may the actions of an individual alter the course of the society, for better or for worse. This has been subtly echoed by the credo \u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e\u094b \u0927\u093e\u0930\u092f\u0924\u093f \u092a\u094d\u0930\u091c\u093e: meaning dharma is that which holds and provides support to the social construct.\nIn Hinduism, \"dharma\" generally includes various aspects:\nIn Vedas and Upanishads.\nThe history section of this article discusses the development of dharma concept in Vedas. This development continued in the Upanishads and later ancient scripts of Hinduism. In Upanishads, the concept of dharma continues as universal principle of law, order, harmony, and truth. It acts as the regulatory moral principle of the Universe. It is explained as law of righteousness and equated to \"satya\" (Sanskrit: \u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0902, truth), in hymn 1.4.14 of Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e\u0903 \u0924\u0938\u094d\u092e\u093e\u0926\u094d\u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e\u093e\u0924\u094d \u092a\u0930\u0902 \u0928\u093e\u0938\u094d\u0924\u094d\u092f\u094d \u0905\u0925\u094b \u0905\u092c\u0932\u0940\u092f\u093e\u0928\u094d \u092c\u0932\u0940\u092f\u093e\u0901\u0938\u092e\u093e\u0936\u0901\u0938\u0924\u0947 \u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e\u0947\u0923 \u092f\u0925\u093e \u0930\u093e\u091c\u094d\u091e\u0948\u0935\u092e\u094d \u0964&lt;br&gt;\n\u092f\u094b \u0935\u0948 \u0938 \u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e\u0903 \u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0902 \u0935\u0948 \u0924\u0924\u094d \u0924\u0938\u094d\u092e\u093e\u0924\u094d\u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0902 \u0935\u0926\u0928\u094d\u0924\u092e\u093e\u0939\u0941\u0930\u094d \u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e\u0902 \u0935\u0926\u0924\u0940\u0924\u093f \u0927\u0930\u094d\u092e\u0902 \u0935\u093e \u0935\u0926\u0928\u094d\u0924\u0901 \u0938\u0924\u094d\u092f\u0902 \u0935\u0926\u0924\u0940\u0924\u094d\u092f\u094d \u090f\u0924\u0926\u094d\u0927\u094d\u092f\u0947\u0935\u0948\u0924\u0926\u0941\u092d\u092f\u0902 \u092d\u0935\u0924\u093f \u0964\u0964\nNothing is higher than dharma. The weak overcomes the stronger by dharma, as over a king. Truly that dharma is the Truth (\"Satya\"); Therefore, when a man speaks the Truth, they say, \"He speaks the Dharma\"; and if he speaks Dharma, they say, \"He speaks the Truth!\" For both are one.\nIn the Epics.\nThe Hindu religion and philosophy, claims Daniel Ingalls, places major emphasis on individual practical morality. In the Sanskrit epics, this concern is omnipresent.\nIn the Second Book of Ramayana, for example, a peasant asks the King to do what dharma morally requires of him, the King agrees and does so even though his compliance with the law of dharma costs him dearly. Similarly, dharma is at the centre of all major events in the life of Rama, Sita, and Lakshman in Ramayana, claims Daniel Ingalls. Each episode of Ramayana presents life situations and ethical questions in symbolic terms. The issue is debated by the characters, finally the right prevails over wrong, the good over evil. For this reason, in Hindu Epics, the good, morally upright, law-abiding king is referred to as \"dharmaraja\".\nIn Mahabharata, the other major Indian epic, similarly, dharma is central, and it is presented with symbolism and metaphors. Near the end of the epic, the god Yama, referred to as dharma in the text, is portrayed as taking the form of a dog to test the compassion of Yudhishthira, who is told he may not enter paradise with such an animal, but refuses to abandon his companion, for which decision he is then praised by dharma. The value and appeal of the Mahabharata is not as much in its complex and rushed presentation of metaphysics in the 12th book, claims Ingalls, because Indian metaphysics is more eloquently presented in other Sanskrit scriptures; the appeal of Mahabharata, like Ramayana, is in its presentation of a series of moral problems and life situations, to which there are usually three answers given, according to Ingalls: one answer is of Bhima, which is the answer of brute force, an individual angle representing materialism, egoism, and self; the second answer is of Yudhishthira, which is always an appeal to piety and gods, of social virtue and of tradition; the third answer is of introspective Arjuna, which falls between the two extremes, and who, claims Ingalls, symbolically reveals the finest moral qualities of man. The Epics of Hinduism are a symbolic treatise about life, virtues, customs, morals, ethics, law, and other aspects of dharma. There is extensive discussion of dharma at the individual level in the Epics of Hinduism, observes Ingalls; for example, on free will versus destiny, when and why human beings believe in either, ultimately concluding that the strong and prosperous naturally uphold free will, while those facing grief or frustration naturally lean towards destiny. The Epics of Hinduism illustrate various aspects of dharma, they are a means of communicating dharma with metaphors.\nAccording to 4th-century Vatsyayana.\nAccording to Klaus Klostermaier, 4th-century CE Hindu scholar V\u0101tsy\u0101yana explained dharma by contrasting it with adharma. V\u0101tsy\u0101yana suggested that dharma is not merely in one's actions, but also in words one speaks or writes, and in thought. According to V\u0101tsy\u0101yana:\nAccording to Patanjali Yoga.\nIn the \"Yoga Sutras\" of Patanjali the dharma is real; in the Vedanta it is unreal.\nDharma is part of yoga, suggests Patanjali; the elements of Hindu dharma are the attributes, qualities and aspects of yoga. Patanjali explained dharma in two categories: \"yamas\" (restraints) and \"niyamas\" (observances).\nThe five yamas, according to Patanjali, are: abstain from injury to all living creatures, abstain from falsehood (satya), abstain from unauthorised appropriation of things-of-value from another (acastrapurvaka), abstain from coveting or sexually cheating on your partner, and abstain from expecting or accepting gifts from others. The five yama apply in action, speech and mind. In explaining yama, Patanjali clarifies that certain professions and situations may require qualification in conduct. For example, a fisherman must injure a fish, but he must attempt to do this with least trauma to fish and the fisherman must try to injure no other creature as he fishes.\nThe five niyamas (observances) are cleanliness by eating pure food and removing impure thoughts (such as arrogance or jealousy or pride), contentment in one's means, meditation and silent reflection regardless of circumstances one faces, study and pursuit of historic knowledge, and devotion of all actions to the Supreme Teacher to achieve perfection of concentration.\nSources.\nDharma is an empirical and experiential inquiry for every man and woman, according to some texts of Hinduism. For example, Apastamba Dharmasutra states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Dharma\" and \"Adharma\" do not go around saying, \"That is us.\" Neither do gods, nor gandharvas, nor ancestors declare what is \"Dharma\" and what is \"Adharma\".\nIn other texts, three sources and means to discover dharma in Hinduism are described. These, according to , are: First, learning historical knowledge such as Vedas, Upanishads, the Epics and other Sanskrit literature with the help of one's teacher. Second, observing the behaviour and example of good people. The third source applies when neither one's education nor example exemplary conduct is known. In this case, \"atmatusti\" is the source of dharma in Hinduism, that is the good person reflects and follows what satisfies his heart, his own inner feeling, what he feels driven to.\nDharma, life stages and social stratification.\nSome texts of Hinduism outline \"dharma\" for society and at the individual level. Of these, the most cited one is \"Manusmriti\", which describes the four \"Varnas\", their rights and duties. Most texts of Hinduism, however, discuss \"dharma\" with no mention of \"Varna\" (caste). Other dharma texts and Smritis differ from Manusmriti on the nature and structure of Varnas. Yet, other texts question the very existence of varna. Bhrigu, in the Epics, for example, presents the theory that dharma does not require any varnas. In practice, medieval India is widely believed to be a socially stratified society, with each social strata inheriting a profession and being endogamous. Varna was not absolute in Hindu dharma; individuals had the right to renounce and leave their Varna, as well as their asramas of life, in search of moksa. While neither Manusmriti nor succeeding Smritis of Hinduism ever use the word varnadharma (that is, the dharma of varnas), or varnasramadharma (that is, the dharma of varnas and asramas), the scholarly commentary on Manusmriti use these words, and thus associate dharma with varna system of India. In 6th century India, even Buddhist kings called themselves \"protectors of varnasramadharma\" \u2013 that is, dharma of varna and asramas of life.\nAt the individual level, some texts of Hinduism outline four \u0101\u015bramas, or stages of life as individual's dharma. These are: (1) brahmac\u0101rya, the life of preparation as a student, (2) g\u1e5bhastha, the life of the householder with family and other social roles, (3) v\u0101nprastha or aranyaka, the life of the forest-dweller, transitioning from worldly occupations to reflection and renunciation, and (4) sanny\u0101sa, the life of giving away all property, becoming a recluse and devotion to moksa, spiritual matters.\nThe four stages of life complete the four human strivings in life, according to Hinduism. Dharma enables the individual to satisfy the striving for stability and order, a life that is lawful and harmonious, the striving to do the right thing, be good, be virtuous, earn religious merit, be helpful to others, interact successfully with society. The other three strivings are Artha \u2013 the striving for means of life such as food, shelter, power, security, material wealth, and so forth; Kama \u2013 the striving for sex, desire, pleasure, love, emotional fulfilment, and so forth; and Moksa \u2013 the striving for spiritual meaning, liberation from life-rebirth cycle, self-realisation in this life, and so forth. The four stages are neither independent nor exclusionary in Hindu dharma.\nDharma and poverty.\nDharma being necessary for individual and society, is dependent on poverty and prosperity in a society, according to Hindu dharma scriptures. For example, according to Adam Bowles, Shatapatha Brahmana 11.1.6.24 links social prosperity and \"dharma\" through water. Waters come from rains, it claims; when rains are abundant there is prosperity on the earth, and this prosperity enables people to follow Dharma \u2013 moral and lawful life. In times of distress, of drought, of poverty, everything suffers including relations between human beings and the human ability to live according to dharma.\nIn Rajadharmaparvan 91.34-8, the relationship between poverty and dharma reaches a full circle. A land with less moral and lawful life suffers distress, and as distress rises it causes more immoral and unlawful life, which further increases distress. Those in power must follow the raja dharma (that is, dharma of rulers), because this enables the society and the individual to follow dharma and achieve prosperity.\nDharma and law.\nThe notion of \"dharma\" as duty or propriety is found in India's ancient legal and religious texts. Common examples of such use are pitri dharma (meaning a person's duty as a father), putra dharma (a person's duty as a son), raj dharma (a person's duty as a king) and so forth. In Hindu philosophy, justice, social harmony, and happiness requires that people live per dharma. The Dharmashastra is a record of these guidelines and rules. The available evidence suggest India once had a large collection of dharma related literature (sutras, shastras); four of the sutras survive and these are now referred to as Dharmasutras. Along with laws of Manu in Dharmasutras, exist parallel and different compendium of laws, such as the laws of Narada and other ancient scholars. These different and conflicting law books are neither exclusive, nor do they supersede other sources of dharma in Hinduism. These Dharmasutras include instructions on education of the young, their rites of passage, customs, religious rites and rituals, marital rights and obligations, death and ancestral rites, laws and administration of justice, crimes, punishments, rules and types of evidence, duties of a king, as well as morality.\nBuddhism.\nIn Buddhism \"dharma\" means cosmic law and order, but is also applied to the teachings of the Buddha. In Buddhist philosophy, \"dhamma/dharma\" is also the term for \"phenomena\".\nBuddha's teachings.\nFor practising Buddhists, references to \"dharma\" (\"dhamma\" in Pali) particularly as \"the dharma\", generally means the teachings of the Buddha, commonly known throughout the East as Buddhadharma. It includes especially the discourses on the fundamental principles (such as the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path), as opposed to the parables and to the poems. The Buddha's teachings explain that in order to end suffering, dharma, or the right thoughts, understanding, actions and livelihood, should be cultivated.\nThe status of dharma is regarded variably by different Buddhist traditions. Some regard it as an ultimate truth, or as the fount of all things which lie beyond the \"three realms\" (Sanskrit: \"tridhatu\") and the \"wheel of becoming\" (Sanskrit: \"bhavachakra\"). Others, who regard the Buddha as simply an enlightened human being, see the dharma as the essence of the \"84,000 different aspects of the teaching\" (Tibetan: \"chos-sgo brgyad-khri bzhi strong\") that the Buddha gave to various types of people, based upon their individual propensities and capabilities.\nDharma refers not only to the sayings of the Buddha, but also to the later traditions of interpretation and addition that the various schools of Buddhism have developed to help explain and to expand upon the Buddha's teachings. For others still, they see the dharma as referring to the \"truth\", or the ultimate reality of \"the way that things really are\" (Tibetan: \"Ch\u00f6\").\nThe dharma is one of the Three Jewels of Buddhism in which practitioners of Buddhism seek refuge, or that upon which one relies for his or her lasting happiness. The Three Jewels of Buddhism are the Buddha, meaning the mind's perfection of enlightenment, the dharma, meaning the teachings and the methods of the Buddha, and the Sangha, meaning the community of practitioners who provide one another guidance and support.\nChan Buddhism.\nDharma is employed in Chan Buddhism in a specific context in relation to transmission of authentic doctrine, understanding and bodhi; recognised in dharma transmission.\nTheravada Buddhism.\nIn Theravada Buddhism obtaining ultimate realisation of the dhamma is achieved in three phases; learning, practising and realising.\nIn Pali \nJainism.\nThe word \"dharma\" in Jainism is found in all its key texts. It has a contextual meaning and refers to a number of ideas. In the broadest sense, it means the teachings of the Jinas, or teachings of any competing spiritual school, a supreme path, socio-religious duty, and that which is the highest (holy).\nThe \"Tattvartha Sutra\", a major Jain text, mentions (lit.\u2009'ten \"dharma\"s') with referring to ten righteous virtues: forbearance, modesty, straightforwardness, purity, truthfulness, self-restraint, austerity, renunciation, non-attachment, and celibacy. , author of the Jain text, writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A right believer should constantly meditate on virtues of dharma, like supreme modesty, in order to protect the Self from all contrary dispositions. He should also cover up the shortcomings of others.\n\"Dharm\u0101stik\u0101ya\".\nThe term () also has a specific ontological and soteriological meaning in Jainism, as a part of its theory of six (substance or a reality). In the Jain tradition, existence consists of (soul, ) and (non-soul, ), the latter consisting of five categories: inert non-sentient atomic matter (), space (), time (), principle of motion (), and principle of rest (). The use of the term to mean motion and to refer to an ontological sub-category is peculiar to Jainism, and not found in the metaphysics of Buddhism and various schools of Hinduism.\nSikhism.\nFor Sikhs, the word \"dharam\" () means the path of righteousness and proper religious practice. Guru Granth Sahib connotes dharma as duty and moral values. The 3HO movement in Western culture, which has incorporated certain Sikh beliefs, defines Sikh Dharma broadly as all that constitutes religion, moral duty and way of life.\nIn South Indian literature.\nSeveral works of the Sangam and post-Sangam period, many of which are of Hindu or Jain origin, emphasizes on dharma. Most of these texts are based on \"a\u1e5fam\", the Tamil term for dharma. The ancient Tamil moral text of the \"Tirukku\u1e5fa\u1e37\" or \"Kural\", a text probably of Jain or Hindu origin, despite being a collection of aphoristic teachings on dharma (\"aram\"), artha (\"porul\"), and kama (\"inpam\"), is completely and exclusively based on \"a\u1e5fam\". The Naladiyar, a Jain text of the post-Sangam period, follows a similar pattern as that of the Kural in emphasizing \"a\u1e5fam\" or dharma.\nDharma in symbols.\nThe importance of \"dharma\" to Indian civilization is illustrated by India's decision in 1947 to include the Ashoka Chakra, a depiction of the \"dharmachakra\" (the \"wheel of dharma\"), as the central motif on its flag.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8754", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8754", "title": "Dhamma", "text": ""}
{"id": "8755", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8755", "title": "Distance function", "text": ""}
{"id": "8756", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8756", "title": "Daniel Dennett", "text": "American philosopher (born 1942)\nDaniel Clement Dennett III (born March 28, 1942) is an American philosopher, writer, and cognitive scientist whose research centers on the philosophy of mind, philosophy of science, and philosophy of biology, particularly as those fields relate to evolutionary biology and cognitive science.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], he is the co-director of the Center for Cognitive Studies and the Austin B. Fletcher Professor of Philosophy at Tufts University in Massachusetts. \nDennett is a member of the editorial board for \"The Rutherford Journal\" and a co-founder of The Clergy Project.\nA vocal atheist and secularist, Dennett is referred to as one of the \"Four Horsemen of New Atheism\", along with Richard Dawkins, Sam Harris, and the late Christopher Hitchens.\nBiography.\nDaniel Clement Dennett III was born on March 28, 1942, in Boston, Massachusetts, the son of Ruth Marjorie (n\u00e9e Leck; 1903\u20131971) and Daniel Clement Dennett Jr. (1910\u20131947). Dennett spent part of his childhood in Lebanon, where, during World War II, his father, who had a PhD in Islamic Studies from Harvard University, was a covert counter-intelligence agent with the Office of Strategic Services posing as a cultural attach\u00e9 to the American Embassy in Beirut. His mother, an English major at Carleton College, went for a master's degree at the University of Minnesota before becoming an English teacher at the American Community School in Beirut. In 1947, his father was killed in a plane crash in Ethiopia. Shortly after, his mother took him back to Massachusetts. Dennett's sister is the investigative journalist Charlotte Dennett. Dennett says that he was first introduced to the notion of philosophy while attending summer camp at age 11, when a camp counselor said to him, \"You know what you are, Daniel? You're a philosopher.\"\nDennett graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy in 1959, and spent one year at Wesleyan University before receiving his Bachelor of Arts in philosophy at Harvard University in 1963. There, he was a student of W.\u00a0V. Quine. In 1965, he received his Doctor of Philosophy in philosophy at the University of Oxford, where he studied under Gilbert Ryle and was a member of Hertford College. His dissertation was entitled \"The Mind and the Brain: Introspective Description in the Light of Neurological Findings; Intentionality\".\nDennett taught at the University of California, Irvine, from 1965 to 1971, before moving to Tufts University, where he settled in for many decades, aside from periods visiting at Harvard University and several other schools.\nDennett describes himself as \"an autodidact\u2014or, more properly, the beneficiary of hundreds of hours of informal tutorials on all the fields that interest me, from some of the world's leading scientists\".\nHe is the recipient of a Fulbright Fellowship, two Guggenheim Fellowships, and a Fellowship at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. He is a Fellow of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry and a Humanist Laureate of the International Academy of Humanism. He was named 2004 Humanist of the Year by the American Humanist Association. In 2006, Dennett received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nIn February 2010, he was named to the Freedom From Religion Foundation's Honorary Board of distinguished achievers.\nIn 2012, he was awarded the Erasmus Prize, an annual award for a person who has made an exceptional contribution to European culture, society or social science, \"for his ability to translate the cultural significance of science and technology to a broad audience.\"\nIn 2018, he was awarded an honorary degree by Radboud University, located in Nijmegen, Netherlands, for his contributions to and influence on cross-disciplinary science.\nPhilosophical views.\nFree will.\nWhile he is a confirmed compatibilist on free will, in \"On Giving Libertarians What They Say They Want\"\u2014chapter 15 of his 1978 book \"Brainstorms\"\u2014Dennett articulated the case for a two-stage model of decision making in contrast to libertarian views.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The model of decision making I am proposing has the following feature: when we are faced with an important decision, a consideration-generator whose output is to some degree undetermined, produces a series of considerations, some of which may of course be immediately rejected as irrelevant by the agent (consciously or unconsciously). Those considerations that are selected by the agent as having a more than negligible bearing on the decision then figure in a reasoning process, and if the agent is in the main reasonable, those considerations ultimately serve as predictors and explicators of the agent's final decision.\nWhile other philosophers have developed two-stage models, including William James, Henri Poincar\u00e9, Arthur Compton, and Henry Margenau, Dennett defends this model for the following reasons:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# First ... The intelligent selection, rejection, and weighing of the considerations that do occur to the subject is a matter of intelligence making the difference.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These prior and subsidiary decisions contribute, I think, to our sense of ourselves as responsible free agents, roughly in the following way: I am faced with an important decision to make, and after a certain amount of deliberation, I say to myself: \"That's enough. I've considered this matter enough and now I'm going to act,\" in the full knowledge that I could have considered further, in the full knowledge that the eventualities may prove that I decided in error, but with the acceptance of responsibility in any case.\nLeading libertarian philosophers such as Robert Kane have rejected Dennett's model, specifically that random chance is directly involved in a decision, on the basis that they believe this eliminates the agent's motives and reasons, character and values, and feelings and desires. They claim that, if chance is the primary cause of decisions, then agents cannot be liable for resultant actions. Kane says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[As Dennett admits,] a causal indeterminist view of this deliberative kind does not give us everything libertarians have wanted from free will. For [the agent] does not have complete control over what chance images and other thoughts enter his mind or influence his deliberation. They simply come as they please. [The agent] does have some control \"after\" the chance considerations have occurred.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But then there is no more chance involved. What happens from then on, how he reacts, is \"determined\" by desires and beliefs he already has. So it appears that he does not have control in the \"libertarian\" sense of what happens after the chance considerations occur as well. Libertarians require more than this for full responsibility and free will.\nMind.\nDennett has remarked in several places (such as \"Self-portrait\", in \"Brainchildren\") that his overall philosophical project has remained largely the same since his time at Oxford. He is primarily concerned with providing a philosophy of mind that is grounded in empirical research. In his original dissertation, \"Content and Consciousness\", he broke up the problem of explaining the mind into the need for a theory of content and for a theory of consciousness. His approach to this project has also stayed true to this distinction. Just as \"Content and Consciousness\" has a bipartite structure, he similarly divided \"Brainstorms\" into two sections. He would later collect several essays on content in \"The Intentional Stance\" and synthesize his views on consciousness into a unified theory in \"Consciousness Explained\". These volumes respectively form the most extensive development of his views.\nIn chapter 5 of \"Consciousness Explained\" Dennett describes his multiple drafts model of consciousness. He states that, \"all varieties of perception\u2014indeed all varieties of thought or mental activity\u2014are accomplished in the brain by parallel, multitrack processes of interpretation and elaboration of sensory inputs. Information entering the nervous system is under continuous 'editorial revision.'\" (p.\u00a0111). Later he asserts, \"These yield, over the course of time, something \"rather like\" a narrative stream or sequence, which can be thought of as subject to continual editing by many processes distributed around the brain, ...\" (p.\u00a0135, emphasis in the original).\nIn this work, Dennett's interest in the ability of evolution to explain some of the content-producing features of consciousness is already apparent, and this has since become an integral part of his program. He states his view is materialist and scientific, and he presents an argument against qualia; he argues that the concept of qualia is so confused that it cannot be put to any use or understood in any non-contradictory way, and therefore does not constitute a valid refutation of physicalism.\nThis view is rejected by neuroscientists Gerald Edelman, Antonio Damasio, Vilayanur Ramachandran, Giulio Tononi, and Rodolfo Llin\u00e1s, all of whom state that qualia exist and that the desire to eliminate them is based on an erroneous interpretation on the part of some philosophers regarding what constitutes science.\nDennett's strategy mirrors his teacher Ryle's approach of redefining first person phenomena in third person terms, and denying the coherence of the concepts which this approach struggles with.\nDennett self-identifies with a few terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Others] note that my \"avoidance of the standard philosophical terminology for discussing such matters\" often creates problems for me; philosophers have a hard time figuring out what I am saying and what I am denying. My refusal to play ball with my colleagues is deliberate, of course, since I view the standard philosophical terminology as worse than useless\u2014a major obstacle to progress since it consists of so many errors.\nIn \"Consciousness Explained\", he affirms \"I am a sort of 'teleofunctionalist', of course, perhaps the original teleofunctionalist\". He goes on to say, \"I am ready to come out of the closet as some sort of verificationist\" (pp.\u00a0460\u201361).\nEvolutionary debate.\nMuch of Dennett's work since the 1990s has been concerned with fleshing out his previous ideas by addressing the same topics from an evolutionary standpoint, from what distinguishes human minds from animal minds (\"Kinds of Minds\"), to how free will is compatible with a naturalist view of the world (\"Freedom Evolves\").\nDennett sees evolution by natural selection as an algorithmic process (though he spells out that algorithms as simple as long division often incorporate a significant degree of randomness). This idea is in conflict with the evolutionary philosophy of paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould, who preferred to stress the \"pluralism\" of evolution (i.e., its dependence on many crucial factors, of which natural selection is only one).\nDennett's views on evolution are identified as being strongly adaptationist, in line with his theory of the intentional stance, and the evolutionary views of biologist Richard Dawkins. In \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", Dennett showed himself even more willing than Dawkins to defend adaptationism in print, devoting an entire chapter to a criticism of the ideas of Gould. This stems from Gould's long-running public debate with E.\u00a0O. Wilson and other evolutionary biologists over human sociobiology and its descendant evolutionary psychology, which Gould and Richard Lewontin opposed, but which Dennett advocated, together with Dawkins and Steven Pinker. Gould argued that Dennett overstated his claims and misrepresented Gould's, to reinforce what Gould describes as Dennett's \"Darwinian fundamentalism\".\nDennett's theories have had a significant influence on the work of evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey Miller.\nReligion and morality.\nDennett is a vocal atheist and secularist, a member of the Secular Coalition for America advisory board, and a member of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry, as well as an outspoken supporter of the Brights movement. Dennett is referred to as one of the \"Four Horsemen of New Atheism\", along with Richard Dawkins, Sam Harris, and the late Christopher Hitchens.\nIn \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", Dennett writes that evolution can account for the origin of morality. He rejects the idea that morality being natural to us implies that we should take a skeptical position regarding ethics, noting that what is fallacious in the naturalistic fallacy is not to support values per se, but rather to \"rush\" from facts to values.\nIn his 2006 book, \"\", Dennett attempts to account for religious belief naturalistically, explaining possible evolutionary reasons for the phenomenon of religious adherence.\nIn this book he declares himself to be \"a bright\", and defends the term.\nHe has been doing research into clerics who are secretly atheists and how they rationalize their works. He found what he called a \"don't ask, don't tell\" conspiracy because believers did not want to hear of loss of faith. That made unbelieving preachers feel isolated but they did not want to lose their jobs and sometimes their church-supplied lodgings and generally consoled themselves that they were doing good in their pastoral roles by providing comfort and required ritual. The research, with Linda LaScola, was further extended to include other denominations and non-Christian clerics. The research and stories Dennett and LaScola accumulated during this project were published in their 2013 co-authored book, \"Caught in the Pulpit: Leaving Belief Behind\".\nMemetics, postmodernism and deepity.\nDennett wrote about and advocated the notion of memetics as a philosophically useful tool, most recently in his \"Brains, Computers, and Minds\", a three-part presentation through Harvard's MBB 2009 Distinguished Lecture Series.\nDennett has been critical of postmodernism, having said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Postmodernism, the school of \"thought\" that proclaimed \"There are no truths, only interpretations\" has largely played itself out in absurdity, but it has left behind a generation of academics in the humanities disabled by their distrust of the very idea of truth and their disrespect for evidence, settling for \"conversations\" in which nobody is wrong and nothing can be confirmed, only asserted with whatever style you can muster.\nDennett adopted and somewhat redefined the term \"deepity\", originally coined by Miriam Weizenbaum. Dennett used \"deepity\" for a statement that is apparently profound, but is actually trivial on one level and meaningless on another. Generally, a deepity has two (or more) meanings: one that is true but trivial, and another that sounds profound and would be important if true, but is actually false or meaningless. Examples are \"Que ser\u00e1 ser\u00e1!\", \"Beauty is only skin deep!\", \"The power of intention can transform your life.\" The term many times.\nArtificial intelligence.\nWhile approving of the increase in efficiency that humans reap by using resources such as expert systems in medicine or GPS in navigation, Dennett sees a danger in machines performing an ever-increasing proportion of basic tasks in perception, memory, and algorithmic computation because people may tend to anthropomorphize such systems and attribute intellectual powers to them that they do not possess. He believes the relevant danger from artificial intelligence (AI) is that people will misunderstand the nature of basically \"parasitic\" AI systems, rather than employing them constructively to challenge and develop the human user's powers of comprehension.\nAs given in his most recent book, \"From Bacteria to Bach and Back\", Dennett's views are contrary to those of Nick Bostrom. Although acknowledging that it is \"possible in principle\" to create AI with human-like comprehension and agency, Dennett maintains that the difficulties of any such \"strong AI\" project would be orders of magnitude greater than those raising concerns have realized. According to Dennett, the prospect of superintelligence (AI massively exceeding the cognitive performance of humans in all domains) is at least 50 years away, and of far less pressing significance than other problems the world faces.\nPersonal life.\nDennett married Susan Bell in 1962. They live in North Andover, Massachusetts, and have a daughter, a son, and five grandchildren. He is an avid sailor.\nSelected works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "8757", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8757", "title": "Darwin's Dangerous Idea", "text": "1995 book by Daniel Dennett\nDarwin's Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life is a 1995 book by the philosopher Daniel Dennett, in which the author looks at some of the repercussions of Darwinian theory. The crux of the argument is that, whether or not Darwin's theories are overturned, there is no going back from the dangerous idea that design (purpose or what something is for) might not need a designer. Dennett makes this case on the basis that natural selection is a blind process, which is nevertheless sufficiently powerful to explain the evolution of life. Darwin's discovery was that the generation of life worked algorithmically, that processes behind it work in such a way that given these processes the results that they tend toward must be so.\nDennett says, for example, that by claiming that minds cannot be reduced to purely algorithmic processes, many of his eminent contemporaries are claiming that miracles can occur. These assertions have generated a great deal of debate and discussion in the general public. The book was a finalist for the 1995 National Book Award in non-fiction and the 1996 Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction.\nBackground.\nDennett's previous book was \"Consciousness Explained\" (1991). Dennett noted discomfort with Darwinism among not only lay people but also even academics and decided it was time to write a book dealing with the subject. \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\" is not meant to be a work of science, but rather an interdisciplinary book; Dennett admits that he does not understand all of the scientific details himself. He goes into a moderate level of detail, but leaves it for the reader to go into greater depth if desired, providing references to this end.\nIn writing the book, Dennett wanted to \"get thinkers in other disciplines to take evolutionary theory seriously, to show them how they have been underestimating it, and to show them why they have been listening to the wrong sirens\". To do this he tells a story; one that is mainly original but includes some material from his previous work.\nDennett taught an undergraduate seminar at Tufts University on Darwin and philosophy, which included most of the ideas in the book. He also had the help of fellow staff and other academics, some of whom read drafts of the book. It is dedicated to W. V. O. Quine, \"teacher and friend\".\nSynopsis.\nPart I: Starting in the Middle.\n\"Starting in the Middle\", Part I of \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", gets its name from a quote by Willard Van Orman Quine: \"Analyze theory-building how we will, we all must start in the middle. Our conceptual firsts are middle-sized, middle-distance objects, and our introduction to them and to everything comes midway in the cultural evolution of the race.\"\nThe first chapter \"Tell Me Why\" is named after a song.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tell me why the stars do shine,&lt;br&gt;\nTell me why the ivy twines, &lt;br&gt;\nTell me why the sky's so blue.&lt;br&gt;\nThen I will tell you just why I love you.\nBecause God made the stars to shine,&lt;br&gt;\nBecause God made the ivy twine,&lt;br&gt;\nBecause God made the sky so blue.&lt;br&gt;\nBecause God made you, that's why I love you.\nBefore Charles Darwin, and still today, a majority of people see God as the ultimate cause of all design, or the ultimate answer to 'why?' questions. John Locke argued for the primacy of mind before matter, and David Hume, while exposing problems with Locke's view, could not see any alternative.\nDarwin provided just such an alternative: evolution. Besides providing evidence of common descent, he introduced a mechanism to explain it: natural selection. According to Dennett, natural selection is a mindless, mechanical and algorithmic process\u2014Darwin's dangerous idea. The third chapter introduces the concept of \"skyhooks\" and \"cranes\" (see below). He suggests that resistance to Darwinism is based on a desire for skyhooks, which do not really exist. According to Dennett, good reductionists explain apparent design without skyhooks; greedy reductionists try to explain it without cranes.\nChapter 4 looks at the tree of life, such as how it can be visualized and some crucial events in life's history. The next chapter concerns the possible and the actual, using the 'Library of Mendel' (the space of all logically possible genomes) as a conceptual aid.\nIn the last chapter of part I, Dennett treats human artifacts and culture as a branch of a unified Design Space. Descent or homology can be detected by shared design features that would be unlikely to appear independently. However, there are also \"Forced Moves\" or \"Good Tricks\" that will be discovered repeatedly, either by natural selection (see convergent evolution) or human investigation.\nPart II: Darwinian Thinking in Biology.\nThe first chapter of part II, \"Darwinian Thinking in Biology\", asserts that life originated without any skyhooks, and the orderly world we know is the result of a blind and undirected shuffle through chaos.\nThe eighth chapter's message is conveyed by its title, \"Biology is Engineering\"; biology is the study of design, function, construction and operation. However, there are some important differences between biology and engineering. Related to the engineering concept of optimization, the next chapter deals with adaptationism, which Dennett endorses, calling Gould and Lewontin's \"refutation\" of it an illusion. Dennett thinks adaptationism is, in fact, the best way of uncovering constraints.\nThe tenth chapter, entitled \"Bully for Brontosaurus\", is an extended critique of Stephen Jay Gould, who Dennett feels has created a distorted view of evolution with his popular writings; his \"self-styled revolutions\" against adaptationism, gradualism and other orthodox Darwinism all being false alarms. The final chapter of part II dismisses directed mutation, the inheritance of acquired traits and Teilhard's \"Omega Point\", and insists that other controversies and hypotheses (like the unit of selection and Panspermia) have no dire consequences for orthodox Darwinism.\nPart III: Mind, Meaning, Mathematics and Morality.\n\"Mind, Meaning, Mathematics and Morality\" is the name of Part III, which begins with a quote from Nietzsche. Chapter 12, \"The Cranes of Culture\", discusses cultural evolution. It asserts that the meme has a role to play in our understanding of culture, and that it allows humans, alone among animals, to \"transcend\" our selfish genes. \"Losing Our Minds to Darwin\" follows, a chapter about the evolution of brains, minds and language. Dennett criticizes Noam Chomsky's perceived resistance to the evolution of language, its modeling by artificial intelligence, and reverse engineering.\nThe evolution of meaning is then discussed, and Dennett uses a series of thought experiments to persuade the reader that meaning is the product of meaningless, algorithmic processes.\nChapter 15 asserts that G\u00f6del's Theorem does not make certain sorts of artificial intelligence impossible. Dennett extends his criticism to Roger Penrose. The subject then moves on to the origin and evolution of morality, beginning with Thomas Hobbes (who Dennett calls \"the first sociobiologist\") and Friedrich Nietzsche. He concludes that only an evolutionary analysis of ethics makes sense, though he cautions against some varieties of 'greedy ethical reductionism'. Before moving to the next chapter, he discusses some sociobiology controversies.\nThe penultimate chapter, entitled \"Redesigning Morality\", begins by asking if ethics can be 'naturalized'. Dennett does not believe there is much hope of discovering an algorithm for doing the right thing, but expresses optimism in our ability to design and redesign our approach to moral problems. In \"The Future of an Idea\", the book's last chapter, Dennett praises biodiversity, including cultural diversity. In closing, he uses \"Beauty and the Beast\" as an analogy; although Darwin's idea may seem dangerous, it is actually quite beautiful.\nCentral concepts.\nDesign Space.\nDennett believes there is little or no principled difference between the naturally generated products of evolution and the man-made artifacts of human creativity and culture. For this reason he indicates deliberately that the complex fruits of the tree of life are in a very meaningful sense \"designed\"\u2014even though he does not believe evolution was guided by a higher intelligence.\nDennett supports using the notion of memes to better understand cultural evolution. He also believes even human creativity might operate by the Darwinian mechanism. This leads him to propose that the \"space\" describing biological \"design\" is connected with the space describing human culture and technology.\nA precise mathematical definition of Design Space is not given in \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\". Dennett acknowledges this and admits he is offering a philosophical idea rather than a scientific formulation.\nNatural selection as an algorithm.\nDennett describes natural selection as a substrate-neutral, mindless algorithm for moving through Design Space.\nUniversal acid.\nDennett writes about the fantasy of a \"universal acid\" as a liquid that is so corrosive that it would eat through anything that it came into contact with, even a potential container. Such a powerful substance would transform everything it was applied to; leaving something very different in its wake. This is where Dennett draws parallels from the \u201cuniversal acid\u201d to Darwin's idea:\n\u201cit eats through just about every traditional concept, and leaves in its wake a revolutionized world-view, with most of the old landmarks still recognizable, but transformed in fundamental ways.\u201d\nWhile there are people who would like to see Darwin's idea contained within the field of biology, Dennett asserts that this dangerous idea inevitably \u201cleaks\u201d out to transform other fields as well.\nSkyhooks and cranes.\nDennett uses the term \"skyhook\" to describe a source of design complexity that does not build on lower, simpler layers\u2014in simple terms, a miracle.\nIn philosophical arguments concerning the reducibility (or otherwise) of the human mind, Dennett's concept pokes fun at the idea of intelligent design emanating from on high, either originating from one or more gods, or providing its own grounds in an absurd, Munchausen-like bootstrapping manner.\nDennett also accuses various competing neo-Darwinian ideas of making use of such supposedly unscientific skyhooks in explaining evolution, coming down particularly hard on the ideas of Stephen Jay Gould.\nDennett contrasts theories of complexity that require such miracles with those based on \"cranes\", structures that permit the construction of entities of greater complexity but are themselves founded solidly \"on the ground\" of physical science.\nReception.\nIn \"The New York Review of Books\", John Maynard Smith praised \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\":\nIt is therefore a pleasure to meet a philosopher who understands what Darwinism is about, and approves of it.\nDennett goes well beyond biology. He sees Darwinism as a corrosive acid, capable of dissolving our earlier belief and forcing a reconsideration of much of sociology and philosophy. Although modestly written, this is not a modest book. Dennett argues that, if we understand \"Darwin's dangerous idea\", we are forced to reject or modify much of our current intellectual baggage...\nWriting in the same publication, Stephen Jay Gould criticised \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\" for being an \"influential but misguided ultra-Darwinian manifesto\":\nDaniel Dennett devotes the longest chapter in \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\" to an excoriating caricature of my ideas, all in order to bolster his defense of Darwinian fundamentalism. If an argued case can be discerned at all amid the slurs and sneers, it would have to be described as an effort to claim that I have, thanks to some literary skill, tried to raise a few piddling, insignificant, and basically conventional ideas to \"revolutionary\" status, challenging what he takes to be the true Darwinian scripture. Since Dennett shows so little understanding of evolutionary theory beyond natural selection, his critique of my work amounts to little more than sniping at false targets of his own construction. He never deals with my ideas as such, but proceeds by hint, innuendo, false attribution, and error.\nGould was also a harsh critic of Dennett's idea of the \"universal acid\" of natural selection and of his subscription to the idea of memetics; Dennett responded, and the exchange between Dennett, Gould, and Robert Wright was printed in the \"New York Review of Books\".\nBiologist H. Allen Orr wrote a critical review emphasizing similar points in the \"Boston Review\".\nThe book has also provoked a negative reaction from creationists; Frederick Crews writes that \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\" \"rivals Richard Dawkins's \"The Blind Watchmaker\" as the creationists' most cordially hated text.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8758", "revid": "1159789010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8758", "title": "Douglas Hofstadter", "text": "American professor of cognitive science (born 1945)\nDouglas Richard Hofstadter (born February 15, 1945) is an American scholar of cognitive science, physics, and comparative literature whose research includes concepts such as the sense of self in relation to the external world, consciousness, analogy-making, artistic creation, literary translation, and discovery in mathematics and physics. His 1979 book \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid\" won both the Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction and a National Book Award (at that time called The American Book Award) for Science. His 2007 book \"I Am a Strange Loop\" won the \"Los Angeles Times\" Book Prize for Science and Technology.\nEarly life and education.\nHofstadter was born in New York City to Jewish parents: Nobel Prize-winning physicist Robert Hofstadter and Nancy Givan Hofstadter. He grew up on the campus of Stanford University, where his father was a professor, and attended the International School of Geneva in 1958\u201359. He graduated with distinction in mathematics from Stanford University in 1965, and received his Ph.D. in physics from the University of Oregon in 1975, where his study of the energy levels of Bloch electrons in a magnetic field led to his discovery of the fractal known as Hofstadter's butterfly.\nAcademic career.\nSince 1988, Hofstadter has been the College of Arts and Sciences Distinguished Professor of Cognitive Science and Comparative Literature at Indiana University in Bloomington, where he directs the Center for Research on Concepts and Cognition which consists of himself and his graduate students, forming the \"Fluid Analogies Research Group\" (FARG). He was initially appointed to the Indiana University's Computer Science Department faculty in 1977, and at that time he launched his research program in computer modeling of mental processes (which he called \"artificial intelligence research\", a label he has since dropped in favor of \"cognitive science research\"). In 1984, he moved to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, where he was hired as a professor of psychology and was also appointed to the Walgreen Chair for the Study of Human Understanding. In 1988 he returned to Bloomington as \"College of Arts and Sciences Professor\" in both cognitive science and computer science. He was also appointed adjunct professor of history and philosophy of science, philosophy, comparative literature, and psychology, but has said that his involvement with most of those departments is nominal. In 1988 Hofstadter received the \"In Praise of Reason\" award, the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry's highest honor. In April 2009 he was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a member of the American Philosophical Society. In 2010 he was elected a member of the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, Sweden.\nAt the University of Michigan and Indiana University, he and Melanie Mitchell coauthored a computational model of \"high-level perception\"\u2014Copycat\u2014and several other models of analogy-making and cognition, including the Tabletop project, co-developed with Robert M. French. The Letter Spirit project, implemented by Gary McGraw and John Rehling, aims to model artistic creativity by designing stylistically uniform \"gridfonts\" (typefaces limited to a grid). Other more recent models include Phaeaco (implemented by Harry Foundalis) and SeqSee (Abhijit Mahabal), which model high-level perception and analogy-making in the microdomains of Bongard problems and number sequences, respectively, as well as George (Francisco Lara-Dammer), which models the processes of perception and discovery in triangle geometry.\nHofstadter has had several exhibitions of his artwork in various university galleries. These shows have featured large collections of his gridfonts, his ambigrams (pieces of calligraphy created with two readings, either of which is usually obtained from the other by rotating or reflecting the ambigram, but sometimes simply by \"oscillation\", like the Necker Cube or the rabbit/duck figure of Joseph Jastrow), and his \"Whirly Art\" (music-inspired visual patterns realized using shapes based on various alphabets from India). Hofstadter invented the term \"ambigram\" in 1984; many ambigrammists have since taken up the concept.\nHofstadter collects and studies cognitive errors (largely, but not solely, speech errors), \"bon mots\", and analogies of all sorts, and his longtime observation of these diverse products of cognition. His theories about the mechanisms that underlie them have exerted a powerful influence on the architectures of the computational models he and FARG members have developed.\nHofstadter's thesis about consciousness, first expressed in \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\" but also present in several of his later books, is that it is \"an emergent consequence of seething lower-level activity in the brain\". In \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\" he draws an analogy between the social organization of a colony of ants and the mind seen as a coherent \"colony\" of neurons. In particular, Hofstadter claims that our sense of having (or being) an \"I\" comes from the abstract pattern he terms a \"strange loop\", an abstract cousin of such concrete phenomena as audio and video feedback that Hofstadter has defined as \"a level-crossing feedback loop\". The prototypical example of a strange loop is the self-referential structure at the core of G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems. Hofstadter's 2007 book \"I Am a Strange Loop\" carries his vision of consciousness considerably further, including the idea that each human \"I\" is distributed over numerous brains, rather than being limited to one.\n\"Le Ton beau de Marot: In Praise of the Music of Language\" is a long book devoted to language and translation, especially poetry translation, and one of its leitmotifs is a set of 88 translations of \"Ma Mignonne\", a highly constrained poem by 16th-century French poet Cl\u00e9ment Marot. In this book, Hofstadter jokingly describes himself as \"pilingual\" (meaning that the sum total of the varying degrees of mastery of all the languages that he has studied comes to 3.14159\u00a0...), as well as an \"oligoglot\" (someone who speaks \"a few\" languages).\nIn 1999, the bicentennial year of the Russian poet and writer Alexander Pushkin, Hofstadter published a verse translation of Pushkin's classic novel-in-verse \"Eugene Onegin\". He has translated other poems and two novels: \"La Chamade\" (\"That Mad Ache\") by Fran\u00e7oise Sagan, and \"La Scoperta dell'Alba\" (\"The Discovery of Dawn\") by Walter Veltroni, the then-head of the Partito Democratico in Italy. \"The Discovery of Dawn\" was published in 2007, and \"That Mad Ache\" was published in 2009, bound together with Hofstadter's essay \"Translator, Trader: An Essay on the Pleasantly Pervasive Paradoxes of Translation\".\nHofstadter's Law.\nHofstadter's Law is \"It always takes longer than you expect, even when you take into account Hofstadter's Law.\" The law is stated in \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\".\nStudents.\nHofstadter's former Ph.D. students include (with dissertation title):\nPublic image.\nHofstadter has said that he feels \"uncomfortable with the nerd culture that centers on computers\". He admits that \"a large fraction [of his audience] seems to be those who are fascinated by technology\", but when it was suggested that his work \"has inspired many students to begin careers in computing and artificial intelligence\" he replied that he was pleased about that, but that he himself has \"no interest in computers\". In that interview he also mentioned a course he has twice given at Indiana University, in which he took a \"skeptical look at a number of highly touted AI projects and overall approaches\". For example, upon the defeat of Garry Kasparov by Deep Blue, he commented that \"It was a watershed event, but it doesn't have to do with computers becoming intelligent\". In his book \"Metamagical Themas\", he says that \"in this day and age, how can anyone fascinated by creativity and beauty fail to see in computers the ultimate tool for exploring their essence?\".\nProvoked by predictions of a technological singularity (a hypothetical moment in the future of humanity when a self-reinforcing, runaway development of artificial intelligence causes a radical change in technology and culture), Hofstadter has both organized and participated in several public discussions of the topic. At Indiana University in 1999 he organized such a symposium, and in April 2000, he organized a larger symposium titled \"Spiritual Robots\" at Stanford University, in which he moderated a panel consisting of Ray Kurzweil, Hans Moravec, Kevin Kelly, Ralph Merkle, Bill Joy, Frank Drake, John Holland and John Koza. Hofstadter was also an invited panelist at the first Singularity Summit, held at Stanford in May 2006. Hofstadter expressed doubt that the singularity will occur in the foreseeable future.\nIn 1988 Dutch director Piet Hoenderdos created a docudrama about Hofstadter and his ideas, \"Victim of the Brain\", based on \"The Mind's I\". It includes interviews with Hofstadter about his work.\nColumnist.\nWhen Martin Gardner retired from writing his \"Mathematical Games\" column for \"Scientific American\" magazine, Hofstadter succeeded him in 1981\u201383 with a column titled \"Metamagical Themas\" (an anagram of \"Mathematical Games\"). An idea he introduced in one of these columns was the concept of \"Reviews of This Book\", a book containing nothing but cross-referenced reviews of itself that has an online implementation. One of Hofstadter's columns in \"Scientific American\" concerned the damaging effects of sexist language, and two chapters of his book \"Metamagical Themas\" are devoted to that topic, one of which is a biting analogy-based satire, \"A Person Paper on Purity in Language\" (1985), in which the reader's presumed revulsion at racism and racist language is used as a lever to motivate an analogous revulsion at sexism and sexist language; Hofstadter published it under the pseudonym William Satire, an allusion to William Safire. Another column reported on the discoveries made by University of Michigan professor Robert Axelrod in his computer tournament pitting many iterated prisoner's dilemma strategies against each other, and a follow-up column discussed a similar tournament that Hofstadter and his graduate student Marek Lugowski organized. The \"Metamagical Themas\" columns ranged over many themes, including patterns in Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin's piano music (particularly his \u00e9tudes), the concept of superrationality (choosing to cooperate when the other party/adversary is assumed to be equally intelligent as oneself), and the self-modifying game of Nomic, based on the way the legal system modifies itself, and developed by philosopher Peter Suber.\nPersonal life.\nHofstadter was married to Carol Ann Brush until her death. They met in Bloomington, and married in Ann Arbor in 1985. They had two children, Danny and Monica. Carol died in 1993 from the sudden onset of a brain tumor, glioblastoma multiforme, when their children were 5 and 2. The Carol Ann Brush Hofstadter Memorial Scholarship for Bologna-bound Indiana University students was established in 1996 in her name. Hofstadter's book \"Le Ton beau de Marot\" is dedicated to their two children and its dedication reads \"To M. &amp; D., living sparks of their Mommy's soul\".\nIn 2010, Hofstadter met Baofen Lin in a cha-cha-cha class, and they married in Bloomington in September 2012.\nHofstadter has composed pieces for piano and for piano and voice. He created an audio CD, \"DRH/JJ\", which includes all these compositions performed mostly by pianist Jane Jackson, with a few performed by Brian Jones, Dafna Barenboim, Gitanjali Mathur and Hofstadter.\nThe dedication for \"I Am A Strange Loop\" is: \"To my sister Laura, who can understand, and to our sister Molly, who cannot.\" Hofstadter explains in the preface that his younger sister Molly never developed the ability to speak or understand language.\nAs a consequence of his attitudes about consciousness and empathy, Hofstadter became vegan in his teenage years, and has remained primarily a vegetarian since that time.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 1982 novel ', Arthur C. Clarke's first sequel to ', HAL 9000 is described by the character \"Dr. Chandra\" as being caught in a \"Hofstadter\u2013M\u00f6bius loop\". The movie uses the term \"H. M\u00f6bius loop\".\nOn April 3, 1995, Hofstadter's book \"Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies: Computer Models of the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought\" was the first book sold by Amazon.com.\nPublished works.\nBooks.\nThe books published by Hofstadter are (the ISBNs refer to paperback editions, where available):\nPapers.\nHofstadter has written, among many others, the following papers:\nHofstadter has also written over 50 papers that were published through the Center for Research on Concepts and Cognition.\nInvolvement in other books.\nHofstadter has written forewords for or edited the following books:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8760", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8760", "title": "Depression and Mood Disorders", "text": ""}
{"id": "8765", "revid": "1160890965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8765", "title": "Dahomey", "text": "c. 1600 \u2013 1904 kingdom in modern Benin, West Africa\nThe Kingdom of Dahomey () was a West African kingdom located within present-day Benin that existed from approximately 1600 until 1904. Dahomey developed on the Abomey Plateau amongst the Fon people in the early 17th century and became a regional power in the 18th century by expanding south to conquer key cities like Whydah belonging to the Kingdom of Whydah on the Atlantic coast which granted it unhindered access to the tricontinental triangular trade.\nFor much of the middle 19th century, the Kingdom of Dahomey became a key regional state, after eventually ending tributary status to the Oyo Empire. European visitors extensively documented the kingdom, and it became one of the most familiar African nations known to Europeans. The Kingdom of Dahomey was an important regional power that had an organized domestic economy built on conquest and slave labor, significant international trade and diplomatic relations with Europeans, a centralized administration, taxation systems, and an organized military. Notable in the kingdom were significant artwork, an all-female military unit called the Dahomey Amazons by European observers, and the elaborate religious practices of Vodun.\nThe growth of Dahomey coincided with the growth of the Atlantic slave trade, and it became known to Europeans as a major supplier of slaves. Dahomey was a highly militaristic society constantly organised for warfare; it engaged in wars and raids against neighboring nations and sold captives into the Atlantic slave trade in exchange for European goods such as rifles, gunpowder, fabrics, cowrie shells, tobacco, pipes, and alcohol. Other captives became slaves in Dahomey, where they worked on royal plantations or were killed in human sacrifices during the festival celebrations known as the Annual Customs of Dahomey. The Annual Customs of Dahomey involved significant collection and distribution of gifts and tribute, religious Vodun ceremonies, military parades, and discussions by dignitaries about the future for the kingdom.\nIn the 1840s, Dahomey began to face decline with British pressure to abolish the slave trade, which included the British Royal Navy imposing a naval blockade against the kingdom and enforcing anti-slavery patrols near its coast. Dahomey was also weakened after failing to invade and capture slaves in Abeokuta, a Yoruba city-state which was founded by the Oyo Empire refugees migrating southwards. Dahomey later began experiencing territorial disputes with France which led to the First Franco-Dahomean War in 1890, resulting in French victory. The kingdom finally fell in 1894 when the last king, B\u00e9hanzin, was defeated by France in the Second Franco-Dahomean War, leading to the country being annexed into French West Africa as the colony of French Dahomey, later gaining independence in 1960 as the Republic of Dahomey, which would later rename itself Benin in 1975.\nName.\nThe Kingdom of Dahomey was referred to by many different names and has been written in a variety of ways, including \"Danxome\", \"Danhome\", and \"Fon\". The name \"Fon\" relates to the dominant ethnic and language group, the Fon people, of the royal families of the kingdom and is how the kingdom first became known to Europeans. The names \"Dahomey\", \"Danxome\", and \"Danhome\" all have a similar origin story, which historian Edna Bay says may be a false etymology.\nThe story goes that Dakodonu, considered the second king in modern kings lists, was granted permission by the Gedevi chiefs, the local rulers, to settle in the Abomey Plateau. Dakodonu requested additional land from a prominent chief named Dan (or Da) to which the chief responded sarcastically, \"Should I open up my belly and build you a house in it?\" For this insult, Dakodonu killed Dan and began the construction of his palace on the spot. The name of the kingdom was derived from the incident: \"Dan\" meaning \"chief\", \"xo\" meaning \"belly\" and \"me\" meaning \"inside of\".\nHistory.\nThe Kingdom of Dahomey was established around 1600 by the Fon people who had recently settled in the area (or were possibly a result of intermarriage between the Aja people and the local Gedevi). The foundational king for Dahomey is often considered to be Houegbadja (c. 1645\u20131685), who built the Royal Palaces of Abomey and began raiding and taking over towns outside of the Abomey Plateau.\nRule of Agaja (1708\u20131740).\nKing Agaja, Houegbadja's grandson, came to the throne in 1708 and began significant expansion of the Kingdom of Dahomey. This expansion was made possible by the superior military force of King Agaja's Dahomey. In contrast to surrounding regions, Dahomey employed a professional standing army numbering around ten thousand. What the Dahomey lacked in numbers, they made up for in discipline and superior arms. In 1724, Agaja conquered Allada, the origin for the royal family according to oral tradition, and in 1727 he conquered Whydah. This increased size of the kingdom, particularly along the Atlantic coast, and increased power made Dahomey into a regional power. The result was near constant warfare with the main regional state, the Oyo Empire, from 1728 until 1740. The warfare with the Oyo empire resulted in Dahomey assuming a tributary status to the Oyo empire.\nRule of Tegbesu (1740\u20131774).\nTegbesu, also spelled as Tegbessou, was King of Dahomey, in present-day Benin, from 1740 until 1774. Tegbesu was not the oldest son of King Agaja (1708\u20131740), but was selected following his father's death after winning a succession struggle with a brother. King Agaja had significantly expanded the Kingdom of Dahomey during his reign, notably conquering Whydah in 1727. This increased the size of the kingdom and increased both domestic dissent and regional opposition. Tegbessou ruled over Dahomey at a point where it needed to increase its legitimacy over those whom it had recently conquered. As a result, Tegbesu is often credited with a number of administrative changes in the kingdom in order to establish the legitimacy of the kingdom. \nThe slave trade increased significantly during Tegbessou's reign and began to provide the largest part of the income for the king. In addition, Tegbesu's rule is the one with the first significant \"kpojito\" or mother of the leopard with Hwanjile in that role. The \"kpojito\" became a prominently important person in Dahomey royalty. Hwanjile, in particular, is said to have changed dramatically the religious practices of Dahomey by creating two new deities and more closely tying worship to that of the king. According to one oral tradition, as part of the tribute owed by Dahomey to Oyo, Agaja had to give to Oyo one of his sons. The story claims that only Hwanjile, of all of Agaja's wives, was willing to allow her son to go to Oyo. This act of sacrifice, according to the oral tradition made Tegbesu, was favored by Agaja. Agaja reportedly told Tegbesu that he was the future king, but his brother Zinga was still the official heir.\nRule of Ghezo (1818-1859).\nWhen King Ghezo ascended the throne in 1818, he was confronted by two immediate obstacles: the Kingdom of Dahomey was in political turmoil, and it was financially unstable. First, he needed to gain political independence by removing the tributary yoke that the Yoruba empire of Oyo had over the Dahomey since 1748. Secondly, he needed to revitalize the Dahomey economy. Both of these objectives relied on the slave trade. King Ghezo implemented new military strategies, which allowed them to take a physical stand against the Oyo, who were also a major competitor in the slave trade. He also put stipulations on Dahomey's participation in the slave trade. Under his reign, no longer would the Dahomey be traded, as they were under the leadership of his brother, Adandozan. Dahomey would focus on capturing their enemies and trading them instead. King Ghezo did, however, seek to eventually lead his people toward the \"legitimate\" trade of palm oil.\nThe Dahomey were soon met with victory when they brought down the Oyo Empire and its yoke at Paonignan in 1827. While Brazil's demand for slaves increased in 1830, the British started a campaign to abolish the slave trade in Africa. The British government began putting significant pressure on King Ghezo in the 1840s to end the slave trade in Dahomey. King Ghezo responded to these requests by emphasizing that he was unable to end the slave trade because of domestic pressure. He explained to them that the entire region had become dependent on the slave trading, so ending immediately would destabilize his kingdom and lead to anarchy. King William Dappa Pepple of Bonny and King Kosoko of Lagos took the same stance towards the British requests. Instead, King Ghezo proposed an expansion of the palm oil trade and gradual abolition of the slave trade.\nKing Ghezo's reign was marked by great battles and significant changes to the empire, including the elevation of the Agojie. These \"Dahomey Amazon\" were pivotal to the defeat of Oyo Empire. His reign also cemented the Kingdom of Dahomey as one of the most powerful African kingdoms that stood against British attempts, with Egba support, at converting people to Christianity, and maintained their traditional religion, known as Vodun. He abolished the human sacrifice of slaves and removed the death penalty for certain lesser offenses, such as adultery. Despite the kingdom's history of brutality, King Ghezo was often characterized as honorable and unconquerable, even by his enemies. British missionary Thomas Birch Freeman also depicted him as \"one of the most remarkable men of his age, whether we consider him in his private capacity as a man, or as a warrior and a statesmen.\"\nEnd of the kingdom.\nThe kingdom fought the First Franco-Dahomean War and Second Franco-Dahomean War with France. The kingdom was reduced and made a French protectorate in 1894.\nIn 1904, the area became part of a French colony, French Dahomey.\nIn 1958, French Dahomey became the self-governing colony called the Republic of Dahomey and gained full independence in 1960. It was renamed in 1975 the People's Republic of Benin and in 1991 the Republic of Benin.\nModern history.\nToday, the kingdom continues to exist as a constituent monarchy located within Benin. Its rulers no longer hold any official powers under Benin's constitution, but they retain some political and economic influence. Modern kings participate in important Vodun religious festivals and other traditional ceremonies.\nPolitics.\nEarly writings often presented the kingdom as an absolute monarchy led by a despotic king. However, these depictions were often deployed as arguments by different sides in the slave trade debates, mainly in the United Kingdom, and as such were probably exaggerations. Recent historical work has emphasized the limits of monarchical power in the Kingdom of Dahomey. Historian John C. Yoder, with attention to the Great Council in the kingdom, argued that its activities do not \"imply that Dahomey's government was democratic or even that her politics approximated those of nineteenth-century European monarchies. However, such evidence does support the thesis that governmental decisions were molded by conscious responses to internal political pressures as well as by executive fiat.\" The primary political divisions revolved around villages with chiefs and administrative posts appointed by the king and acting as his representatives to adjudicate disputes in the village.\nThe king.\nThe King of Dahomey (\"Ahosu\" in the Fon language) was the sovereign power of the kingdom. All of the kings claimed to be part of the \"Alladaxonou\" dynasty, claiming descent from the royal family in Allada. Much of the succession rules and administrative structures were created early by Kings Houegbadja, Akaba, and Agaja. Succession through the male members of the line was the norm, with the kingship typically (but not always) going to the oldest son. The king was selected largely through discussion and decision in the meetings of the Great Council, although how this operated was not always clear. The Great Council brought together a host of different dignitaries from throughout the kingdom yearly to meet at the Annual Customs of Dahomey. Discussions would be lengthy and included members, both men and women, from throughout the kingdom. At the end of the discussions, the king would declare the consensus of the group.\nThe royal court.\nKey positions in the King's court included the \"migan\" (Prime Minister), the \"mehu\" (Finance Minister), the \"yovogan\", the \"tokpo\" (Minister of Agriculture), the \"agan\" (general of the army), the \"kpojito\" (or queen mother), and later the \"chacha\" (or viceroy) of Whydah. Each of these cabinet positions\u2014which, with the exception of the \"kpojito\", were headed by men\u2014had a female counterpart to complement them. The \"migan\u2014\"a combination of \"mi\" (our) and \"gan\" (chief)\u2014was a primary consul for the king, a key judicial figure, and served as the head executioner. The \"mehu\" was similarly a key administrative officer who managed the palaces and the affairs of the royal family, economic matters, and the areas to the south of Allada (making the position key to contact with Europeans).\nForeign relations.\nThe relations between Dahomey and other countries were complex and heavily impacted by the transatlantic slave trade.\nBrazil.\nIn 1750, the Kingdom of Dahomey sent a diplomatic mission to Brazil, while the country was still part of the Portuguese Empire, in order to strengthen diplomatic relations after an incident which led to the expulsion of Portuguese-Brazilian diplomatic authorities in 1743. The interest of maintaining these relations was economic, \"with the aim of building closer ties with Portuguese colonial authorities and slave buyers residing in Brazil, and making sure they continued to buy slaves supplied by Dahomey rather than rival kingdoms.\" Dahomey was the first country to recognize the independence of Brazil in 1822.\nFrancisco F\u00e9lix de Sousa, a Brazilian slave trader, became a politically influential figure in Dahomey after helping King Ghezo seize power. He even held the office of \"chacha\" during his subsequent reign.\nFrance.\nIn 1861, the kingdom of Porto-Novo, one of Dahomey's tributaries, was attacked by the British Royal Navy, which was participating in anti-slaving patrols. Porto-Novo asked for protection from France and became a French protectorate as a result in 1863. However, this status was rejected by King Behanzin, who still declared Porto-Novo to be a tributary of Dahomey. Another issue of contention was the status of Cotonou, a port the French believed was under their control because of a treaty signed by Dahomey's representative in Whydah. Dahomey ignored all French claims there as well and continued to collect customs from the port. These territorial disputes escalated into the First Franco-Dahomean War in 1890, resulting in French victory. Dahomey was forced to sign a treaty surrendering Porto-Novo and Cotonou to the French. However, Dahomey later returned to raiding the area and disregarded French complaints, triggering the Second Franco-Dahomean War in 1892. The kingdom was defeated in 1894, it was annexed into the French colonial empire as French Dahomey, and King Behanzin was exiled to Algeria.\nPortugal.\nThe Portuguese fort at Ouidah was destroyed by the army of Dahomey in 1743 during its conquest of the city, so King Tegbesu desired to renew relations with Portugal. Dahomey sent at least five embassies to Portugal and Brazil during the years of 1750, 1795, 1805, 1811 and 1818, with the goal of negotiating the terms of the Atlantic slave trade. These missions created an official correspondence between the kings of Dahomey and the kings of Portugal, and gifts were exchanged between them. The Portuguese Crown paid for the expenses travel and accommodation expenses of Dahomey's ambassadors, who traveled between Lisbon and Salvador, Bahia. The embassies of 1805 and 1811 brought letters from King Adandozan, who had imprisoned Portuguese subjects in the Dahomean capital of Abomey and requested for Portugal to trade exclusively at Ouidah. Portugal promised to answer to his demands if he released the prisoners.\nA long and detailed letter from King Adandonzan dated 9 October 1810 shows that he had knowledge of the Napoleonic Wars and the subsequent exile of the Portuguese royal family to Brazil, and he expressed remorse that he was not able to help the Portuguese royal family during their war against France.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Soon the news that Your Royal Majesty and all the Royal family were made prisoners of the French, who took Lisbon, as well as the King of Spain, started arriving. Some time passed and another vessel came and brought other news that Your Royal Majesty and Our Sovereign Mother Queen of Portugal had left for the City of Bahia, under the protection of the English and the Portuguese Navy. Then more time passed and another vessel brought news that you have moved to Rio de Janeiro, where we know that the Duke of Cadaval deceased, for which I feel sorry\nand give you my condolences...what I feel the most is to no longer be the neighbour of Our Majesty, and not being able to walk on firm land to give you a help with my arm, so my wish is big, as here I have also fought many wars in the backlands. After detailing how he defeated the king of the Mahi nation, Adandonzan tells the Portuguese,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...Give me also news about the Wars, and also give me news about the wars with the French nation and the others, it will make me happy to know about it\nUnited Kingdom.\nDahomey became a target of the British Empire's anti-slavery campaign during the 19th century. The British sent diplomatic missions to Dahomey in an effort to convince King Ghezo to abolish human sacrifice and slave trading. Ghezo did not immediately concede to British demands but attempted to maintain friendly relations with the British by encouraging the growth of new trade in palm oil instead. In 1851, the Royal Navy imposed a naval blockade against Dahomey, forcing Ghezo to sign a treaty in 1852 that immediately abolished the export of slaves. However, the treaty was broken and slave trading efforts resumed in 1857 and 1858. Historian Martin Meredith quotes Ghezo telling the British:\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The slave trade has been the ruling principle of my people. It is the source of their glory and wealth. Their songs celebrate their victories and the mother lulls the child to sleep with notes of triumph over an enemy reduced to slavery.\nDuring a diplomatic mission to Dahomey in 1849, Captain Frederick E. Forbes of the Royal Navy received an enslaved girl (later named Sara Forbes Bonetta) from King Ghezo as a \"gift\", who would later become a goddaughter to Queen Victoria.\nUnited States.\nDuring the American Revolution, the rebelling United Colonies prohibited the international slave trade for a variety of economic, political, and moral reasons depending on the colony. Following the end of the revolution, U.S. President Thomas Jefferson signed the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves in 1807, which federally outlawed the international slave trade, though domestic slavery itself would persist until the American Civil War. Thus, the United States never established any formal diplomatic relations with the Kingdom of Dahomey. However, the last known slave ship that sailed to the United States secretly and illegally imported a group of 110 slaves from Dahomey, purchased long after the abolition of the slave trade. The story was mentioned in the newspaper \"The Tarboro Southerner\" on July 14, 1860. On July 9, 1860, a schooner called \"Clotilda\", captained by William Foster, arrived in the bay of Mobile, Alabama carrying the last known shipment of slaves to the U.S. In 1858, an American man named Timothy Meaher made a wager with acquaintances that despite the law banning the slave trade, he could safely bring a load of slaves from Africa. He built the \"Clotilda\" slave ship and sent William Foster to captain it and retrieve enslaved Africans.\nCaptain William Foster arrived in Ouidah, a coastal port of Dahomey, and retrieved 110 slaves. Describing how he came in possession of the slaves, he wrote in his journal in 1860,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From thence I went to see the King of Dahomey. Having agreeably transacted affairs with the Prince we went to the warehouse where they had in confinement four thousand captives in a state of nudity from which they gave me liberty to select one hundred and twenty-five as mine offering to brand them for me, from which I preemptorily [sic] forbid; commenced taking on cargo of negroes, successfully securing on board one hundred and ten.\nZora Neal Hurston wrote about her interviews with Oluale Kossola, the last survivor of the \"Clotilda\", in her book \"\". A notable descendant of a slave from this ship is Ahmir Khalib Thompson, an American music artist known as Questlove. Mr. Thompson's story is depicted in the PBS Television show \"Finding Your Roots\" [Season 4, Episode 9].\nYoruba.\nThe Oyo Empire engaged in frequent conflicts with the Kingdom of Dahomey and Dahomey became a tributary of the Oyo from 1732 until 1823. The city-state of Porto-Novo, under the protection of Oyo, and Dahomey had a long-standing rivalry largely over control of the slave trade along the coast. The rise of Abeokuta in the 1840s created another power rivaling Dahomey, largely by creating a safe haven for people from the slave trade.\nNotable Yoruba people who were captured by Dahomey in slave raids following the collapse of the Oyo Empire include Sara Forbes Bonetta (Aina), Cudjoe Lewis (Oluale Kossola), Matilda McCrear (Abake), Redoshi, and Seriki Williams Abass (Ifaremilekun Fagbemi).\nMilitary.\nThe military of the Kingdom of Dahomey was divided into two units: the right and the left. The right was controlled by the \"migan\" and the left was controlled by the \"mehu\". At least by the time of Agaja, the kingdom had developed a standing army that remained encamped wherever the king was. Soldiers in the army were recruited as young as seven or eight years old, initially serving as shield carriers for regular soldiers. After years of apprenticeship and military experience, they were allowed to join the army as regular soldiers. To further incentivize the soldiers, each soldier received bonuses paid in cowry shells for each enemy they killed or captured in battle. This combination of lifelong military experience and monetary incentives resulted in a cohesive, well-disciplined military. One European said Agaja's standing army consisted of \"elite troops, brave and well-disciplined, led by a prince full of valor and prudence, supported by a staff of experienced officers\". The army consisted of 15,000 personnel which was divided into right, left, center and reserve; and in each of these was further divided into companies and platoons.\nIn addition to being well trained, the Dahomey army under Agaja was also very well armed. The Dahomey army favored imported European weapons as opposed to traditional weapons. For example, they used European flintlock muskets in long-range combat and imported steel swords and cutlasses in close combat. The Dahomey army also possessed twenty-five cannons. By the late 19th century, Dahomey had a large arsenal of weapons. These included the Chassepot Dreyse, Mauser, Snider Enfield, Wanzel, Werndl, Peabody action, Winchester, Spencer, Albini, Robert Jones carbine, French musketoon 1882 and the Mitrailleuse Reffye 1867. Along with firearms, Dahomey employed mortars.\nWhen going into battle, the king would take a secondary position to the field commander with the reason given that if any spirit were to punish the commander for decisions it should not be the king. Dahomey units were drilled constantly. They fired on command, employed countermarch, and formed extended lines from deep columns. Tactics such as covering fire, frontal attacks and flanking movements were used in the warfare of Dahomey. The Dahomey Amazons, a unit of all-female soldiers, is one of the most unusual aspects of the military of the kingdom. Unlike other regional powers, the military of Dahomey did not have a significant cavalry (like the Oyo empire) or naval power (which prevented expansion along the coast). From the 18th century, the state could obtain naval support from Ardra where they had created a subordinate dynasty after conquering the state in the early 18th century. Dahomey enlisted the services of Ardra's navy against the Epe in 1778 and Badagry in 1783.\nDahomey Amazons.\nThe Dahomean state became widely known for its corps of female soldiers. Their origins are debated; they may have formed from a palace guard or from (female hunting teams).\nThey were organized around 1729 to fill out the army and make it look larger in battle, armed only with banners. The women reportedly behaved so courageously they became a permanent corps. In the beginning, the soldiers were criminals pressed into service rather than being executed. Eventually, however, the corps became respected enough that King Ghezo ordered every family to send him their daughters, with the fittest being chosen as soldiers. European accounts clarified that seven distinct movements were required to load a Dane gun which took an Amazon 30 seconds in comparison to the 50 seconds it took a Dahomean male soldier to load.\nSiege and engineering.\nIn order to repress the navies of its neighbors, Dahomey built causeways starting from 1774. During a campaign against Whydah that year, Dahomey was able to force Whydah to fortify itself at an island called Foudou-Cong. Dahomey cut trees which were planted in the water to serve as a causeway and bridge the army's access to the fortified Whydah island. The causeway also obstructed the movement of a 700 canoe force belonging to Whydah. As a result, the Whydah army had to survive on the boats for months sustaining its forces with fish diet. According to Thornton, Dahomey used this strategy of siege causeways again in 1776 against another opponent state where it built 3 bridges to connect the island housing the opponent forces. \nCoastal belligerents opposing Dahomey allied with European forts against the state. Dahomey was able to capture Dutch and Portuguese forts in the 18th century through the use of ladders and sappers. Thornton writes that in 1737, Dahomey used scale ladders against the Dutch fort in Keta simultaneously as its sappers built a tunnel under the fort's bastion causing it to collapse when its defenders fired an artillery round within the bastion. A similar tactic was employed against a Portuguese fort with 30 mounted guns at Whydah in 1743 as its bastions collapsed enabling the Dahomey infantry to enter the fort. In 1728, Dahomey forces captured and destroyed a French fort at Whydah by blowing up the magazine that held the fort's ammunition and gunpowder. Another tactic for attacking coastal forts was the burning of nearby villages during a land breeze in order for the wind to carry the flames towards the fort. This tactic was first revealed by a British commander at Whydah in 1728, who countered it by burning the nearby villages during a sea breeze to prevent the Dahomeyan army from burning the villages during a land breeze. \nAs a result of the threat posed by Oyo in the 18th century, the state built fortifications of its own with the help of a French officer from whom they learnt field fortification and artillery. According to a Dutch source in 1772, the king of Dahomey \"has made deep ditches around his entire country as well as walls and batteries mounted with cannons he captured at Fida [Whydah].\" Thornton suggests these fortifications were mostly built out of wood. Dahomey used a tactic of trench construction against Oyo where its forces withdrew into the trenches after confrontation with the Oyo force. Despite this, Dahomey was overwhelmed by an Oyo siege after the arrival of reinforcement. In the mid 18th century, Abomey was surrounded by a ditch accessible by bridges whiles in 1772 the royal residence was surrounded with a mud brick wall 20 feet high, \"with blockhouses on each wall.\" \nDahomey also built underground chambers in Abomey which served varying functions including that of providing military installations for the army. These souterrains have been dated to the late 17th century. Wheeled vehicles are recorded to have been implemented in Dahomeyan warfare. In an operation against Abeokuta in 1864, Dahomey fielded three guns mounted on locally made carriages of which historian Robin Law adds that these weapons did not play an effective role in the battle. Some references exist about the possible production of guns and gunpowder in Dahomey. In 1880, king B\u00e9hanzin informed a French mission that firearms were manufactured in the state. Amid the war with France in 1892, a French expeditionary force discovered tools and resources such as cartridge cases, signal rockets and electric batteries which are necessary for making cartridges and repairing firearms.\nEconomy.\nThe economic structure of the kingdom was highly intertwined with the political and religious systems and these developed together significantly. The main currency was cowry shells.\nDomestic economy.\nThe domestic economy largely focused on agriculture and crafts for local consumption. Until the development of palm oil, very little agricultural or craft goods were traded outside of the kingdom. Markets served a key role in the kingdom and were organized around a rotating cycle of four days with a different market each day (the market type for the day was religiously sanctioned). Agriculture work was largely decentralized and done by most families. However, with the expansion of the kingdom, agricultural plantations began to be a common agricultural method in the kingdom. Craftwork was largely dominated by a formal guild system. Several wealthy citizens stored their cowrie wealth in a building called \"akueho\" (cowrie huts) located in the compounds of their houses. Such cowrie huts were designed to protect the cowries from fire and theft. Iroko argues that this was a form of banking in Dahomey because the owners of such \"akueho\" houses regularly kept the deposits of others in the storehouse which they used as a form of loans to 3rd parties. Guyer and Stiansen on the other hand, are skeptical of Iroko's theory.\nTaxation.\nHerskovits recounts a complex tax system in the kingdom, in which officials who represented the king, the , gathered data from each village regarding their harvest. Then the king set a tax based upon the level of production and village population. In addition, the king's own land and production were taxed. After significant road construction undertaken by the kingdom, toll booths were also established that collected yearly taxes based on the goods people carried and their occupation. Officials also sometimes imposed fines for public nuisance before allowing people to pass. Tax officials on road tolls were provided with armed guards. \nTaxes were imposed on craft workers including blacksmiths, weavers and wood cutters for example. Kangaroo courts could be held at any place such as the market or on roads, presided over by officials recognized by the central government. Such courts could extract some form of tax from the litigants before judging the case. Since the 18th century, prostitution (\"Ko-si\") was licensed by the king. Robert Norris and Archibald Dalzel documented in the late 18th century that the central government was responsible for distributing prostitutes throughout the state at a price set by civil decree. Taxes were derived from prostitutes during the annual customs.\nInfrastructure.\nRoyal Road.\nAn unpaved road system was developed from the port of Ouidah through Cana up to Abomey. Its purpose was to improve the transportation of the king between Cana and Abomey. The Royal Road dates to the 18th century but most primary sources about the road date to the century after. The road stretched over seven miles in a near straight line, between the gates of the two towns and its width was estimated to be 20\u201330 meters. The road was occasionally kept weeded and cleared with cutlass. Primary sources give varying accounts that the Royal Road was kept cleared every two or three months or even six weeks. The road was shaded by tall trees. The biggest specimen was that of a bombax tree species. Surrounding the road on both sides were intensive farms which Forbes stated in the mid 19th century, to have \"rivaled that of the Chinese.\" \nIn addition, religious shrines were lined along the road and Forbes counted 60 of them en route to Abomey. A palace was built halfway along the road by Tegbesu (1740\u20131774) to host the king as a resting place during transport. There is a lack of information about security provided across the Royal Road. Primary sources from the mid 19th century indicate that a large pair of carronades was placed on each side of the road near Abomey, which pointed towards Cana. A large number of cannons with diverse calibers were also placed at the road's end before the gates of Cana. Historian Alpern, indicates that the cannons in front of Cana might have served a ceremonial purpose because they lacked carriages to utilize.\nSlavery.\nBoth domestic slavery and the Atlantic slave trade were important to the economy of Dahomey. Men, women, and children captured by Dahomey in wars and slave raids were sold to European slave traders in exchange for various goods such as rifles, gunpowder, textiles, cowry shells, and alcohol. Dahomey used magical rituals for slave trading. Prior to being sold to Europeans, slaves were forced to march in circles around the \"Tree of Forgetfulness\" so they would lose memories of their culture, family, and homeland. The purpose of this ritual was to prevent the spirits of deceased slaves from returning and seeking revenge against the royalty of Dahomey.\nOther war captives who were not intended to be sold to Europeans remained in Dahomey as slaves. There, they worked on royal plantations that supplied food for the army and royal court. Some historians such as Watson and Schellinger have argued that the shift from slave trading to a plantation economy in the 19th century worsened the social perception of slaves in Dahomey. They cite reasons that slaves before then were treated as members of their master's family and they could attain free status after a generation or two. Following the intensification of palm oil in the state, it became common for slaves to be abused and ill treated. To solve this issue, King Ghezo declared the trial of cases involving the murder of slaves at the Judicial Court in Abomey.\nThere was a history of human sacrifice using slaves.\nReligion.\nThe Kingdom of Dahomey shared many religious rituals with surrounding populations; however, it also developed unique ceremonies, beliefs, and religious stories for the kingdom. These included royal ancestor worship and the specific vodun practices of the kingdom.\nRoyal ancestor worship.\nEarly kings established clear worship of royal ancestors and centralized their ceremonies in the Annual Customs of Dahomey. The spirits of the kings had an exalted position in the land of the dead and it was necessary to get their permission for many activities on earth. Ancestor worship pre-existed the kingdom of Dahomey; however, under King Agaja, a cycle of ritual was created centered on first celebrating the ancestors of the king and then celebrating a family lineage.\nThe Annual Customs of Dahomey ( or in Fon) involved multiple elaborate components and some aspects may have been added in the 19th century. In general, the celebration involved distribution of gifts, human sacrifice, military parades, and political councils. Its main religious aspect was to offer thanks and gain the approval for ancestors of the royal lineage. However, the custom also included military parades, public discussions, gift giving (the distribution of money to and from the king), and human sacrifice and the spilling of blood.\nHuman sacrifice was an important part of the practice. During the Annual Custom, 500 prisoners would be sacrificed. In addition, when a ruler died, hundreds, to thousands of prisoners would be sacrificed. In 1727, an English trader alleged that he witness the Dahomey massacre 400 people during a Vodun ceremony. The number is also often reported to be 4,000. Human sacrifice was often exaggerated, however, by contemporary anti-abolitionist Western authors, who sought to justify the continued need for slavery as a means to \"rescue\" Africans from a worse fate in Dahomey.\nDahomey cosmology.\nDahomey had a unique form of West African Vodun that linked together preexisting animist traditions with vodun practices. Oral history recounted that Hwanjile, a wife of Agaja and mother of Tegbessou, brought Vodun to the kingdom and ensured its spread. The primary deity is the combined Mawu-Lisa (Mawu having female characteristics and Lisa having male characteristics) and it is claimed that this god took over the world that was created by their mother Nana-Buluku. Mawu-Lisa governs the sky and is the highest pantheon of gods, but other gods exist in the earth and in thunder. Religious practice organized different priesthoods and shrines for each different god and each different pantheon (sky, earth or thunder). Women made up a significant amount of the priest class and the chief priest was always a descendant of Dakodonou.\nArts.\nThe arts in Dahomey were unique and distinct from the artistic traditions elsewhere in Africa. The arts were substantially supported by the king and his family, had non-religious traditions, assembled multiple different materials, and borrowed widely from other peoples in the region. Common art forms included wood and ivory carving, metalwork (including silver, iron and brass, appliqu\u00e9 cloth, and clay bas-reliefs).\nThe king was key in supporting the arts and many of them provided significant sums for artists resulting in the unique development, for the region, of a non-religious artistic tradition in the kingdom. Artists were not of a specific class but both royalty and commoners made important artistic contributions. Kings were often depicted in large zoomorphic forms with each king resembling a particular animal in multiple representations.\nSuzanne Blier identifies two unique aspects of art in Dahomey: 1. Assemblage of different components and 2. Borrowing from other states. Assemblage of art, involving the combination of multiple components (often of different materials) combined in a single piece of art, was common in all forms and was the result of the various kings promoting finished products rather than particular styles. This assembling may have been a result of the second feature, which involved the wide borrowing of styles and techniques from other cultures and states. Clothing, cloth work, architecture, and the other forms of art all resemble other artistic representation from around the region.\nMuch of the artwork revolved around the royalty. Each of the palaces at the Royal Palaces of Abomey contained elaborate bas-reliefs (\"noundid\u0117\" in Fon) providing a record of the king's accomplishments. Each king had his own palace within the palace complex and within the outer walls of their personal palace was a series of clay reliefs designed specific to that king. These were not solely designed for royalty and chiefs, temples, and other important buildings had similar reliefs. The reliefs would present Dahomey kings often in military battles against the Oyo or Mahi tribes to the north of Dahomey with their opponents depicted in various negative depictions (the king of Oyo is depicted in one as a baboon eating a cob of corn). Historical themes dominated representation and characters were basically designed and often assembled on top of each other or in close proximity creating an ensemble effect. In addition to the royal depictions in the reliefs, royal members were depicted in power sculptures known as \"bocio\", which incorporated mixed materials (including metal, wood, beads, cloth, fur, feathers, and bone) onto a base forming a standing figure. The bocio are religiously designed to include different forces together to unlock powerful forces. In addition, the cloth appliqu\u00e9 of Dahomey depicted royalty often in similar zoomorphic representation and dealt with matters similar to the reliefs, often the kings leading during warfare.\nDahomey had a distinctive tradition of casting small brass figures of animals or people, which were worn as jewellery or displayed in the homes of the relatively well-off. These figures, which continue to be made for the tourist trade, were relatively unusual in traditional African art in having no religious aspect, being purely decorative, as well as indicative of some wealth. Also unusual, by being so early and clearly provenanced, is a carved wooden tray (not dissimilar to much more recent examples) in Ulm, Germany, which was brought to Europe before 1659, when it was described in a printed catalogue.\nWheeled carriages were used in Dahomey after their introduction into the region of modern Benin in the late 17th century. Some carriages were manufactured indigenously while most were obtained as gifts from European allies. The carriages were often used for ceremonial purposes and were drawn mostly by men due to the small number of horses in the state. Carriages in Dahomey came in varying sizes and shapes. Some were modelled after ships, elephants and horses. Burton noted that the road between Abomey and the town of Cana, which was about six to seven miles long, was regularly kept weeded for the convenience of the royal carriages.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Kingdom of Dahomey has been depicted in a number of different works of fiction or creative nonfiction.\nVideo games.\nDahomey has been depicted in some historical war strategy video games. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8767", "revid": "1503319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8767", "title": "Dragoon", "text": "Type of mounted soldiers\nDragoons were originally a class of mounted infantry, who used horses for mobility, but dismounted to fight on foot. From the early 17th century onward, dragoons were increasingly also employed as conventional cavalry and trained for combat with swords and firearms from horseback. While their use goes back to the late 16th century, dragoon regiments were established in most European armies during the 17th and early 18th centuries; they provided greater mobility than regular infantry but were far less expensive than cavalry.\nThe name reputedly derives from a type of firearm, called a \"dragon\", which was a handgun version of a blunderbuss, carried by dragoons of the French Army.\nThe title has been retained in modern times by a number of armoured or ceremonial mounted regiments.\nOrigins and name.\nThe establishment of dragoons evolved from the practice of sometimes transporting infantry by horse when speed of movement was needed. In 1552, Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma mounted several companies of infantry on pack horses to achieve surprise, another example being that used by Louis of Nassau in 1572 during operations near Mons in Hainaut, when 500 infantry were transported this way. It is also suggested the first dragoons were raised by the Marshal de Brissac in 1600. According to old German literature, dragoons were invented by Count Ernst von Mansfeld, one of the greatest German military commanders, in the early 1620s. There are other instances of mounted infantry predating this. However Mansfeld, who had learned his profession in Hungary and the Netherlands, often used horses to make his foot troops more mobile, creating what was called an \"arm\u00e9e volante\" (French for \"flying army\").\nDuring the Spanish Conquest of Peru in the 16th century, conquistadors fought on horse with arquebuses, prefiguring the origin of European dragoons.\nThe name possibly derives from an early weapon, a short wheellock, called a \"dragon\" because its muzzle was decorated with a dragon's head. The practice comes from a time when all gunpowder weapons had distinctive names, including the culverin, serpentine, falcon, falconet, etc. It is also sometimes claimed a galloping infantryman with his loose coat and the burning match resembled a dragon.\nIt has also been suggested that the name derives from the German \"tragen\" or the Dutch \"dragen\", both being the verb \"to carry\" in their respective languages. Howard Reid claims the name and role descend from the Latin Draconarius.\nUse as a verb.\nDragoon is occasionally used as a verb to mean to subjugate or persecute by the imposition of troops; and by extension to compel by any violent measures or threats. The term dates from 1689, at a time when dragoons were being used by the French monarchy to persecute Protestants, particularly by forcing Protestants to lodge a dragoon in their house to watch over them, at the householder's expense.\nEarly history and role.\nEarly dragoons were not organized in squadrons or troops as were cavalry, but in companies like the infantry. Their commissioned and non-commissioned officers bore infantry ranks, while they used drummers, not buglers, to communicate orders on the battlefield. The flexibility of mounted infantry made dragoons a useful arm, especially when employed for what would now be termed \"internal security\" against smugglers or civil unrest, and on line of communication security duties.\nIn Britain, companies of dragoons were first raised during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms and prior to 1645 either served as independent troops or were attached to cavalry units. When the New Model Army was first approved by Parliament in January 1645, it included ten regiments of cavalry, each with a company of dragoons attached. At the urging of Sir Thomas Fairfax, on 1 March they were formed into a separate unit of 1,000 men, commanded by Colonel John Okey, and played an important part at the Battle of Naseby in June.\nSupplied with inferior horses and more basic equipment, the dragoon regiments were cheaper to raise and maintain than the expensive regiments of cavalry. When in the 17th century Gustav II Adolf introduced dragoons into the Swedish Army, he provided them with a sabre, an axe and a matchlock musket, using them as \"labourers on horseback\". Many of the European armies henceforth imitated this all-purpose set of weaponry. Dragoons of the late 17th and early 18th centuries retained strong links with infantry in appearance and equipment, differing mainly in the substitution of riding boots for shoes and the adoption of caps instead of broad-brimmed hats to enable muskets to be worn slung.\nA non-military use of dragoons was the 1681 \"Dragonnades\", a policy instituted by Louis XIV to intimidate Huguenot families into either leaving France or re-converting to Catholicism by billeting ill-disciplined dragoons in Protestant households. While other categories of infantry and cavalry were also used, the mobility, flexibility and available numbers of the dragoon regiments made them particularly suitable for repressive work of this nature over a wide area.\nIn the Spanish Army, Pedro de la Puente organized a body of dragoons in Innsbruck in 1635. In 1640, a tercio of a thousand dragoons armed with the arquebus was created in Spain. By the end of the 17th century, the Spanish Army had three tercios of dragoons in Spain, plus three in the Netherlands and three more in Milan. In 1704, the Spanish dragoons were reorganised into regiments by Philip V, as were the rest of the tercios.\nDragoons were at a disadvantage when engaged against true cavalry, and constantly sought to improve their horsemanship, armament and social status. By the Seven Years' War in 1756, their primary role in most European armies had progressed from that of mounted infantry to that of heavy cavalry. They were sometimes described as 'medium' cavalry, midway between heavy/armoured and light/unarmoured regiments, though this was a classification that was rarely used at the time. Their original responsibilities for scouting and picket duty had passed to hussars and similar light cavalry corps in the French, Austrian, Prussian, and other armies. In the Imperial Russian Army, due to the availability of Cossack troops, the dragoons were retained in their original role for much longer.\nAn exception to the rule was the British Army, which from 1746 onward gradually redesignated all regiments of \"Horse\" (regular cavalry) as lower paid \"Dragoons\", in an economy measure. Starting in 1756, seven regiments of Light Dragoons were raised and trained in reconnaissance, skirmishing and other work requiring endurance in accordance with contemporary standards of light cavalry performance. The success of this new class of cavalry was such that another eight dragoon regiments were converted between 1768 and 1783. When this reorganisation was completed in 1788, the cavalry arm consisted of regular dragoons and seven units of Dragoon Guards. The designation of Dragoon Guards did not mean that these regiments (the former 2nd to 8th Horse) had become Household Troops, but simply that they had been given a more dignified title to compensate for the loss of pay and prestige.\nTowards the end of 1776, George Washington realized the need for a mounted branch of the American military. In January 1777 four regiments of light dragoons were raised. Short term enlistments were abandoned and the dragoons joined for three years, or \"the war\". They participated in most of the major engagements of the American War of Independence, including the Battles of White Plains, Trenton, Princeton, Brandywine, Germantown, Saratoga, Cowpens, and Monmouth, as well as the Yorktown campaign.\n19th century.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars, dragoons generally assumed a cavalry role, though remaining a lighter class of mounted troops than the armored cuirassiers. Dragoons rode larger horses than the light cavalry and wielded straight, rather than curved swords. Emperor Napoleon often formed complete divisions out of his 30 dragoon regiments, while in 1811 six regiments were converted to \"Chevau-Legers Lanciers\"; they were often used in battle to break the enemy's main resistance. In northern and eastern Europe they were employed as heavy cavalry, while in the Peninsular War they also fulfilled the role of lighter cavalry, for example in anti-guerrilla operations. In 1809, French dragoons scored notable successes against Spanish armies at the Battle of Ocana and the Battle of Alba de Tormes.\nPost 1805, the 7th, 10th, 15th and 18th regiments of Light Dragoons of the British Army were re-designated as hussars and when the Napoleonic Wars ended in 1815, some became lancers. The transition from dragoons to hussars was however a slow one, affecting uniforms but not equipment and functions. Even titles often remained ambiguous until 1861, for example, 18th King's Light Dragoons (Hussars).\nThe seven regiments of Dragoon Guards served as the heavy cavalry arm of the British Army, although unlike continental cuirassiers they carried no armour. Between 1816 and 1861, the other twenty-one cavalry regiments were either disbanded or rebadged as lancers or hussars. \nThe creation of a unified German state in 1871 brought together the dragoon regiments of Prussia, Bavaria, Saxony, Mecklenburg, Oldenburg, Baden, Hesse, and W\u00fcrttemberg in a single numbered sequence, although historic distinctions of insignia and uniform were largely preserved. Two regiments of the Imperial Guard were designated as dragoons.\nThe Austrian (later Austro-Hungarian) Army of the 19th century included six regiments of dragoons in 1836, classed as heavy cavalry for shock action, but in practice used as multi-purpose medium troops. After 1859 all but two Austrian dragoon regiments were converted to cuirassiers or disbanded. From 1868 to 1918 the Austro-Hungarian dragoons numbered 15 regiments.\nDuring the 18th century, Spain raised several regiments of dragoons to protect the northern provinces and borders of New Spain, the present-day states of California, Nevada, Colorado, Texas, Kansas, Arizona, Montana, North Dakota, and South Dakota. In mainland Spain, dragoons were reclassified as light cavalry from 1803 but remained among the elite units of the Spanish Colonial Army. A number of dragoon officers played a leading role in initiating the Mexican War of Independence in 1810, including Ignacio Allende, Juan Aldama and Agustin de Iturbide, who briefly served as Emperor of M\u00e9xico from 1822 to 1823.\nPrior to the War of 1812 the U.S. organized the Regiment of Light Dragoons. For the war a second regiment was activated; that regiment was consolidated with the original regiment in 1814. The original regiment was consolidated with the Corps of Artillery in June 1815. The United States Dragoons was organized by an Act of Congress approved on 2 March 1833 after the disbandment of the Battalion of Mounted Rangers. The unit became the \"First Regiment of Dragoons\" when the Second Dragoons was raised in 1836. In 1861, they were re-designated as the 1st and 2nd Cavalry but did not change their role or equipment, although the traditional orange uniform braiding of the dragoons was replaced by the standard yellow of the Cavalry branch. This marked the official end of dragoons in the U.S. Army in name, although certain modern units trace their origins back to the historic dragoon regiments. In practice, all US cavalry assumed a dragoon-like role, frequently using carbines and pistols, in addition to their swords.\nBetween 1881 and 1907 all Russian cavalry (other than Cossacks and Imperial Guard regiments) were designated as dragoons, reflecting an emphasis on the double ability of dismounted action as well as the new cavalry tactics in their training and a growing acceptance of the impracticality of employing historical cavalry tactics against modern firepower. Upon the reinstatement of Uhlan and Hussar Regiments in 1907 their training pattern, as well as that of the Cuirassiers of the Guard, remained unchanged until the collapse of the Russian Imperial Army.\nIn Japan, during the late 19th and early 20th century, dragoons were deployed in the same way as in other armies, but were dressed as hussars.\n20th century.\nIn the period before 1914, there were still dragoon regiments in the British and French armies, as well as German, Russian, Austro-Hungarian, Canadian, Peruvian, Swiss, Norwegian, Swedish, Danish, and Spanish. Their uniforms varied greatly, lacking the characteristic features of hussar or lancer regiments. There were occasional reminders of their mounted infantry origins; the 28 dragoon regiments of the Imperial German Army wore the infantry Pickelhaube or spiked helmet, while British dragoons wore scarlet tunics for full dress while hussars and all but one of the lancer regiments wore dark blue. In other respects however dragoons had adopted the same tactics, roles and equipment as other branches of the cavalry and the distinction had become simply one of traditional titles. Weaponry had ceased to have a historic connection, with both the French and German dragoon regiments carrying lances during the early stages of World War I.\nThe historic German, Russian and Austro-Hungarian dragoon regiments ceased to exist as distinct branches following the overthrow of the respective imperial regimes of these countries during 1917\u201318. The Spanish dragoons, which dated back to 1640, were reclassified as numbered cavalry regiments in 1931 as part of the army modernization policies of the Second Spanish Republic.\nThe Australian Light Horse were similar to 18th-century dragoon regiments in some respects, being mounted infantry which normally fought on foot, their horses' purpose being transportation. They served during the Second Boer War and World War I. The Australian 4th Light Horse Brigade became famous for the Battle of Beersheba in 1917 where they charged on horseback using rifle bayonets in hand, since neither sabres or lances were part of their equipment. Later in the Palestine campaign Pattern 1908 Cavalry swords were issued and used in the campaign leading to the fall of Damascus.\nProbably the last use of real dragoons (infantry on horseback) in combat was made by the Portuguese Army in the war in Angola during the 1960s and 1970s. In 1966, the Portuguese created an experimental horse platoon, to operate against the guerrillas in the high grass region of Eastern Angola, in which each soldier was armed with a G3 assault rifle for combat on foot and with a semi-automatic pistol to fire from horseback. The troops on horseback were able to operate in difficult terrain unsuited to motor vehicles and had the advantage of being able to control the area around them, with a clear view over the grass that foot troops did not have. Moreover, these unconventional troops created a psychological impact on an enemy that was not used to facing horse troops, and thus had no training or strategy to deal with them. The experimental horse platoon was so successful that its entire parent battalion was transformed from an armored reconnaissance unit to a three-squadron horse battalion known as the \"Dragoons of Angola\". One of the typical operations carried out by the Dragoons of Angola, in cooperation with airmobile forces, consisted of the dragoons chasing the guerrillas and pushing them in one direction, with the airmobile troops being launched from helicopter in the enemy rear, trapping the enemy between the two forces.\nDragoner rank.\nUntil 1918 Dragoner (en: dragoon) was the designation given to the lowest ranks in the dragoon regiments of the Austro-Hungarian and Imperial German Armies. The \"Dragoner\" rank, together with all other private ranks of the different branch of service, belonged to the so-called \"Gemeine\" rank group.\nModern dragoons.\nBrazil.\nThe guard of honour for the President of Brazil includes the 1st Guards Cavalry Regiment of the Brazilian Army, known as the \"Drag\u00f5es da Independ\u00eancia\" (Independence Dragoons). The name was given in 1927 and refers to the fact that a detachment of dragoons escorted the Prince Royal of Portugal and Brazil, Pedro of Braganza, at the time when he declared the Brazilian independence from the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves on 7 September 1822.\nThe Independence Dragoons wear 19th-century dress uniforms similar to those of the earlier Imperial Honor Guard, which are used as the regimental full dress uniform since 1927. The uniform was designed by Debret, in white and red, with plumed bronze helmets. The colors and pattern were influenced by the Austrian dragoons of the period, as the Brazilian Empress consort was also an Austrian archduchess. The color of the plumes varies according to rank. The Independence Dragoons are armed with lances and sabres, the latter only for the officers and the colour guard.\nThe regiment was established in 1808 by the Prince Regent and future King of Portugal, John VI, with the duty of protecting the Portuguese royal family, which had sought refuge in Brazil during the Napoleonic wars. However dragoons had existed in Portugal since at least the early 18th century and, in 1719, units of this type of cavalry were sent to Brazil, initially to escort shipments of gold and diamonds and to guard the Viceroy who resided in Rio de Janeiro (1st Cavalry Regiment \u2013 Vice-Roy Guard Squadron). Later, they were also sent to the south to serve against the Spanish during frontier clashes. After the proclamation of the Brazilian independence, the title of the regiment was changed to that of the Imperial Honor Guard, with the role of protecting the Imperial Family. The Guard was later disbanded by Emperor Pedro II and would be recreated only later in the republican era.\nAt the time of the Republic proclamation in 1889, horse No. 6 of the Imperial Honor Guard was ridden by the officer making the declaration of the end of Imperial rule, Second lieutenant Eduardo Jos\u00e9 Barbosa. This is commemorated by the custom under which the horse having this number is used only by the commander of the modern regiment.\nCanada.\nThere are three dragoon regiments in the Canadian Army: The Royal Canadian Dragoons and two reserve regiments, the British Columbia Dragoons and the Saskatchewan Dragoons.\nThe Royal Canadian Dragoons is the senior Armoured regiment in the Canadian Army. The regiment was authorized in 1883 as the Cavalry School Corps, being redesignated as Canadian Dragoons in 1892, adding the Royal designation the next year. The RCD has a history of fighting dismounted, serving in the Second Boer War in South Africa as mounted infantry, fighting as infantry with the 1st Canadian Division in Flanders in 1915\u20131916 and spending the majority of the regiment's service in the Italian Campaign 1944\u20131945 fighting dismounted. In 1994 when the regiment deployed to Bosnia as part of the United Nations Protection Force, B Squadron was employed as a mechanized infantry company. The current role of The Royal Canadian Dragoons is to provide Armour Reconnaissance support to 2 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group (2 CMBG) as well as C Squadron RCD in Gagetown supporting the Combat Training Centre with Leopard 2A4 and 2A6 tanks.\nThe Royal Canadian Mounted Police were accorded the formal status of a regiment of dragoons in 1921. The modern RCMP does not retain any military status however.\nChile.\nFounded as the \"Dragones de la Reina\" (Queen's Dragoons) in 1758 and later renamed the Dragoons of Chile in 1812, and then becoming the Carabineros de Chile in 1903. The Carabineros are the national police of Chile. The military counterpart, that of the 15th Reinforced Regiment \"Dragoons\" is now as of 2010 the 4th Armored Brigade \"Chorrillos\" based in Punta Arenas as the 6th Armored Cavalry Squadron \"Dragoons\", and form part of the 5th Army Division.\nDenmark.\nThe Royal Danish Army includes amongst its historic regiments the Jutish Dragoon Regiment, which was raised in 1670.\nFrance.\nThe modern French Army retains three dragoon regiments from the thirty-two in existence at the beginning of World War I: the 2nd, which is a nuclear, biological and chemical protection regiment, the 5th, an experimental Combined arms regiment, and the 13th (Special Reconnaissance).\nLithuania.\nBeginning in the 17th century, the mercenary army of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania included dragoon units. In the middle of the 17th century there were 1,660 dragoons in an army totaling 8,000 men. By the 18th century there were four regiments of dragoons.\nLithuanian cavalrymen served in dragoon regiments of both the Russian and Prussian armies, after the Partitions of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nBetween 1920 and 1924 and 1935\u20131940 the Lithuanian Army included the Third Dragoon \"Iron Wolf\" Regiment. The dragoons were the equivalent of the present-day Volunteer Forces.\nIn modern Lithuania the Grand Duke Butigeidis Dragoon Battalion (\"Lithuanian: did\u017eiojo kunigaik\u0161\u010dio Butigeid\u017eio drag\u016bn\u0173 batalionas\") is designated as dragoons, with a motorized infantry role.\nMexico.\nDuring the times of the Viceroyalty, regiments of dragoons (Dragon de cuera) were created to defend New Spain. They were mostly horsemen from the provinces. During and after the Mexican war of independence, dragons have played an important role in military conflicts within the country such as the Battle of Puebla during the French intervention, until the Mexican Revolution. One of the best-known military marches in Mexico is the Marcha Dragona (dragon march), the only one currently used by cavalry and motorized units during the parade on 16 September to commemorate Independence Day.\nNorway.\nIn the Norwegian Army during the early part of the 20th century, dragoons served in part as mounted troops, and in part on skis or bicycles (\"hjulryttere\", meaning \"wheel-riders\"). Dragoons fought on horses, bicycles and skis against the German invasion in 1940. After World War II the dragoon regiments were reorganized as armoured reconnaissance units. \"Dragon\" is the rank of a compulsory service private cavalryman while enlisted (regular) cavalrymen have the same rank as infantrymen: \"Grenader\".\nPakistan.\nThe Armoured Regiment \"34 Lancers\" of Pakistan Army Armoured Corps is also known as \"Dragoons\".\nPeru.\nThe \"Mariscal Domingo Nieto\" Cavalry Regiment Escort, named after Field Marshal Domingo Nieto, a former President of Peru, were the traditional Guard of the Government Palace until 5 March 1987 and its disbandment in that year. However, by Ministerial Resolution No 139-2012/DE/EP of 2 February 2012 the restoration of the Cavalry Regiment \"Marshal Domingo Nieto\" as the official escort of the President of the Republic of Peru was announced. The main mission of the reestablished regiment was to guarantee the security of the President of the Republic and of the Government Palace.\nThis regiment of dragoons was created in 1904 following the suggestion of a French military mission which undertook the reorganization of the Peruvian Army in 1896. The initial title of the unit was Cavalry Squadron \"President's Escort\". It was modelled on the French dragoons of the period. The unit was later renamed as the Cavalry Regiment \"President's Escort\" before receiving its current title in 1949.\nThe Peruvian Dragoon Guard has throughout its existence worn French-style uniforms of black tunic and red breeches in winter and white coat and red breeches in summer, with red and white plumed bronze helmets with the coat of arms of Peru and golden or red epaulettes depending on rank. They retain their original armament of lances and sabres, until the 1980s rifles were used for dismounted drill.\nAt 13:00 hours every day, the main esplanade in front of the Government Palace of Per\u00fa fronting Lima's Main Square serves as the stage for the changing of the guard, undertaken by members of the Presidential Life Guard Escort Dragoons, mounted or dismounted. While the dismounted changing is held on Mondays and Fridays, the mounted ceremony is held twice a month on a Sunday.\nPortugal.\nThe Portuguese Army still maintains two units which are descended from former regiments of dragoons. These are the 3rd Regiment of Cavalry (the former \"Oliven\u00e7a Dragoons\") and the 6th Regiment of Cavalry (the former \"Chaves Dragoons\"). Both regiments are, presently, armoured units. The Portuguese Rapid Reaction Brigade's Armoured Reconnaissance Squadron \u2013 a unit from the 3rd Regiment of Cavalry \u2013 is known as the \"Paratroopers Dragoons\".\nDuring the Portuguese Colonial War in the 1960s and the 1970s, the Portuguese Army created an experimental horse platoon, to combat the guerrillas in eastern Angola. This unit was soon augmented, becoming a group of three squadrons, known as the \"Angola Dragoons\". The Angola Dragoons operated as mounted infantry \u2013 like the original dragoons \u2013 each soldier being armed with a pistol to fire when on horseback and with an automatic rifle, to use when dismounted. A unit of the same type was being created in Mozambique when the war ended in 1974.\nSpain.\nThe Spanish Army began the training of a dragoon corps in 1635 under the direction of Pedro de la Puente at Innsbruck. In 1640 the first dragoon \"tercio\" was created, equipped with arquebuses and maces. The number of dragoon tercios was increased to nine by the end of the XVII century: three garrisoned in Spain, another three in the Netherlands and the remainder in Milan.\nThe \"tercio\"s were converted into a Regimental system, beginning in 1704. Philip V created several additional dragoon regiments to perform the functions of a police corps in the New World. Notable amongst those units were the leather-clad \"dragones de cuera\".\nIn 1803 the dragoon regiments were renamed as \"\"caballer\u00eda ligera\" (light cavalry). By 1815 these units had been disbanded.\nSpain recreated its dragoons in the late nineteenth century. Three Spanish dragoon regiments were still in existence in 1930.\nSweden.\nIn the Swedish Army, dragoons comprise the Military Police and Military Police Rangers. They also form the 13th Battalion of the Life Guards, which is a military police unit. The 13th (Dragoons) Battalion have roots that go back as far as 1523, making it one of the world's oldest military units still in service. Today, the only mounted units still retained by the Swedish Army are the two dragoons squadrons of the King's Guards Battalion of the Life Guards. Horses are used for ceremonial purposes only, most often when the dragoons take part in the changing of the guards at The Royal Palace in Stockholm. \"Livdragon\" is the rank of a private cavalryman.\nSwitzerland.\nMounted dragoons existed in the Swiss Armed Forces until the early 1970s, when they were converted into Armoured Grenadiers units. The \"Dragoner\"\" had to prove he was able to keep a horse at home before entering the army. At the end of basic training they had to buy a horse at a reduced price from the army and to take it home together with equipment, uniform and weapon. In the \"yearly repetition course\" the dragoons served with their horses, often riding from home to the meeting point.\nThe abolition of the dragoon units, believed to be the last non-ceremonial horse cavalry in Europe, was a contentious issue in Switzerland. On 5 December 1972 the Swiss \"National Council\" approved the measure by 91 votes, against 71 for retention.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAs of 2021, the British Army contains four regiments designated as dragoons: 1st The Queens Dragoon Guards, Royal Scots Dragoon Guards, the Royal Dragoon Guards, and the Light Dragoons. These perform a variety of reconnaissance and light support activities, including convoy protection, and operate the Jackal, the Coyote Reconnaissance Vehicle and the FV107 Scimitar light tank.\nUnited States.\nThe 1st and 2nd Battalion, 48th Infantry were mechanized infantry units assigned to the 3rd Armored Division (3AD) in West Germany during the Cold War. The unit crest of the 48th Infantry designated the unit as Dragoons, purely a traditional designation.\nThe 1st Dragoons was reformed in the Vietnam War era as the 1st Squadron, 1st U.S. Cavalry. It served in the Iraq War and remains as the oldest cavalry unit, as well as the most decorated one, in the U.S. Army. Today's modern 1\u20131 Cavalry is a scout/attack unit, equipped with MRAPs, M3A3 Bradley CFVs, and Strykers.\nAnother modern United States Army unit, informally known as the 2nd Dragoons, is the 2nd Cavalry Regiment. This unit was originally organized as the Second Regiment of Dragoons in 1836 and was renamed the Second Cavalry Regiment in 1861, being redesignated as the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment in 1948. The regiment is currently equipped with the Stryker family of wheeled fighting vehicles and was redesignated as the 2nd Stryker Cavalry Regiment in 2006. In 2011 the 2nd Dragoon regiment was redesignated as the 2nd Cavalry Regiment. The 2nd Cavalry Regiment has the distinction of being the longest continuously serving regiment in the United States Army.\nThe 113th Army Band at Fort Knox is also officially nicknamed as \"The Dragoons\". This derives from its formation as the Band, First Regiment of Dragoons on 8 July 1840.\nCompany D, 3rd Light Armored Reconnaissance Battalion of the United States Marine Corps, is nicknamed the \"Dragoons\". Their combat history includes Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom from 2002 to 2013.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8768", "revid": "4490355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8768", "title": "Dulcimer", "text": "The word dulcimer refers to two families of musical string instruments.\nHammered dulcimers.\nThe word \"dulcimer\" originally referred to a trapezoidal zither similar to a psaltery whose many strings are struck by handheld \"hammers\". Variants of this instrument are found in many cultures, including:\nAppalachian dulcimer and derivatives.\nIn the Appalachian region of the U.S. in the nineteenth century, hammered dulcimers were rare. There, the word \"dulcimer\", which was familiar from the King James Version of the Bible, was used to refer to a three or four stringed fretted instrument, generally played on the lap by strumming. \nVariants include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndex of articles associated with the same name\nThis includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "8769", "revid": "45623991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8769", "title": "Dutch West India Company", "text": "Dutch chartered company responsible for trade and colonization in the New World (1621\u20131792)\nThe Dutch West India Company or WIC () ] was a chartered company of Dutch merchants as well as foreign investors, formally known as GWC (). Among its founders were Reynier Pauw, Willem Usselincx (1567\u20131647) and Jess\u00e9 de Forest (1576\u20131624). On 3 June 1621, it was granted a for a trade monopoly in the Dutch West Indies by the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands and given jurisdiction over Dutch participation in the Atlantic slave trade, Brazil, the Caribbean, and North America. \nThe area where the company could operate consisted of West Africa (between the Tropic of Cancer and the Cape of Good Hope) and the Americas, which included the Pacific Ocean and ended east of the Maluku Islands, according to the Treaty of Tordesillas. The intended purpose of the charter was to eliminate competition, particularly Spanish or Portuguese, between the various trading posts established by the merchants. The company became instrumental in the largely ephemeral Dutch colonization of the Americas (including New Netherland) in the seventeenth century. \nFrom 1624 to 1654, in the context of the Dutch\u2013Portuguese War, the GWC held Portuguese territory in northeast Brazil, but they were ousted from Dutch Brazil following fierce resistance. After several reversals, the GWC reorganized and a new charter was granted in 1675, largely on the strength in the Atlantic slave trade. This \"new\" version lasted for more than a century, until after the Fourth Anglo\u2013Dutch War, during which it lost most of its assets.\nOrigins.\nWhen the Dutch East India Company (VOC) was founded in 1602, some traders in Amsterdam did not agree with its monopolistic policies. With help from Petrus Plancius, a Dutch-Flemish astronomer, cartographer, and clergyman, they sought for a northeastern or northwestern access to Asia to circumvent the VOC monopoly. In 1609, English explorer Henry Hudson, in employment of the VOC, landed on the coast of New England and sailed up what is now known as the Hudson River in his quest for the Northwest Passage to Asia. However, he failed to find a passage. Consequently, in 1615, Isaac Le Maire and Samuel Blommaert, assisted by others, focused on finding a south-westerly route around South America's Tierra del Fuego archipelago in order to circumvent the monopoly of the VOC.\nOne of the first sailors who focused on trade with Africa was Balthazar de Moucheron. The trade with Africa offered several possibilities to set up trading posts or factories, an important starting point for negotiations. It was Blommaert, however, who stated that, in 1600, eight companies sailed on the coast of Africa, competing with each other for the supply of copper, from the Kingdom of Loango. Pieter van den Broecke was employed by one of these companies. In 1612, a Dutch fortress was built in Mouree (present day Ghana), along the Dutch Gold Coast.\nTrade with the Caribbean, for salt, sugar and tobacco, was hampered by Spain and delayed because of peace negotiations. Spain offered peace on condition that the Dutch Republic would withdraw from trading with Asia and America. Spain refused to sign the peace treaty if a West Indian Company would be established. At this time, the Dutch War of Independence (1568\u20131648) between Spain and the Dutch Republic was occurring. Grand Pensionary Johan van Oldenbarnevelt offered to suspend trade with the West Indies in exchange for the Twelve Years' Truce. He took the proposal of founding a West-India Company off table. The result was that, during a few years, the Dutch sailed under a foreign flag to South America. However, ten years later, Stadtholder Maurice of Orange, proposed to continue the war with Spain, but also to distract attention from Spain to the Republic. In 1619, his opponent Johan van Oldenbarnevelt was beheaded, and when in April 1621 the truce expired, the West Indian Company could be established.\nThe West India Company received its charter from the States-General in June 1621, granting it a 24-year monopoly on trade and colonization that included the American coast between Newfoundland and the Straits of Magellan. One of the promotors all these years was Reynier Pauw who appointed two of his sons as the first managers in 1621; both Pieter and Michael Reyniersz Pauw were in function for fifteen years. Reynier Pauw jr, Cornelis Bicker and Samuel Blommaert were appointed in 1622.\nOrganization.\nThe \"Dutch West India Company\" was organized similarly to the Dutch East India Company (VOC). Like the VOC, the GWC had five offices, called chambers (\"kamers\"), in Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Hoorn, Middelburg and Groningen, of which the chambers in Amsterdam and Middelburg contributed most to the company. The board consisted of 19 members, known as the Heeren XIX (the Nineteen Gentlemen). The institutional structure of the GWC followed the federal structure, which entailed extensive discussion for any decision, with regional representation: 8 from Amsterdam; 4 from Zeeland, 2 each from the Northern Quarter (Hoorn and Enkhuizen), the Maas (Rotterdam, Delft and Dordrecht), the region of Groningen, and one representative from the States General. Each region had its own chamber and board of directors. The validity of the charter was set at 24 years.\nOnly in 1623 was funding arranged, after several bidders were put under pressure. The States General of the Netherlands and the VOC pledged one million guilders in the form of capital and subsidy. Although Iberian writers said that crypto-Jews or Marranos played an important role in the formation of both the VOC and the GWC, research has shown that initially they played a minor role, but expanded during the period of the Dutch in Brazil. Emigrant Calvinists from the Spanish Netherlands did make significant investments in the GWC. Investors did not rush to put their money in the company in 1621, but the States-General urged municipalities and other institutions to invest. Explanations for the slow investment by individuals were that shareholders had \"no control over the directors' policy and the handling of ordinary investors' money,\" that it was a \"racket\" to provide \"cushy posts for the directors and their relatives, at the expense of ordinary shareholders\". The VOC directors invested money in the GWC, without consulting their shareholders, causing dissent among a number of shareholders. In order to attract foreign shareholders, the GWC offered equal standing to foreign investors with Dutch, resulting in shareholders from France, Switzerland, and Venice. A translation of the original 1621 charter appeared in English, \"Orders and Articles granted by the High and Mightie Lords the States General of the United Provinces concerning the erecting of a West-Indies Companie, Anno Dom. MDCXII\". by 1623, the capital for the GWC at 2.8\u00a0million florins was not as great the VOC's original capitalization of 6.5\u00a0million, but it was still a substantial sum. The GWC had 15 ships to carry trade and plied the west African coast and Brazil.\nUnlike the VOC, the GWC had no right to deploy military troops. When the Twelve Years' Truce in 1621 was over, the Republic had a free hand to re-wage war with Spain. A \"Groot Desseyn\" (\"grand design\") was devised to seize the Portuguese colonies in Africa and the Americas, so as to dominate the sugar and slave trade. When this plan failed, privateering became one of the major goals within the GWC. The arming of merchant ships with guns and soldiers to defend themselves against Spanish ships was of great importance. On almost all ships in 1623, 40 to 50 soldiers were stationed, possibly to assist in the hijacking of enemy ships. It is unclear whether the first expedition was the expedition by Jacques l'Hermite to the coast of Chile, Peru and Bolivia, set up by Stadtholder Maurice with the support of the States General and the VOC.\nThe company was initially a dismal failure, in terms of its expensive early projects, and its directors shifted emphasis from conquest of territory to pursue plunder of shipping. The most spectacular success for the GWC was Piet Heyn's seizure of the Spanish silver fleet, which carried silver from Spanish colonies to Spain. He had also seized a consignment of sugar from Brazil and a galleon from Honduras with cacao, indigo, and other valuable goods. Privateering was its most profitable activity in the late 1620s. Despite Heyn's success at plunder, the company's directors realized that it was not a basis to build long-term profit, leading them to renew their attempts to seize Iberian territory in the Americas. They decided their target was Brazil. (Recapture of Bahia)\nThe Brazil adventure.\nThere were conflicts between directors from different areas of The Netherlands, with Amsterdam less supportive of the company. Non-maritime cities, including Haarlem, Leiden, and Gouda, along with Enkhuizen and Hoorn were enthusiastic about seizing territory. They sent a fleet to Brazil, capturing Olinda and Pernambuco in 1630 in their initial foray to create a Dutch Brazil, but could not hold them due to a strong Portuguese resistance. Company ships continued privateering in the Caribbean, as well seizing vital land resources, particularly salt pans. The company's general lack of success saw their shares plummet and the Dutch and The Spanish renewed truce talks in 1633.\nIn 1629, the GWC gave permission to a number of investors in New Netherlands to found patroonships, enabled by the Charter of Freedoms and Exemptions which was ratified by the Dutch States General on June 7, 1629. The patroonships were created to help populate the colony, by providing investors grants providing land for approximately 50 people \"upwards of 15 years old\", per grant, mainly in the region of New Netherland. Patroon investors could expand the size of their land grants as large as 4 miles, \"along the shore or along one bank of a navigable river...\" Rensselaerswyck was the most successful Dutch West India Company patroonship.\nThe New Netherland area, which included New Amsterdam, covered parts of present-day New York, Connecticut, Delaware, and New Jersey. Other settlements were established on the Netherlands Antilles, and in South America, in Dutch Brazil, Suriname and Guyana. In Africa, posts were established on the Gold Coast (now Ghana), the Slave Coast (now Benin), and briefly in Dutch Loango-Angola. It was a neo-feudal system, where patrons were permitted considerable powers to control the overseas colony. In the Americas, fur (North America) and sugar (South America) were the most important trade goods, while African settlements traded the enslaved (mainly destined for the plantations on the Antilles and Suriname), gold, cupper and ivory.\nDecline.\nIn North America, the settlers Albert Burgh, Samuel Blommaert, Samuel Godijn, Johannes de Laet had little success with populating the colony of New Netherland, and to defend themselves against local Amerindians. Only Kiliaen Van Rensselaer managed to maintain his settlement in the north along the Hudson. Blommaert secretly tried to secure his interests with the founding of the colony of New Sweden on behalf of Sweden on the Delaware in the south. The main focus of the GWC now went to Brazil.\nOnly in 1630 did the West India Company manage to conquer a part of Brazil. In 1630, the colony of New Holland (capital Mauritsstad, present-day Recife) was founded, taking over Portuguese possessions in Brazil. In the meantime, the war demanded so many of its forces that the company had to operate under a permanent threat of bankruptcy. In fact, the GWC went bankrupt in 1636 and all attempts at rehabilitation were doomed to failure.\nBecause of the ongoing war in Brazil, the situation for the GWC in 1645, at the end of the charter, was very bad. An attempt to compensate the losses of the GWC with the profits of the VOC failed because the directors of the VOC did not want to. In 1645, the main participants in the GWC were members of the . Merging the two companies was not feasible. Amsterdam was not willing to help out, because it had too much interest in peace and healthy trade relations with Portugal. This indifferent attitude of Amsterdam was the main cause of the slow, half-hearted policy, which would eventually lead to losing the colony. In 1647, the company made a restart using 1.5\u00a0million guilders, capital of the VOC. The States General took responsibility for the warfare in Brazil.\nRestart.\nDue to the Peace of Westphalia, the attacks on Spanish shipping were forbidden to the GWC. The Portuguese succeeded in the recapture of Angola. Many merchants from Amsterdam and Zeeland decided to work with marine and merchants from the Holy Roman Empire, Denmark\u2013Norway, England and other European countries. In 1649, a competing Swedish Africa Company was founded; the GWC obtained a monopoly on gold and enslaved Africans with the kingdom of Accra (present-day Ghana). Elmina Castle was the main port. In 1654 the Dutch were thrown out of Brazil after the recapture of Recife. In 1656, the company signed the Treaty of Butre (Dutch Gold Coast). In 1659 the Danish West India Company, an undercover Dutch enterprise, was founded. (In 1660 the Royal African Company was founded, led by the Duke of York.) \nIn 1662, the GWC obtained several \"asiento\" subcontracts with the Spanish Crown, under which the Dutch were allowed to deliver 24,000 enslaved Africans. The GWC made Cura\u00e7ao a centre of the Atlantic slave trade, bringing slaves from West Africa to the island, before selling them elsewhere in the Caribbean and Spanish Main. The influence of the GWC in Africa was threatened during the Second and Third Anglo\u2013Dutch Wars, but English efforts to displace the Dutch from the region ultimately proved unsuccessful.\nThe first West India Company suffered a long agony, and its end in 1674 was painless. The reason that the GWC could drag on for 27 years seems to have been its valuable West African possessions, due to its slaves.\nSecond West India Company.\nWhen the GWC could not repay its debts in 1674, the company was dissolved. But due to continued high demand for trade between West Africa and the Dutch colonies in the Americas (mainly slave trade), a second West India Company known as the New West India Company was chartered that same year. This new company controlled the same trade area as the first but privateering was no longer an asset. All ships, fortresses, etc. were taken over by the new company. Nobody was fired, but the number of directors was reduced from 19 to 10, and the number of governors from 74 to 50. By 1679, the new GWC had slightly more than 6 million guilders which was largely supplied by the Amsterdam Chamber. In 1687, due to the Asiento possessed by , the company paid the highest dividend.\nFrom 1694 until 1700, the GWC waged a long conflict against the Eguafo Kingdom along the Gold Coast, present-day Ghana. The Komenda Wars drew in significant numbers of neighbouring African kingdoms and led to the replacement of the gold trade with enslaved Africans. Calabar was the largest slave trading place in Africa. Sint Eustatius (Dutch Caribbean) became the most profitable asset of the WIC and a transit point for enslaved Africans in the transatlantic slave trade. After 1734 the WIC was primarily engaged in facilitating the slave trade, and only responsible for the supply of slaves until 1738. The company then began to outsource the slave trade and left it to private enterprise, especially in Middelburg, Zeeland.\nIn 1750 Thomas Hope was elected in the board of the company, but preferred the Heren XVII after two years; he was succeed by Nicolaas Geelvinck in 1764. In 1773, when drinking coffee and cocoa was popular almost everywhere, the family Van Aerssen van Sommelsdijck sold its property in the colony of Surinam. The WIC participated in a bigger share together with the Society of Suriname. Many planters in Surinam and the Caribbean came into financial trouble because of the mortgages (Crisis of 1772); the demand for slaves dropped. In 1775, the last slave ship entered the port of Willemstad. From 1780 on the company made losses and paid no dividend.\nAfter the Fourth Anglo\u2013Dutch War, it became apparent that the WIC was no longer capable of defending its own colonies, as Sint Eustatius, Berbice, Essequibo, Demerara, and some forts on the Dutch Gold Coast were rapidly taken by the British. In 1791 it was decided not to renew the patent to the WIC and to dissolve the Company. All stocks were sold and territories previously held by the GWC came under the rule of the States General of the Netherlands. A directorate Ad-Interim took over the administration. A Council of Colonies was established as administrator over the affairs of the WIC until 1795. Around 1800 there was an attempt to create a third West India Company, but without success.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "8771", "revid": "41854226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8771", "title": "Dyula language", "text": "Mande language spoken in West Africa\nDyula (or Jula, Dioula, \"Julakan\" \u07d6\u07ce\u07ec\u07df\u07ca\u07ec\u07de\u07ca\u07f2) is a language of the Mande language family spoken mainly in Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast and Mali, and also in some other countries, including Ghana, Guinea and Guinea-Bissau. It is one of the Manding languages and is most closely related to Bambara, being mutually intelligible with Bambara as well as Malinke. It is a trade language in West Africa and is spoken by millions of people, either as a first or second language. Similar to the other Mande languages, it uses tones. It may be written in the Latin, Arabic or N'Ko scripts.\nHistory.\nHistorically, Dyula (\"jula\" in the language) was not an ethonym, but rather a Manding language label literally meaning 'trader'. The term used to distinguish Muslim traders from the non-Muslim population living in the same area, mainly Senufo agricultors. It then became an exonym for Manding-speaking traders such as the Bambara or the Mandinka and their languages. At the same time, however, a process of ethnogenesis across the centuries led to some communities in modern towns like Bobo-Dioulasso, Odienn\u00e9 and Kong adopting the label as one of their ethnic identity. These communities speak varieties of Dyula with common traits that distinguish it from the lingua franca form of Jula that one hears in markets across much of Burkina Faso and C\u00f4te d'Ivoire.\nLater, the term was also used for a simplified version of Bambara, which comes from Mali, mixed with elements of Maninka. It became a widely used lingua franca. Native speakers of Manding in the Ivory Coast use the pejorative term 'Tagbusikan' to refer to this simplified language, while they called their own language 'Konyakakan', 'Odiennekakan' or 'Maukakan'. The influx of millions of migrant workers from the Sahel further boostered the use of Dyula in the Ivory Coast due to the need of a lingua franca. Many Burkinabe learned Dyula while staying in the Ivory Coast and further disseminated it back home. Today, Dyula is used to at least some extent by 61% of the population of the Ivory Coast and by about 35% of the Burkinabe (mainly those living in the southern or western part of the country).\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nThe seven vowel sounds may also be either lengthened /i\u02d0 e\u02d0 \u025b\u02d0 a\u02d0 \u0254\u02d0 o\u02d0 u\u02d0/ or nasalized /\u0129 \u1ebd \u025b\u0303 \u00e3 \u0254\u0303 \u00f5 \u0169/.\nWriting systems.\nLatin alphabet and orthography.\nDioula orthography is regulated in Burkina Faso by the Dioula Sub-Commission of the National Commission for Languages. On 15 July 1971, the National Sub-Commission for Dioula was created and on 16 July 1971, it began a study in order to set the Dioula alphabet. An alphabet was published on 27 July 1973 and gained official status on 2 February 1979. Some letters were added later, \u27e8c, j\u27e9 for borrowed words, and others were replaced: \u27e8sh\u27e9 by \u27e8s\u27e9, and \u27e8ny\u27e9 by \u27e8\u0272\u27e9.\nIn Burkina Faso, the Dioula alphabet is made up of 28 letters each representing a single phoneme. In the orthography, long vowels are represented by doubled letters; thus, /e/ is written \u27e8e\u27e9 and /e\u02d0/, \u27e8ee\u27e9. The nasalisation of a vowel is written followed by an n; for example, /\u1ebd/ is written \u27e8en\u27e9.\nThe notation of tones was recommended in 1973, but in practice they are not written. The transcription guide published in 2003 does not reiterate this recommendation. Tones are noted solely in lexicographical works. However, to avoid ambiguity, tone marking is obligatory in certain cases.\nFor example:\nN'Ko alphabet.\nThe N'Ko script is an indigenous writing system for the Manding language continuum, invented in 1949 by Solomana Kant\u00e9, a Guinean educator. Today, the script has been digitised as part of Unicode, which allows it to be used easily online, but the lack of funding and the official status of French means that use of this alphabet largely happens outside of formal education and is not systematically used on street signs, etc.\nUse in media.\nDioula can be heard spoken in the 2004 film \"Night of Truth\", directed by Fanta R\u00e9gina Nacro, Burkina Faso's first female director.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8772", "revid": "6781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8772", "title": "Domination and submission", "text": ""}
{"id": "8773", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8773", "title": "Daniel C. Dennett", "text": ""}
{"id": "8774", "revid": "13238219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8774", "title": "Desi Arnaz", "text": "American musician, actor and television producer (1917\u20131986)\nDesiderio Alberto Arnaz y de Acha III (March 2, 1917 \u2013 December 2, 1986) was a Cuban-born American actor, bandleader, and film and television producer. He played Ricky Ricardo on the American television sitcom \"I Love Lucy\", in which he co-starred with his then-wife Lucille Ball. Arnaz and Ball are credited as the innovators of the syndicated rerun, which they pioneered with the \"I Love Lucy\" series.\nArnaz and Lucille Ball co-founded and ran the television production company called Desilu Productions, originally to market \"I Love Lucy\" to television networks. After \"I Love Lucy\" ended, Arnaz went on to produce several other television series, at first with Desilu Productions, and later independently, including \"The Ann Sothern Show\" and \"The Untouchables\". He was also the bandleader of his Latin group, the Desi Arnaz Orchestra. He was known for playing conga drums and popularized the conga line in the United States.\nEarly life.\nArnaz was born in Santiago de Cuba, Cuba, to Desiderio Alberto Arnaz y de Alberni II (March 8, 1894 \u2013 May 31, 1973) and Dolores \"Lolita\" de Acha y de Socias (April 2, 1896 \u2013 October 24, 1988). His father was Santiago's youngest mayor and also served in the Cuban House of Representatives. His maternal grandfather was Alberto de Acha, an executive at rum producer Bacardi &amp; Co. \nA descendant of Cuban nobility, Arnaz was a great-great-great-grandson of Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn. The Cuban Revolution of 1933 forced Arnaz and his family to lose everything and flee Cuba. A mob attacked and destroyed the family's houses, property, and livestock. Arnaz narrowly escaped the attack because he was able to hop in a car getting away. His father, Alberto Arnaz, was jailed and all of his property was confiscated. He was released after six months when his brother-in-law Alberto de Acha intervened on his behalf.\nThe family then fled to Miami, where Desi attended high school. They came to the United States with no money and Desi had to live with his father in a garage that was infested with rats and roaches. In the summer of 1934, he attended Saint Leo Prep (near Tampa) to improve his English. His first jobs included working at Woolworth's and cleaning canary cages in Miami. He then went into the tile business with his father before turning to show business full time.\nProfessional career.\nMusician and actor.\nAfter finishing high school, Arnaz formed a band, the Siboney Septet, and began making a name for himself in Miami. Xavier Cugat, after seeing Arnaz perform, hired him for his touring orchestra, playing the conga drum and singing. Becoming a star attraction encouraged him to start his own band, the Desi Arnaz Orchestra.\nArnaz and his orchestra became a hit in New York City's club scene, including a club named La Conga, where he is credited with introducing the concept of conga line dancing to the United States.\nHe came to the attention of Rodgers and Hart who, in 1939, cast him in their Broadway musical \"Too Many Girls\". The show was a hit and RKO Pictures bought the movie rights.\nArnaz went to Hollywood the next year to appear in the show's movie version at RKO, which also starred Lucille Ball. Arnaz and Ball fell in love during the film's production and eloped on November 30, 1940.\nArnaz appeared in several movies in the 1940s such as \"Bataan\", starring Robert Taylor (1943). His portrayal of Felix Ramirez, the jive-loving California National Guardsman, was described by \"New York Times\" critic Bosley Crowther as one of several supporting players who were \"convincing in soldier roles\".\nMilitary service.\nApril 27, 1943, Arnaz received his draft notice. However, Arnaz was disqualified from overseas service due to hypertension and knee injuries, which caused him pain with prolonged physical exertion, according to his military physical examination. He had injured his left knee prior to his enlistment and injured his right knee soon after enlisting on May 23, 1943, during a baseball game at Camp Arlington. He completed his recruit training, but was classified for limited service in the United States Army during World War II.\nHe was assigned to direct United Service Organization (USO) programs at the Birmingham General Army Hospital in the San Fernando Valley. It was his responsibility to keep injured soldiers entertained while they were recovering in the hospital. Thanks to his Hollywood connections, Arnaz was able to bring celebrities to visit the hospital and boost morale of the soldiers. For example, discovering the first thing the wounded soldiers requested was a glass of cold milk, he arranged for movie starlets to meet them and pour the milk for them.\nArnaz served two years, seven months and four days. His primary unit was the 9th Service Command, Army Service Forces. For his service during World War II, he was awarded the Army Good Conduct Medal, the American Campaign Medal and the World War II Victory Medal.\nArnaz was discharged as a staff sergeant on September 30, 1945.\nCareer post-military.\nFollowing his discharge as a staff sergeant on December 1, 1945, Arnaz formed another orchestra, which was successful in live appearances and recordings. He sang for troops in Birmingham Hospital with John Macchia and hired his childhood friend Marco Rizo to play piano and arrange for the orchestra.\nFor the 1946\u201347 season, Arnaz was the bandleader, conducting his Desi Arnaz Orchestra, on Bob Hope's radio show (\"The Pepsodent Show\") on NBC.\nIn 1951, Arnaz was given a game show on CBS Radio, \"Your Tropical Trip\" in order to entice Arnaz and Ball to stay at CBS over a competing offer from NBC, and to keep Arnaz and his band employed and in Hollywood, rather than touring. The musical game show, hosted by Arnaz and featuring Arnaz's orchestra, had audience members competing for a Caribbean vacation. The program aired from January 1951 until September, shortly before the premiere of \"I Love Lucy\" in October.\nWhen he became successful in television, he kept the orchestra on his payroll, and Rizo arranged and orchestrated the music for \"I Love Lucy\".\n\"I Love Lucy\".\nOn October 15, 1951, Arnaz co-starred in the premiere of \"I Love Lucy\", in which he played a fictionalized version of himself, Cuban orchestra leader Enrique \"Ricky\" Ricardo. His co-star was his real-life wife, Lucille Ball, who played Ricky's wife, Lucy. Television executives had been pursuing Ball to adapt her very popular radio series \"My Favorite Husband\" for television. Ball insisted on Arnaz playing her on-air spouse so the two would be able to spend more time together. CBS wanted Ball's \"Husband\" co-star Richard Denning.\nThe original premise was for the couple to portray Lucy and Larry Lopez, a successful show business couple whose glamorous careers interfered with their efforts to maintain a normal marriage. Market research indicated, however, that this scenario would not be popular, so Jess Oppenheimer changed it to make Ricky Ricardo a struggling young orchestra leader and Lucy an ordinary housewife who had show business fantasies but no talent. The character name \"Larry Lopez\" was dropped because of a real-life bandleader named Vincent Lopez, and was replaced with \"Ricky Ricardo\". The name was inspired by Henry Richard, a family friend and the brother of P.C. Richard of P.C. Richard &amp; Son. This name translates to Enrique Ricardo. Ricky often appeared at, and later owned, the Tropicana Club, which under his ownership he renamed Club Babalu.\nInitially, the idea of having Ball and the distinctly Latin American Arnaz portray a married couple encountered resistance as they were told that Desi's Cuban accent and Latin style would not be agreeable to American viewers. The couple overcame these objections, however, by touring together, during the summer of 1950, in a live vaudeville act they developed with the help of Spanish clown Pepito P\u00e9rez, together with Ball's radio show writers. Much of the material from their vaudeville act, including Lucy's memorable seal routine, was used in the pilot episode of \"I Love Lucy\". Segments of the pilot were recreated in the sixth episode of the show's first season. During his time on the show, Arnaz and Ball became TV's most successful entrepreneurs.\nDesilu Productions.\nWith Ball, Arnaz founded Desilu Productions in 1950, initially to produce the vaudeville-style touring act that led to \"I Love Lucy\". At that time, most television programs were broadcast live, and as the largest markets were in New York, the rest of the country received only kinescope images. Karl Freund, Arnaz's cameraman, and even Arnaz himself have been credited with the development of the multiple-camera setup production style using adjacent sets in front of a live audience that became the standard for subsequent situation comedies. The use of film enabled every station around the country to broadcast high-quality images of the show. Arnaz was told that it would be impossible to allow an audience onto a sound stage, but he worked with Freund to design a set that would accommodate an audience, allow filming, and adhere to fire and safety codes. Due to the expense of 35mm film, Arnaz and Ball agreed to salary cuts. In return, they retained the rights to the films. This was the basis for their invention of re-runs and syndicating TV shows (a huge source of new revenue).\nIn addition to \"I Love Lucy\", he executive produced \"The Ann Sothern Show\" and \"Those Whiting Girls\" (starring Margaret Whiting and Barbara Whiting), and was involved in several other series such as \"The Untouchables\", \"Whirlybirds\", and \"Sheriff of Cochise\" / \"United States Marshal\". While he was producing \"The Untouchables\", Arnaz was allegedly the target of a mafia murder plot, which was later called off, due to the show's negative publicity of gangsters. These allegations were made in the 1980s by Jimmy Fratianno in his book, \"The Last Mafioso.\" Arnaz denied these claims were true. He also produced the feature film \"Forever, Darling\" (1956), in which he and Ball starred.\nThe original Desilu company continued long after Arnaz's divorce from Ball and her subsequent marriage to Gary Morton. Desilu continued to produce its own programs in addition to providing facilities to other producers. In 1962, Arnaz sold his share of Desilu to Ball and formed his own production company after their divorce. With the newly formed Desi Arnaz Productions, he made \"The Mothers-In-Law\" (at Desilu) for United Artists Television and NBC. This sitcom ran for two seasons from 1967 to 1969. During its two-year run, Arnaz made four guest appearances as a Spanish matador, Se\u00f1or Delgado.\nArnaz's company was succeeded-in-interest by the company now known as Desilu, Too. Desilu, Too and Lucille Ball Productions worked hand-in-hand with MPI Home Video in the home video reissues of the Ball/Arnaz material not owned by CBS (successor-in-interest to Paramount Television, which in turn succeeded the original Desilu company). This material included \"Here's Lucy\" and \"The Mothers-In-Law\", as well as many programs and specials Ball and Arnaz made independently of each other.\nLater career.\nIn the 1970s, Arnaz co-hosted a week of shows with daytime host and producer Mike Douglas. Vivian Vance appeared as a guest. Arnaz also headlined a \"Kraft Music Hall\" special on NBC that featured his two children, with a brief appearance by Vance. Arnaz suffered a severe attack of diverticulitis in 1971, which required an operation and several years of recovery. He worked with Universal Studios for two years working on development deals for two shows that eventually fell through, \"Dr. Domingo\" (the character did appear on one episode of \"Ironside\") and \"Chairman of the Board\" starring Elke Sommer. Arnaz moved on to work on his autobiography for two years.\nTo promote his autobiography, \"A Book\", on February 21, 1976, Arnaz served as a guest host on \"Saturday Night Live\", with his son, Desi, Jr., also appearing. The program contained spoofs of \"I Love Lucy\" and \"The Untouchables\". The spoofs of \"I Love Lucy\" were supposed to be earlier concepts of the show that never made it on the air, such as \"I Love Louie\", where Desi lived with Louis Armstrong. He read Lewis Carroll's poem \"Jabberwocky\" in a heavy Cuban accent (he pronounced it \"Habberwocky\"). Desi Jr., played the drums and, supported by the \"SNL\" band, Desi sang both \"Babal\u00fa\" and another favorite from his dance band days, \"Cuban Pete\"; the arrangements were similar to the ones used on \"I Love Lucy\". He ended the broadcast by leading the entire cast in a conga line through the \"SNL\" studio.\nIn 1976, CBS paid tribute to Lucille Ball with the two-hour special \"CBS Salutes Lucy: The First 25 Years.\" Both Ball and Arnaz appeared on the screen for the special, which is the first time they appeared together in 16 years since their divorce.\nWhen asked about returning to television in a 1976 newspaper article, Arnaz said, \"People ask me to go back on TV but the thin' is, it's too tough competing with the Ricky Ricardo of 20 years ago. He looks a lot better than I do.\" Arnaz made a guest appearance on the TV series \"Alice\", in 1978 starring Linda Lavin and produced by \"I Love Lucy\" co-creators Madelyn Pugh (Madelyn Davis) and Bob Carroll, Jr. His last acting role was as Mayor Leon Qui\u00f1ones in the 1982 film, \"The Escape Artist\".\nArnaz owned the Indian Wells Country Club in Palm Desert, CA. He also taught classes at San Diego State University in studio production and acting for television.\nPersonal life.\nBeliefs.\nArnaz and Ball decided that \"I Love Lucy\" would maintain what Arnaz termed \"basic good taste\" and were therefore determined to avoid ethnic jokes, as well as humor based on physical handicaps or mental disabilities. Arnaz recalled that the only exception consisted of making fun of Ricky Ricardo's accent; even these jokes worked only when Lucy, as his wife, did the mimicking.\nArnaz was also a lifelong Catholic.\nPolitics.\nA lifelong Republican, Arnaz was deeply patriotic about the United States. In his memoirs, he wrote that he knew of no other country in the world where \"a sixteen-year-old kid, broke and unable to speak the language\" could achieve the successes that he had. He was a supporter of Richard Nixon and member of the Spanish-Speaking Committee for the Re-Election of the President in 1972. Nixon appointed Arnaz as the U.S. roving ambassador to Latin America in the early 1970s. He was a supporter of Ronald Reagan and spoke at campaign rallies, such as one hosted by the National Republican Hispanic Assembly in 1980. He was an advocate for the Hispanic community, encouraging them to take the 1980 census to increase federal funding for their communities.\nMarriages.\nArnaz and Lucille Ball were married on November 30, 1940. Their marriage was always turbulent. Convinced that Arnaz was being unfaithful to her and also because he came home drunk several times, Ball filed for divorce in September 1944, but returned to him before the interlocutory decree became final. Arnaz and Ball subsequently had two children, actors Lucie Arnaz (born 1951) and Desi Arnaz Jr. (born 1953).\nHollywood procurer and prostitute Scotty Bowers claimed in his memoir \"Full Service\" that he had procured as many as two to three prostitutes per week for Arnaz, each of whom was paid 200 dollars, as opposed to the usual 20. Lucille Ball confronted Bowers about this and publicly slapped him in the face, yelling \"You! Stop pimping for my husband!\"\nArnaz's marriage with Ball began to collapse under the strain of his growing problems with alcohol, gambling, and infidelity. According to his memoir, the combined pressures of managing the production company, as well as supervising its day-to-day operations, had greatly worsened as the company grew much larger, and he felt compelled to seek outlets to alleviate the stress. Arnaz also suffered from diverticulitis. Ball divorced him on March 2, 1960, which was coincidentally his birthday. When Ball returned to weekly television, she and Arnaz worked out an agreement regarding Desilu, wherein she bought him out.\nEdith Mack Hirsch (n\u00e9e McSkimming) was Arnaz's second wife. After the two married on March 2, 1963 (Arnaz's 46th birthday), he greatly reduced his show business activities. The two were married for 22 years until Edith died from cancer on March 23, 1985.\nAlthough Arnaz and Ball both married other spouses after their divorce in 1960, they remained friends and grew closer in his final decade. \"\"I Love Lucy\" was never just a title,\" wrote Arnaz in the last years of his life. Family home video later aired on television showed Ball and Arnaz playing together with their grandson Simon shortly before Arnaz's death.\nHealth.\nArnaz suffered from knee injuries as a young man shortly before and during his military service in World War II. The pain was troublesome enough that he was disqualified from serving overseas. In the late 1960s, he was seriously injured in an accident when the floor collapsed and he was impaled by a tree stump in his home in Baja California. An operation saved his life, although his health was never the same after the incident. Throughout his life he periodically had to seek medical treatment for diverticulitis and intestinal issues, sometimes requiring hospitalization.\nAfter his second wife Edith's death in 1986, Arnaz was persuaded by his children to seek treatment for his decades-long alcohol addiction, which by then had seriously damaged his health. Lucie Arnaz described her pride at attending a treatment meeting with her father where he stood up and said \"I'm Desi, and I'm an alcoholic\".\nArrests.\nArnaz had a few run-ins with the law. He was arrested in 1959 on an intoxication charge while he was walking Hollywood Blvd. In 1966, he was arrested and charged with assault with a deadly weapon after an altercation with youth parking in front of his house. Two young men were allegedly partying nearby and harassing his then-15-year-old daughter Lucie and her friend. Arnaz confronted them, threatened to shoot their tires and cars, and then fired two shots that went into the ground. He spent three hours at the San Diego jail and was released on $1,100 bail.\nLater life.\nDesi Arnaz spent his retirement doing activities he enjoyed including sailing his yacht (he was a skilled yachtsman since childhood), fishing, and cooking Cuban dishes. He suffered from numerous health issues later in life. He contributed to charitable and nonprofit organizations, including San Diego State University. He was active in politics and made occasional public appearances. He was the guest of honor at the Carnival Miami in March 1982 where he performed with his children, Lucie and Desi, Jr., in front of a crowd of 35,000.\nArnaz was known to be very loving to his grandchildren.\nThoroughbred racing.\nArnaz and his second wife eventually moved to Del Mar, California where he lived the rest of his life in semi-retirement. He owned a horse-breeding farm in Corona, California and raced Thoroughbreds. The Desi Arnaz Stakes at Del Mar Racetrack is named in his honor.\nDeath.\nArnaz was a regular smoker for much of his life and often smoked cigarettes on the set of \"I Love Lucy\". He smoked cigars until he was in his sixties. Arnaz was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1986 and underwent treatment. Lucille Ball visited him during this time in the hospital and the two watched VHS tapes of \"I Love Lucy\". His daughter Lucie was by his side constantly during his final days.\nOn November 30, 1986, on what would have been their 46th wedding anniversary, Ball telephoned him and they spoke for a short time, including saying \"I love you.\" She finished by saying, \"Alright, honey. I'll talk to you later.\" He died two days later on December 2, 1986, at the age of 69. Arnaz was cremated and his ashes scattered. Ball was one of hundreds to attend Arnaz's funeral, which was held at St. James Roman Catholic Church in San Diego County, California.\nHis death came just five days before Lucille Ball received the Kennedy Center Honors. His mother outlived him by almost two years.\nLegacy.\nDesi Arnaz has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame: one at 6301 Hollywood Boulevard for contributions to motion pictures and one at 6250 Hollywood Boulevard for television. Unlike his co-stars, Arnaz was never nominated for an Emmy for his performance in \"I Love Lucy\"; however, as executive producer of the series, he was nominated four times in the Best Situation Comedy category, winning twice. In 1956, he won a Golden Globe for Best Television Achievement for helping to shape the American Comedy through his contributions in front of and behind the camera of \"I Love Lucy\". He was inducted into the Television Academy's Hall of Fame.\nThe Lucille Ball-Desi Arnaz Center museum is in Jamestown, New York, and the Desi Arnaz Bandshell in the Lucille Ball Memorial Park is in Celoron, New York.\nDesi Arnaz appears as a character in Oscar Hijuelos's 1989 novel \"The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love\" and is portrayed by his son, Desi Arnaz Jr., in the 1992 film adaptation, \"The Mambo Kings\".\nMaurice Benard portrayed Desi Arnaz in the 1991 television film \"\".\nIn the 2003 television film \"Lucy\", Desi Arnaz was portrayed by Danny Pino.\nArnaz was portrayed by Oscar Nu\u00f1ez in \"I Love Lucy: A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Sitcom\", a comedy about how Arnaz and Ball battled to get their sitcom on the air. It had its world premiere in Los Angeles on July 12, 2018, co-starring Sarah Drew as Lucille Ball and Seamus Dever as \"I Love Lucy\" creator-producer-head writer Jess Oppenheimer. The play, written by Jess Oppenheimer's son, Gregg Oppenheimer, was recorded in front of a live audience for nationwide public radio broadcast and online distribution. BBC Radio 4 broadcast a serialized version of the play in the UK in August 2020, as \"LUCY LOVES DESI: A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Sitcom,\" starring Wilmer Valderrama as Arnaz and co-starring Anne Heche as Lucille Ball.\nOn March 2, 2019, Google celebrated what would have been Arnaz's 102nd birthday with a Google doodle.\nJavier Bardem portrayed Arnaz in the 2021 biographical film \"Being the Ricardos\" written and directed by Aaron Sorkin and produced by Amazon Studios, alongside Nicole Kidman as Ball. He was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8777", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8777", "title": "DNA virus", "text": "Virus that has DNA as its genetic material\nA DNA virus is a virus that has a genome made of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) that is replicated by a DNA polymerase. They can be divided between those that have two strands of DNA in their genome, called double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses, and those that have one strand of DNA in their genome, called single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) viruses. dsDNA viruses primarily belong to two realms: \"Duplodnaviria\" and \"Varidnaviria\", and ssDNA viruses are almost exclusively assigned to the realm \"Monodnaviria\", which also includes some dsDNA viruses. Additionally, many DNA viruses are unassigned to higher taxa. Reverse transcribing viruses, which have a DNA genome that is replicated through an RNA intermediate by a reverse transcriptase, are classified into the kingdom \"Pararnavirae\" in the realm \"Riboviria\".\nDNA viruses are ubiquitous worldwide, especially in marine environments where they form an important part of marine ecosystems, and infect both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. They appear to have multiple origins, as viruses in \"Monodnaviria\" appear to have emerged from archaeal and bacterial plasmids on multiple occasions, though the origins of \"Duplodnaviria\" and \"Varidnaviria\" are less clear.\nProminent disease-causing DNA viruses include herpesviruses, papillomaviruses, and poxviruses.\nBaltimore classification.\nThe Baltimore classification system is used to group viruses together based on their manner of messenger RNA (mRNA) synthesis and is often used alongside standard virus taxonomy, which is based on evolutionary history. DNA viruses constitute two Baltimore groups: Group I: double-stranded DNA viruses, and Group II: single-stranded DNA viruses. While Baltimore classification is chiefly based on transcription of mRNA, viruses in each Baltimore group also typically share their manner of replication. Viruses in a Baltimore group do not necessarily share genetic relation or morphology.\nDouble-stranded DNA viruses.\nThe first Baltimore group of DNA viruses are those that have a double-stranded DNA genome. All dsDNA viruses have their mRNA synthesized in a three-step process. First, a transcription preinitiation complex binds to the DNA upstream of the site where transcription begins, allowing for the recruitment of a host RNA polymerase. Second, once the RNA polymerase is recruited, it uses the negative strand as a template for synthesizing mRNA strands. Third, the RNA polymerase terminates transcription upon reaching a specific signal, such as a polyadenylation site.\ndsDNA viruses make use of several mechanisms to replicate their genome. Bidirectional replication, in which two replication forks are established at a replication origin site and move in opposite directions of each other, is widely used. A rolling circle mechanism that produces linear strands while progressing in a loop around the circular genome is also common. Some dsDNA viruses use a strand displacement method whereby one strand is synthesized from a template strand, and a complementary strand is then synthesized from the prior synthesized strand, forming a dsDNA genome. Lastly, some dsDNA viruses are replicated as part of a process called replicative transposition whereby a viral genome in a host cell's DNA is replicated to another part of a host genome.\ndsDNA viruses can be subdivided between those that replicate in the cell nucleus, and as such are relatively dependent on host cell machinery for transcription and replication, and those that replicate in the cytoplasm, in which case they have evolved or acquired their own means of executing transcription and replication. dsDNA viruses are also commonly divided between tailed dsDNA viruses, referring to members of the realm \"Duplodnaviria\", usually the tailed bacteriophages of the order \"Caudovirales\", and tailless or non-tailed dsDNA viruses of the realm \"Varidnaviria\".\nSingle-stranded DNA viruses.\nThe second Baltimore group of DNA viruses are those that have a single-stranded DNA genome. ssDNA viruses have the same manner of transcription as dsDNA viruses. However, because the genome is single-stranded, it is first made into a double-stranded form by a DNA polymerase upon entering a host cell. mRNA is then synthesized from the double-stranded form. The double-stranded form of ssDNA viruses may be produced either directly after entry into a cell or as a consequence of replication of the viral genome. Eukaryotic ssDNA viruses are replicated in the nucleus.\nMost ssDNA viruses contain circular genomes that are replicated via rolling circle replication (RCR). ssDNA RCR is initiated by an endonuclease that bonds to and cleaves the positive strand, allowing a DNA polymerase to use the negative strand as a template for replication. Replication progresses in a loop around the genome by means of extending the 3'-end of the positive strand, displacing the prior positive strand, and the endonuclease cleaves the positive strand again to create a standalone genome that is ligated into a circular loop. The new ssDNA may be packaged into virions or replicated by a DNA polymerase to form a double-stranded form for transcription or continuation of the replication cycle.\nParvoviruses contain linear ssDNA genomes that are replicated via rolling hairpin replication (RHR), which is similar to RCR. Parvovirus genomes have hairpin loops at each end of the genome that repeatedly unfold and refold during replication to change the direction of DNA synthesis to move back and forth along the genome, producing numerous copies of the genome in a continuous process. Individual genomes are then excised from this molecule by the viral endonuclease. For parvoviruses, either the positive or negative sense strand may be packaged into capsids, varying from virus to virus.\nNearly all ssDNA viruses have positive sense genomes, but a few exceptions and peculiarities exist. The family \"Anelloviridae\" is the only ssDNA family whose members have negative sense genomes, which are circular. Parvoviruses, as previously mentioned, may package either the positive or negative sense strand into virions. Lastly, bidnaviruses package both the positive and negative linear strands.\nICTV classification.\nThe International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) oversees virus taxonomy and organizes viruses at the basal level at the rank of realm. Virus realms correspond to the rank of domain used for cellular life but differ in that viruses within a realm do not necessarily share common ancestry, nor do the realms share common ancestry with each other. As such, each virus realm represents at least one instance of viruses coming into existence. Within each realm, viruses are grouped together based on shared characteristics that are highly conserved over time. Three DNA virus realms are recognized: \"Duplodnaviria\", \"Monodnaviria\", and \"Varidnaviria\".\n\"Duplodnaviria\".\n\"Duplodnaviria\" contains dsDNA viruses that encode a major capsid protein (MCP) that has the HK97 fold. Viruses in the realm also share a number of other characteristics involving the capsid and capsid assembly, including an icosahedral capsid shape and a terminase enzyme that packages viral DNA into the capsid during assembly. Two groups of viruses are included in the realm: tailed bacteriophages, which infect prokaryotes and are assigned to the order \"Caudovirales\", and herpesviruses, which infect animals and are assigned to the order \"Herpesvirales\".\n\"Duplodnaviria\" is a very ancient realm, perhaps predating the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) of cellular life. Its origins not known, nor whether it is monophyletic or polyphyletic. A characteristic feature is the HK97-fold found in the MCP of all members, which is found outside the realm only in encapsulins, a type of nanocompartment found in bacteria: this relation is not fully understood.\nThe relation between caudoviruses and herpesviruses is also uncertain: they may share a common ancestor or herpesviruses may be a divergent clade from the realm \"Caudovirales\". A common trait among duplodnaviruses is that they cause latent infections without replication while still being able to replicate in the future. Tailed bacteriophages are ubiquitous worldwide, important in marine ecology, and the subject of much research. Herpesviruses are known to cause a variety of epithelial diseases, including herpes simplex, chickenpox and shingles, and Kaposi's sarcoma.\n\"Monodnaviria\".\n\"Monodnaviria\" contains ssDNA viruses that encode an endonuclease of the HUH superfamily that initiates rolling circle replication and all other viruses descended from such viruses. The prototypical members of the realm are called CRESS-DNA viruses and have circular ssDNA genomes. ssDNA viruses with linear genomes are descended from them, and in turn some dsDNA viruses with circular genomes are descended from linear ssDNA viruses.\nViruses in \"Monodnaviria\" appear to have emerged on multiple occasions from archaeal and bacterial plasmids, a type of extra-chromosomal DNA molecule that self-replicates inside its host. The kingdom \"Shotokuvirae\" in the realm likely emerged from recombination events that merged the DNA of these plasmids and complementary DNA encoding the capsid proteins of RNA viruses.\nCRESS-DNA viruses include three kingdoms that infect prokaryotes: \"Loebvirae\", \"Sangervirae\", and \"Trapavirae\". The kingdom \"Shotokuvirae\" contains eukaryotic CRESS-DNA viruses and the atypical members of \"Monodnaviria\". Eukaryotic monodnaviruses are associated with many diseases, and they include papillomaviruses and polyomaviruses, which cause many cancers, and geminiviruses, which infect many economically important crops.\n\"Varidnaviria\".\n\"Varidnaviria\" contains DNA viruses that encode MCPs that have a jelly roll fold folded structure in which the jelly roll (JR) fold is perpendicular to the surface of the viral capsid. Many members also share a variety of other characteristics, including a minor capsid protein that has a single JR fold, an ATPase that packages the genome during capsid assembly, and a common DNA polymerase. Two kingdoms are recognized: \"Helvetiavirae\", whose members have MCPs with a single vertical JR fold, and \"Bamfordvirae\", whose members have MCPs with two vertical JR folds.\nVaridnaviria is either monophyletic or polyphyletic and may predate the LUCA. The kingdom \"Bamfordvirae\" is likely derived from the other kingdom \"Helvetiavirae\" via fusion of two MCPs to have an MCP with two jelly roll folds instead of one. The single jelly roll (SJR) fold MCPs of \"Helvetiavirae\" show a relation to a group of proteins that contain SJR folds, including the Cupin superfamily and nucleoplasmins.\nMarine viruses in \"Varidnaviria\" are ubiquitous worldwide and, like tailed bacteriophages, play an important role in marine ecology. Most identified eukaryotic DNA viruses belong to the realm. Notable disease-causing viruses in \"Varidnaviria\" include adenoviruses, poxviruses, and the African swine fever virus. Poxviruses have been highly prominent in the history of modern medicine, especially \"Variola virus\", which caused smallpox. Many varidnaviruses can become endogenized in their host's genome; a peculiar example are virophages, which after infecting a host, can protect the host against giant viruses.\nBaltimore classification.\ndsDNA viruses are classified into three realms and include many taxa that are unassigned to a realm:\nssDNA viruses are classified into one realm and include several families that are unassigned to a realm:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8778", "revid": "32694456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8778", "title": "Daniel Ortega", "text": "President of Nicaragua since 2007\nJos\u00e9 Daniel Ortega Saavedra (]; born 11 November 1945) is a Nicaraguan politician serving as President of Nicaragua since 2007. Previously he was leader of Nicaragua from 1979 to 1990, first as coordinator (1979\u20131985) of the Junta of National Reconstruction, and then as President of Nicaragua (1985\u20131990). During his first term, he implemented policies to achieve leftist reforms across Nicaragua. In later years, Ortega's left-wing radical politics cooled significantly, leading him to pursue pro-business policies and even rapprochement with the Catholic Church. As a part of this, his government adopted strong anti-abortion policies, and his rhetoric took on a new, strongly religious tenor, despite formerly having professed atheism.\nOrtega came to prominence with the overthrow and exile of US-backed dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle in 1979 during the Nicaraguan Revolution. As a leader in the Sandinista National Liberation Front (, FSLN) Ortega became leader of the ruling Junta of National Reconstruction. A Marxist\u2013Leninist, Ortega pursued a program of nationalization, land reform, wealth redistribution and literacy programs during his first period in office. In 1984, Ortega won Nicaragua's first ever free and fair presidential election with over 60% of the vote as the FSLN's candidate. Throughout the 1980s, Ortega's government faced a rebellion by US-backed rebels, known as the Contras. The US also sought to place economic pressure on the Sandinista government, imposing a full trade embargo, and planting underwater mines in Nicaragua's ports. After a presidency marred by conflict and economic collapse, Ortega was defeated in the 1990 Nicaraguan general election by Violeta Chamorro, in an election marked by US interference. \nOrtega was an unsuccessful candidate for president in 1996 and 2001 but won the 2006 Nicaraguan general election. In office, he made alliances with fellow Latin American socialists. His second administration, in contrast to his earlier political career, abandoned most of his earlier leftist principles, and became increasingly anti-democratic, alienating many of his former revolutionary allies. \nIn June 2018, organisations such as Amnesty International and the OAS reported that Ortega had engaged in a violent oppression campaign against the anti-Ortega 2018\u20132022 Nicaraguan protests. The violent crackdown and subsequent constriction of civil liberties have led to massive waves of emigration to neighboring Costa Rica, with more than 30,000 Nicaraguans filing for asylum in that country. In his fourth term, Ortega ordered the closure of several NGOs, universities, and newspapers.\nHis government jailed many potential rival candidates in the 2021 Nicaraguan general election, including Cristiana Chamorro Barrios. Ortega's government also imprisoned other opponents, such as former allies Dora Maria Tellez and Hugo Torres Jim\u00e9nez. In August 2021, Nicaragua cancelled the operating permits of six US and European NGOs. Many critics of the Ortega government, including opposition leaders, journalists and members of civil society, fled the country in mid-2021. After Ortega was re-elected in 2021, President Joe Biden banned him and his officials from entering the United States.\nEarly life.\nEarly childhood.\nOrtega was born in La Libertad, department of Chontales, Nicaragua, into a working-class family. His parents, Daniel Ortega Cerda and Lidia Saavedra, were opposed to the regime of Anastasio Somoza Debayle. His mother was imprisoned by Somoza's National Guard for being in possession of \"love letters\", which the police said were coded political missives. Ortega and his two brothers grew up to become revolutionaries. His brother Humberto Ortega is a former general, military leader, and published writer, and the third brother Camilo Ortega died fighting the Somoza regime in 1978. They had a sister, Germania, who died.\nJuigalpa and Managua.\nSeeking stable employment, the family migrated from La Libertad to the provincial capital of Juigalpa, and then to a middle-class neighborhood in Managua. In Managua, Ortega and his brother studied at the upper-middle class high school, the LaSalle Institute, where Ortega was classmates with Arnoldo Aleman, who would go on to be mayor of Managua (1990-1995) and later President of Nicaragua (1997-2002). Ortega's father Daniel Ortega Cedra detested US military intervention in Nicaragua and Washington's support for the Somoza government. He imparted this anti-American sentiment to his sons.\nEarly political activity.\nFrom an early age Ortega opposed Nicaragua's president Anastasio Somoza Debayle, and became involved in the underground movement against his government. Ortega and his brother Humberto formed the Insurrectionist, or Tercerista (Third Way) faction, culminating in the Nicaraguan Revolution. After the overthrow and exile of Somoza Debayle's government, Ortega became leader of the ruling multi-partisan Junta of National Reconstruction.\nOrtega was first arrested for political activities at the age of 15, and quickly joined the then-underground Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) in 1963. In 1964, Ortega travelled to Guatemala, where the police arrested him and turned him over to the Nicaraguan National Guard. After his release from detainment, Ortega arranged the assassination of his torturer, Guardsman Gonzalo Lacayo, in August 1967.\nImprisonment.\nHe was imprisoned in 1967 for taking part in armed robbery of a branch of the Bank of America. He told collaborators that they should be killed if they did not take part in the robbery. Ortega was released in late 1974, along with other Sandinista prisoners, in exchange for Somocista hostages. While imprisoned at the El Modelo jail, just outside Managua, Ortega wrote poems, one of which he titled \"I Never Saw Managua When Miniskirts Were in Fashion\". During his imprisonment, Ortega was tortured. While he was incarcerated at El Modelo, his mother helped stage protests and hunger strikes for political prisoners; this resulted in improving the treatment of incarcerated Sandinistas.\nExile in Cuba.\nUpon release in 1974, Ortega was exiled to Cuba. There he received training in guerrilla warfare from Fidel Castro's Marxist\u2013Leninist government. He later returned secretly to Nicaragua.\nSectional division within the FSLN.\nIn the late 1970s, divisions over the FSLN's campaign against Somoza led Ortega and his brother Humberto to form the Insurrectionist, or \"Tercerista\" (Third Way) faction. The Terceristas sought to combine the distinct guerrilla war strategies of the two other factions, Tom\u00e1s Borge's \"Guerra Prolongada Popular\" (GPP, or Prolonged People's War), and Jaime Wheelock's \"Proletarian Tendency\". The Ortega brothers forged alliances with a wide array of anti-Somoza forces, including Catholic and Protestant activists, and other non-Marxist civil society groups. The Terceristas became the most effective faction in wielding political and military strength, and their push for FSLN solidarity received the support of revolutionary leaders such as Fidel Castro.\nMarriage and family.\nOrtega married Rosario Murillo in 1979 in a secret ceremony. They moved to Costa Rica with her three children from a previous marriage. Ortega remarried Murillo in 2005 in order to have the marriage recognized by the Catholic Church, as part of his effort to reconcile with the church. The couple has eight children, three of them together. Murillo serves as the Ortega government's spokeswoman and a government minister, among other positions. Ortega adopted stepdaughter Zoilam\u00e9rica Narv\u00e1ez in 1986, through a court case.\nSandinista revolution and first presidency (1979\u20131990).\nWhen Somoza was overthrown by the FSLN in July 1979, Ortega became a member of the five-person Junta of National Reconstruction, which included Sandinista militant Mois\u00e9s Hassan, novelist Sergio Ram\u00edrez, businessman Alfonso Robelo, and Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, the widow of a murdered journalist. In September 1979, United States President Carter hosted Ortega at the White House, and warned him against arming other Central American leftist guerrilla movements. At the time, Ortega spoke truthfully when he denied Sandinista involvement in neighboring countries. When Ortega questioned the Americans about CIA support for anti-Sandinista groups, Carter and Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the reports were false. After the meeting, Carter asked Congress for $75 million in aid to Nicaragua, contingent on the Sandinista government's promise not to aid other guerrillas.\nThe FSLN came to dominate the junta, Robelo and Chamorro resigned, and in 1981 Ortega became the coordinator of the Junta. As the only member of the FSLN National Directorate in the Junta, he was the effective leader of the country. After attaining power, the FSLN embarked upon an ambitious programme of social reform. They arranged to redistribute of land to about 100,000 families; launched a literacy drive, and made health care improvements that ended polio through mass vaccinations, and reduced the frequency of other treatable diseases. The Sandinista nationalization efforts affected mostly banks and industries owned by the extended Somoza family. More than half of all farms, businesses, and industries remained in private hands. The revolutionary government wanted to preserve a mixed economy and support private sector investment. The Superior Council of Private Enterprise (COSEP) opposed the Sandinistas' economic reform. The main organization of Nicaraguan big business was composed of prosperous families from the Pacific coast cities, who dominated commerce and banking. Ortega took a very hard line against opposition to his policies: On 21 February 1981, the Sandinista army killed 7 Miskito Indians and wounded 17.\nOrtega's administration forced displacement of many of the indigenous population: 10,000 individuals had been moved by 1982. Thousands of Indians fled to take refuge across the border in Honduras, and Ortega's government imprisoned 14,000 in Nicaragua. Anthropologist Gilles Bataillon termed this \"politics of ethnocide\" in Nicaragua. The Indians formed two rebel groups \u2013 the Misura and Misurasata. They were joined in the north by Nicaraguan Democratic Force (FDN) and in the south by former Sandinistas and peasantry who, under the leadership of Ed\u00e9n Pastora, were resisting forced collectivization.\nIn 1980 the Sandinista government launched the massive Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign and said the illiteracy rate fell from 50% to 13% in the span of five months. Robert F. Arnove said the figures were excessive because many \"unteachable\" illiterates were omitted from the statistics, and many people declared literate were found to be unable to read or write a simple sentence. Richard Kraft said that even if the figures were exaggerated, the \"accomplishment is without precedent in educational history\". In 1980, UNESCO awarded Nicaragua the Nadezhda K. Krupskaya prize in recognition of its efforts. The FSLN also focused on improving the Nicaraguan health system, particularly through vaccination campaigns and the construction of public hospitals. These actions reduced child mortality by half, to 40 deaths per thousand. By 1982, the World Health Organization deemed Nicaragua a model for primary health care. During this period, Nicaragua won the UNESCO prize for exceptional health progress.\nIn 1981, United States President Ronald Reagan accused the FSLN of joining with Soviet-backed Cuba in supporting Marxist revolutionary movements in other Latin American countries, such as El Salvador. People within the Reagan administration authorized the CIA to begin financing, arming and training rebels as anti-Sandinista guerrillas, some of whom were former officers from Somoza's National Guard. These were known collectively as the Contras. This resulted in one of the largest political scandals in US history, (the Iran\u2013Contra affair). Oliver North and several members of the Reagan administration defied the Boland Amendment, selling arms to Iran and using the proceeds in order to secretly fund the Contras.\nThe Contra war claimed 30,000 lives in Nicaragua. The tactics used by the Sandinista government to fight the Contras have been widely condemned for their suppression of civil rights. On 15 March 1982, the Junta declared a state of siege, which allowed it to close independent radio stations, suspend the right of association, and limit the freedom of trade unions. Nicaragua's Permanent Commission on Human Rights condemned Sandinista human rights violations, accusing them of killing and forcibly disappearing thousands of persons in the first few years of the war.\nAt the 1984 general election Ortega won the presidency with 67% of the vote and took office on 10 January 1985. In the early phases of the campaign, Ortega enjoyed many institutional advantages, and used the full power of the press, police, and Supreme Electoral Council against the fractured opposition. In the weeks before the November election, Ortega gave a U.N. speech denouncing talks held in Rio de Janeiro on electoral reform. But by 22 October, the Sandinistas signed an accord with opposition parties to reform electoral and campaign laws, making the process more fair and transparent. While campaigning, Ortega promoted the Sandinistas' achievements, and at a rally said that \"Democracy is literacy, democracy is land reform, democracy is education and public health.\" International observers judged the election to be the first free election held in the country in more than half a century. A report by an Irish governmentary delegation stated: \"The electoral process was carried out with total integrity. The seven parties participating in the elections represented a broad spectrum of political ideologies.\" The general counsel of New York's Human Rights Commission described the election as \"free, fair and hotly contested\". A study by the US Latin American Studies Association (LASA) concluded that the FSLN (Sandinista Front) \"did little more to take advantage of its incumbency than incumbent parties everywhere (including the U.S.) routinely do.\" However some people described the election as \"rigged\". According to a detailed study, since the 1984 election was for posts subordinate to the Sandinista Directorate, the elections were no more subject to approval by vote than the Central Committee of the Communist Party is in countries of the East Bloc.\nThirty-three per cent of the Nicaraguan voters cast ballots for one of six opposition parties\u2014three to the right of the Sandinistas, three to the left\u2014which had campaigned with the aid of government funds and free T.V. and radio time. Two conservative parties captured a combined 23% of the vote. They held rallies across the country (a few of which were disrupted by FSLN supporters) and blasted the Sandinistas in harsh terms. Most foreign and independent observers noted this pluralism in debunking the Reagan administration charge\u2014ubiquitous in the US media\u2014that it was a \"Soviet-style sham\" election. Some opposition parties boycotted the election, allegedly under pressure from US embassy officials, and so it was denounced as being unfair by the Reagan administration. Reagan thus maintained that he was justified to continue supporting what he referred to as the Contras' \"democratic resistance\".\nThe illegal intervention of the Contras continued (albeit covertly) after Ortega's democratic election. Peace talks between five Central American heads of state in July 1987 led to the signing of the Central American Peace Accords, and the beginning of a roadmap to the end of the conflict. In 1988, the Contras first entered into peace talks with the Sandinista government, although the violence continued, as did their US support. Despite US opposition, disarmament of the Contras began in 1989.\nIn opposition (1990\u20132007).\nIn the 1990 presidential election, Ortega lost his reelection bid to Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, his former colleague in the junta. Chamorro was supported by the US and a 14-party anti-Sandinista alliance known as the National Opposition Union (Uni\u00f3n Nacional Oppositora, UNO), an alliance that ranged from conservatives and liberals to communists. She ran an effective campaign, presenting herself as the peace candidate and promising to end the US-funded Contra War if she won. Ortega campaigned on the slogan, \"Everything Will Be Better\", and promised that, with the Contra war over, he could focus on the nation's recovery. Contrary to what most observers expected, Chamorro shocked Ortega and won the election. Chamorro's UNO coalition garnered 54% of the vote, and won 51 of the 92 seats in the National Assembly. Immediately after the loss, the Sandinistas tried to maintain unity around their revolutionary posture. In Ortega's concession speech the following day he vowed to keep \"ruling from below\" a reference to the power that the FSLN still wielded in various sectors. He also stressed his belief that the Sandinistas had the goal of bringing \"dignity\" to Latin America, and not necessarily to hold on to government posts. In 1991, Ortega said elections were \"an instrument to reaffirm\" the FSLN's \"political and ideological positions,\" and also \"confront capitalism.\" However, the electoral loss led to pronounced divisions in the FSLN. Some members adopted more pragmatic positions, and sought to transform the FSLN into a modern social democratic party engaged in national reconciliation and class cooperation. Ortega and other party insiders found common ground with the radicals, who still promoted anti-imperialism and class conflict to achieve social change.\nPossible explanations for his loss include that the Nicaraguan people were disenchanted with the Ortega government as well as the fact that already in November 1989, the White House had announced that the economic embargo against Nicaragua would continue unless Violeta Chamorro won. Also, there had been reports of intimidation from the side of the contras, with a Canadian observer mission stating that 42 people were killed by the contras in \"election violence\" in October 1989. This led many commentators to assume that Nicaraguans voted against the Sandinistas out of fear of a continuation of the contra war and economic deprivation.\nFrom 19 to 21 July 1991, the FSLN held a National Congress to mend the rifts between members and form a new overarching political program. The effort failed to unite the party, and intense debates over the internal governance of the FSLN continued. The pragmatists, led by the former vice president Sergio Ramirez, formed the basis of a \"renovating\" faction, and supported collaboration with other political forces to preserve the rule of law in Nicaragua. Under the leadership of Ortega and Tomas Borge, the radicals regrouped into the \"principled\" faction, and branded themselves the Izquierda Democratica (ID), or Democratic Left (DL). The DL fought the Chamorro government with disruptive labor strikes and demonstrations, and renewed calls for the revolutionary reconstruction of Nicaraguan society. During the 20\u201323 May 1994, extraordinary congress, Ortega ran against a fellow National Directorate member, Henry Ruiz, for the position of party secretary-general. Ortega was elected with 287 to Ruiz's 147 votes, and the DL secured the most dominant role in the FSLN.\nOn 9 September 1994, Ortega gained more power after taking over Sergio Ramirez's seat in the Asamblea Sandinista (Sandinista Assembly). Ramirez had served as chief of the FSLN's parliamentary caucus since 1990, but Ortega came to oppose his actions in the National Assembly, setting the stage for Ramirez's removal. Historic leaders, such as Ernesto Cardenal, a former minister of culture in the Sandinista government, rejected Ortega's consolidation of power: \"My resignation from the FSLN has been caused by the kidnapping of the party carried out by Daniel Ortega and the group he heads.\" The party formally split on 8 January 1995, when Ramirez and a number of prominent Sandinista officials quit.\nOrtega ran for election again, in October 1996 and November 2001, but lost on both occasions to Arnoldo Alem\u00e1n and Enrique Bola\u00f1os, respectively. In these elections, a key issue was the allegation of corruption. In Ortega's last days as president, through a series of legislative acts known as \"The Pi\u00f1ata\", estates that had been seized by the Sandinista government (some valued at millions and even billions of US dollars) became the private property of various FSLN officials, including Ortega himself.\nIn the 1996 campaign, Ortega faced the Liberal Alliance (Alianza Liberal), headed by Arnoldo Aleman Lacayo, a former mayor of Managua. The Sandinistas softened their anti-imperialist rhetoric, with Ortega calling the US \"our great neighbor,\" and vowing to cooperate \"within a framework of respect, equality, and justice.\" The image change failed, as Aleman's Liberal Alliance came first with 51.03% of the vote, while Ortega's FSLN secured 37.75%.\nOrtega's policies became more moderate during his time in opposition, and he gradually changed much of his former Marxist-Leninst stance in favor of an agenda of democratic socialism. His Roman Catholic faith has become more public in recent years as well, leading Ortega to embrace a variety of socially conservative policies; in 2006 the FSLN endorsed a strict law banning all abortions in Nicaragua. In the run-up to the 2006 elections, Ortega displayed his ties to the Catholic Church by renewing his marriage vows before Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo.\nOrtega was instrumental in creating the controversial strategic pact between the FSLN and the Constitutional Liberal Party (Partido Liberal Constitucionalista, PLC). The controversial alliance of Nicaragua's two major parties is aimed at distributing power between the PLC and FSLN, and preventing other parties from rising. After sealing the agreement in January 2000, the two parties controlled the three key institutions of the state: the Comptroller General of the Republic, the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Electoral Council. \"\"El Pacto\",\" as it is known in Nicaragua, is said to have personally benefited former presidents Ortega and Alem\u00e1n greatly, while constraining then-president Bola\u00f1os. One of the key accords of the pact was to lower the ratio necessary to win a presidential election in the first round from 45% to 35%, a change in electoral law that would become decisive in Ortega's favor in the 2006 elections.\nAt the Fourth Ordinary Congress of the FSLN, held 17\u201318 March 2002, Ortega eliminated the National Directorate (DN). Once the main collective leadership body of the party, with nine members, the DN no longer met routinely, and only three historic members remained. Instead, the body just supported decisions already made by the secretary-general. Ortega sidelined party officials and other members while empowering his own informal circle, known as the ring of iron.\n2001 presidential election.\nIn the November 2001 general elections, Ortega lost his third successive presidential election, this time to Enrique Bola\u00f1os of the Constitutionalist Liberal Party.\nUnder Ortega's direction, the FSLN formed the broad National Convergence (Convergencia Nacional) coalition in opposition to the PLC. Ortega abandoned the revolutionary tone of the past, and infused his campaign with religious imagery, giving thanks in speeches to \"God and the Revolution\" for the post-1990 democracy, and said a Sandinista victory would enable the Nicaraguan people to \"pass through the sea and reach the Promised Land.\" The US opposed Ortega's candidacy from the beginning. The US ambassador even made an appearance with the PLC's Enrique Bolanos while distributing food aid. The 11 September 2001, terrorist attacks doomed Ortega's chances, as the threat of a US invasion became an issue. Bolanos convinced many Nicaraguans that the renewed US hostility towards terrorism would endanger their country if the openly anti-US Ortega prevailed. Bolanos ended up with 56.3% of the vote, and Ortega won 42.3%.\n2006 presidential election.\nIn 2006, Daniel Ortega was elected president with 38% of the vote. This occurred despite the fact that the breakaway Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) continued to oppose the FSLN, running former Mayor of Managua, Herty Lewites as its candidate for president. Ortega personally attacked Lewites' Jewish background, compared him to Judas, and warned he \"could end up hanged.\" However, Lewites died several months before the elections.\nOrtega emphasized peace and reconciliation in his campaign, and selected a former Contra leader, Jaime Morales Corazo, as his running mate. The FSLN also won 38 seats in the congressional elections, becoming the party with the largest representation in parliament. The split in the Constitutionalist Liberal Party helped allow the FSLN to become the largest party in Congress; however, the Sandinista vote had a minuscule split between the FSLN and MRS, and that the liberal party combined is larger than the Frente Faction. In 2010, several liberal congressmen raised accusations about the FSLN presumably attempting to buy votes to pass constitutional reforms that would allow Ortega to run for office for the 6th time since 1984.\nSecond presidency (2007\u2013present).\nAccording to Tim Rogers, writing in \"The Atlantic\", during his second term as president, Ortega took \"full control of all four branches of government, state institutions, the military, and police\", and in the process dismantled \"Nicaragua's institutional democracy\". Frances Robles wrote that Ortega took control \"every aspect of government ... the National Assembly, the Supreme Court, the armed forces, the judiciary, the police and the prosecutor's office\". In its 2019 World Report, Human Rights Watch wrote that Ortega \"aggressively dismantled all institutional checks on presidential power\". Many journalists and governments criticize Ortega and label him a dictator.\n2008 elections.\nIn June 2008 the Nicaraguan Supreme Court disqualified the MRS and the Conservative Party from participation in municipal elections. In November 2008, the Supreme Electoral Council received national and international criticism following irregularities in municipal elections, but agreed to review results for Managua only, while the opposition demanded a nationwide review. For the first time since 1990, the Council decided not to allow national or international observers to witness the election. Instances of intimidation, violence, and harassment of opposition political party members and NGO representatives have been recorded. Official results show Sandinista candidates winning 94 of the 146 municipal mayoralties, compared to 46 for the main opposition Liberal Constitutional Party (PLC). The opposition claimed that marked ballots were dumped and destroyed, that party members were refused access to some of the vote counts and that tallies from many polling places were altered. As a result of the fraud allegations, the European Union suspended $70m of aid, and the US$64m.\nWith the late-2000s recession, Ortega in 2011 characterised capitalism as in its \"death throes\" and portrayed the Bolivarian Alternative for the People of Our America (ALBA) is the most advanced, most Christian and fairest project. He also said God was punishing the United States with the financial crisis for trying to impose its economic principles on poor countries. \"It's incredible that in the most powerful country in the world, which spends billions of dollars on brutal wars ... people do not have enough money to stay in their homes.\"\nBefore the National Sandinista Council held in September 2009, Lenin Cerna, the secretary of the party organization, called for diversifying its political strategies. He declared the FSLN's future depended on implementing new plans, \"so that the party can advance via new routes and in new ways, always under Ortega's leadership.\" Ortega gained power over the selection of candidates, allowing him to personally choose all candidates for public office.\nDuring an interview with David Frost for the Al Jazeera English programme \"Frost Over The World\" in March 2009, Ortega suggested that he would like to change the constitution to allow him to run again for president. In Judicial Decision 504, issued on 19 October 2009, the Supreme Court of Justice of Nicaragua declared portions of Articles 147 and 178 of the Constitution of Nicaragua inapplicable; these provisions concerned the eligibility of candidates for president, vice-president, mayor, and vice-mayor\u2014a decision that had the effect of allowing Ortega to run for reelection in 2011.\nFor this decision, the Sandinista magistrates formed the required quorum by excluding the opposition magistrates and replacing them with Sandinista substitutes, violating the Nicaraguan constitution. Opposing parties, the church and human rights groups in Nicaragua denounced the decision. Throughout 2010, court rulings gave Ortega greater power over judicial and civil service appointments.\nWhile supporting abortion rights during his presidency during the 1980s, Ortega has since embraced the Catholic Church's position of strong opposition. While non-emergency abortions have long been illegal in Nicaragua, recently even abortions \"in the case where the pregnancy endangers the mother's life\", otherwise known as therapeutic abortions have been made illegal in the days before the 2006 election, with a six-year prison term in such cases, too\u2014a move supported by Ortega.\n2011 election.\nOrtega was re-elected president with a vote on 6 November and confirmation on 16 November 2011. During the election, the Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) blocked both domestic and international poll observers from multiple polling stations. According to the Supreme Electoral Council, Ortega defeated Fabio Gadea, with 63% of the vote.\nIn January 2014 the National Assembly, dominated by the FSLN, approved constitutional amendments that abolished term limits for the presidency and allowed a president to run for an unlimited number of five-year terms. While the FSLN claimed the amendments would assure the stability Nicaragua needed to deal with long-term problems, the opposition claimed they were a threat to democracy. The constitutional reforms also gave Ortega the sole power to appoint military and police commanders.\n2016 elections.\nAs of 2016, Ortega's family owns three of the nine free-to-air television channels in Nicaragua, and controls a fourth (the public Channel 6). Four of the remaining five are controlled by Mexican mogul \u00c1ngel Gonz\u00e1lez, and are generally considered to be aligned with Ortega's ruling FSLN party. There are no government restrictions on Internet use; the Ortega administration attempted to gain complete control over online media in 2015, but failed due to opposition from civil society, political parties, and private organizations.\nIn June 2016, the Nicaraguan supreme court ruled to oust Eduardo Montealegre, the leader of the main opposition party, leaving the main opposition coalition with no means of contesting the November 2016 national elections. In August 2016, Ortega chose his wife, Rosario Murillo, as his vice-presidential running-mate for re-election.\nAccording to \"The Washington Post\", figures announced on November 7, 2016, put Daniel Ortega in line for his third consecutive term as president, also being his fourth term overall. The Supreme Electoral Council (CSE) reported Ortega and Murillo won 72.4% of the vote, with 68% turnout. The opposition coalition had called the election a \"farce\" and had called for the boycott of the election. International observers were not allowed to observe the vote. Nevertheless, according to the BBC, Ortega was the most popular candidate by far, possibly due to Nicaragua's stable economic growth and lack of violence compared to its neighbours El Salvador and Honduras in recent years.\nAccording to Tim Rogers, until the 2018 unrest, as president Ortega presided over \"the fastest-growing economy in Central America\" and was a \"poster child for foreign investment and citizen security in a region known for gangs and unrest\". During this time the Ortega government formed an alliance with the Superior Council for Private Enterprise (COSEP), Nicaragua's council of business chambers. However the same unpopular decree which \"unilaterally overhauling the social-security tax system\" (mentioned below) and precipitated the unrest in April 2018, also broke Ortega's arrangement with COSEP, and along with US sanctions, brought a sharp economic drop that as of mid-2020 is still \"crippling\" Nicaragua's economy.\nResponse to COVID pandemic.\nPresident Ortega's government has been the target of criticism for its lack of a response to the pandemic.\nOn 14 March 2020, Ortega's government called a massive demonstration called \"Love in the Time of COVID-19\" as a show of support to him and his government. This occurred in the middle of the COVID-19 Pandemic which had only recently been officially declared by the WHO.\nAccording to CNN, as of mid-June 2020, Ortega had \"refused to impose strict, preventive quarantine measures seen in neighboring countries\" to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. \"Public schools remain open, businesses continue to operate, festivals and cultural events are happening on an almost-weekly basis.\" The story stated that from mid-March to mid-June six politicians had died, and, according to witnesses, their remains disposed of at night in \"express burials\" (with police in attendance but \"no Mass, no wake and no funeral arrangements\", no photographs). The Ortega government said reports of \"express burials\" were \"false news\". According to AP News \"the government threatened to ban\" professional baseball players \"who refuse to play baseball ... And everyone is warned to keep quiet.\"\nIn hospitals \"ruling-party activists ensure no information leaks out\", and it quotes a doctor (anesthesiologist Mar\u00eda Nela Escoto) complaining that in the public hospital where she works \"everything is secret. They don't allow suggestions, and you can't question anything because they're watching. It's a very hostile environment.\"\n2018\u20132021 Nicaraguan protests.\nIn April 2018, student protests over a nature reserve fire expanded to cover an unpopular decree that would have cut social security benefits and increased taxpayer contributions. The protesters were violently set upon by the state sponsored Sandinista Youth. Despite attempts by Ortega's government to hide the incident through censorship of all private-owned news outlets, photos and videos of the violence made their way to social media where they sparked outrage and urged more Nicaraguans to join in on the protests. Tensions escalated quickly, as police began using tear gas canisters and rubber bullets, and eventually live ammunition on unarmed protesters. Authorities were also seen arming Sandinista Youth members with weapons to serve as paramilitary forces. Dozens of student protesters were subsequently killed. Despite the withdrawal of the unpopular decree, the protests continue, with most protesters demanding Ortega's and his cabinet's resignations.\nOn 30 May 2018, Nicaragua's Mother's Day, over 300,000 people marched to honor the mothers of students killed in the preceding protests. Despite the attendance of children, mothers and retirees, and lack of any violence by marchers, marchers were attacked in an event dubbed the \"Mother's Day Massacre\". 16 were killed, and 88 injured, as \"police sprayed the crowd with bullets, government sharpshooters positioned on the roof of the national baseball stadium went headhunting with sniper rifles\".\nIn June 2018, Tim Rogers wrote in \"The Atlantic\" magazine:Over the past seven weeks, Ortega's police and paramilitaries have killed more than 120 people, mostly students and other young protesters who are demanding the president's ouster and a return to democracy, according to a human-rights group [CENIDH, Nicaraguan Center for Human Rights]. Police hunt students like enemy combatants. Sandinista Youth paramilitaries, armed and paid by Ortega's party, drive around in pickup trucks attacking protesters. Gangs of masked men loot and burn shops with impunity. Cops wear civilian clothing, and some paramilitaries dress in police uniforms. \"This is starting to look more like Syria than Caracas,\" one Nicaraguan business leader told me.\nBy December 322 people were dead and 565 imprisoned. Professionals involved in the protests (lawyers, engineering majors, radio broadcasters and merchants) had been reduced to lives of \"ever-changing safe houses, encrypted messaging apps and pseudonyms\", with the Ortega government allegedly \"hunting us like deer,\" according to one dissident (Roberto Carlos Membre\u00f1o Brice\u00f1o). Human rights organization offices were raided, computers seized and observers expelled. Observers from the Organization of American States were expelled after releasing a critical investigative report of the government's response to the protests. The report found the government had progressed from \"using tear gas to rubber bullets, then real bullets and finally military firepower like assault rifles and grenade launchers\", based on an analysis of videos posted on social media. At least 1,400 people involved in the protests were hurt, although that the number was probably \"far higher because most people were too afraid to go to public hospitals, where doctors were fired for treating wounded protesters\". By July 2019 the international human rights organization Human Rights Watch called on the United States to impose sanctions on Ortega \"and other top\" Nicaraguan officials \"implicated\" in the crackdown on protests.\nForeign policy.\nSoon after the 2006 election, Ortega paid an official visit to Iran and met Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. Ortega told the press that the \"revolutions of Iran and Nicaragua are almost twin revolutions...since both revolutions are about justice, liberty, self-determination, and the struggle against imperialism.\"\nOn 6 March 2008, following the 2008 Andean diplomatic crisis, Ortega announced that Nicaragua was breaking diplomatic ties with Colombia \"in solidarity with the Ecuadorian people\". Ortega also stated, \"We are not breaking relations with the Colombian people. We are breaking relations with the terrorist policy practiced by \u00c1lvaro Uribe's government\". The relations were restored with the resolution at a Rio Group summit held in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, on 7 March 2008. At the summit Colombia's \u00c1lvaro Uribe, Ecuador's Rafael Correa, Venezuela's Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and Ortega publicly shook hands in a show of good-will. The handshakes, broadcast live throughout Latin America, appeared to signal that a week of military buildups and diplomatic repercussions was over. After the handshakes, Ortega said he would re-establish diplomatic ties with Colombia. Uribe then quipped that he would send him the bill for his ambassador's plane fare.\nOn 25 May 2008, Ortega, upon learning of the death of FARC guerrilla leader Manuel Marulanda in Colombia, expressed condolences to the family of Marulanda and solidarity with the FARC and called Marulanda an extraordinary fighter who battled against profound inequalities in Colombia. The declarations were protested by the Colombian government and criticized in the major Colombian media outlets.\nOn 2 September 2008, during ceremonies for the 29th anniversary of the founding of the Nicaraguan army, Ortega announced that \"Nicaragua recognizes the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia and fully supports the Russian government's position\". Ortega's decision made Nicaragua the second country (after Russia) to recognize the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia from Georgia.\nUnder Ortega's leadership, Nicaragua joined the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas.\nWhen seeking office, Ortega threatened to cut diplomatic recognition with the Republic of China (Taiwan, formerly Nationalist China) in order to restore relations with the Mainland-based People's Republic of China (as in the period from 1985 to 1990) as the legal government of China. But he did not do so. In 2007 Ortega stated that Nicaragua did not accept the One China Policy of the PRC government and that Nicaragua reserved the right to maintain official diplomatic relations with the ROC. He reassured President Chen Shui Bian in 2007 that Nicaragua would not break diplomatic relations with the ROC. He explained that during the Reagan administration the United States imposed sanctions on Nicaragua. But cutting ties with Taipei was a sad and painful decision because of the friendship between Nicaragua and Taiwan's people and government. Ortega met with the ROC President Ma Ying-jeou in 2009 and both agreed to improve the diplomatic ties between both countries. However, with a trade show from China (PRC) in Managua in 2010, he is attempting a two-track policy to get benefits from both sides. In 2016 Nicaragua and China (ROC) signed an air services agreement and Ortega stated that Nicaragua's free trade deal with the ROC had benefited both nations. The ROC increased its investment in Nicaragua. In December 2021, Nicaragua once again switched recognition with the PRC.\nIn September 2010, after a US report listed Nicaragua as a \"major\" drug-trafficking centre, with Costa Rica and Honduras, Ortega urged the US Congress and Obama administration to allocate more resources to assist the fight against drug trafficking.\nDuring the Libyan Civil War, Ortega was among the very few leaders who spoke out in clear defense of the embattled Muammar Gaddafi. During a telephone conversation between the two, Ortega told Gaddafi that he was \"waging a great battle to defend his nation\" and stated that \"it's at difficult times that loyalty and resolve are put to the test.\"\nOrtega has said that Assad's victory in the 2014 election is an important step to \"attain peace in Syria and a clear cut evidence that the Syrian people trust their president as a national leader and support his policies which aim at maintaining Syria's sovereignty and unity\".\nOrtega attended the swearing-in ceremony of Nicol\u00e1s Maduro for his second term on 10 January 2019.\nIn an interview with Max Blumenthal in August 2019, Ortega stated that he was open to the idea of Bernie Sanders (who had visited him in 1985) winning the US presidency in 2020 and that Bernie's message \"goes in the right direction for the U.S. to become a pole of peace, development, and cooperation.\"\nEnvironmental policy.\nIn 2016, Daniel Ortega did not sign the Paris Agreement because he felt the deal did not do enough to protect the climate, although he later changed his mind. Moreover, Nicaragua rejected projects of mining of the Canadian group B2 Gold which could represent a threat to the environment. According to government estimates, Nicaragua has passed from 25% renewable electricity to 52% between 2007 and 2016.\nUS sanctions.\nIn November 2021, Joe Biden signed into law the \"Reinforcing Nicaragua's Adherence to Conditions for Electoral Reform Act\" (RENACER Act) which extended US sanctions against Nicaragua and gave Biden the power to exclude Nicaragua from the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) and to obstruct multilateral loans to Nicaragua. Venezuela and Russia condemned the new law.\nUkraine Sanctions.\nDaniel Ortega it is also subject to sanctions in Ukraine for sending a delegation to the occupied territory of Crimea.\nControversy.\nOrtega's presidency has been subject to much criticism and accusations of his becoming a strongman. The 2018 protests have been pointed to as being symbolic of these tensions. In 2018, Frances Robles wrote in \"The New York Times\" that the \"many Ortega adult children manage everything from gasoline distribution to television stations\" in Nicaragua.\nIn the months preceding the November 2021 Nicaraguan general election, Ortega's government arrested many prominent opposition members. As of July 23, 26 opposition leaders have been imprisoned.\nOn March 24, 2022, the ambassador Arturo McFields, condemned the Ortega government and requested the release of political prisoners, alluding that the government people were \"tired of dictatorship\" and that it was not easy to denounce it. As a result, he was dismissed.\nThe American lawyer Paul Reichler also left his position as representative due to \"moral conscience\", who felt that \"He was no longer the Daniel Ortega whom he respected so much and served with so much pride,\" he found it inconceivable that someone like him would have mercilessly suppressed peaceful demonstrations and who denounced that he had his former colleagues prisoners in inhumane conditions, accusing him of \"murdering\" said general for not receiving adequate medical treatment. This figure of American origin served as Nicaragua's international legal adviser before the International Court of Justice, when Managua denounced the United States for financing the counterrevolution, winning the case.\nThe Ortega administration also ordered the closure of the Nicaraguan Language Academy for failing to register as a \"foreign agent\" ratified by the Sandinista parliament with the favorable vote of 75 deputies of the ruling FSLN.\nSexual abuse allegations.\nIn 1998, Daniel Ortega's adopted stepdaughter Zoilam\u00e9rica Narv\u00e1ez released a 48-page report in which she alleged he had sexually abused her from 1979, when she was 12, until 1990. Ortega and his wife Murillo denied the allegation. The case could not proceed in Nicaraguan courts, which have been consistently allied with Ortega, because he had immunity from prosecution as a member of parliament, and the five-year statute of limitations for sexual abuse and rape charges had expired. Narv\u00e1ez's complaint to the Inter American Human Rights Commission was ruled admissible on 15 October 2001. On 4 March 2002, the Nicaraguan government accepted the commission's recommendation of a \"friendly agreement\". Narv\u00e1ez withdrew the accusations in 2008. Following the 2016 election, Narv\u00e1ez renewed her accusations and said that she had become an outcast in her family.\nIn 2019 a documentary film \"Exiliada\" was released which revolves around Zoilam\u00e9rica Narv\u00e1ez and her sexual abuse allegations against Ortega.\nThere is also the case of Elvia Junieth who was abused by the president in 2005, and, according to the family, a girl was born from that relationship that Ortega did not recognize. Ernesto Moncada Lau, another of the assistants to the Sandinista president, appears on the birth certificate as the father of the minor. Her brother died in the Tipitapa Model prison in November 2021.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "8779", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8779", "title": "Destroyer", "text": "Type of warship intended to escort other larger ships\nIn naval terminology, a destroyer is a fast, maneuverable, long-endurance warship intended to escort\nlarger vessels in a fleet, convoy, or battle group and defend them against powerful short-range attackers. They were originally developed in 1885 by Fernando Villaamil for the Spanish Navy as a defense against torpedo boats, and by the time of the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, these \"torpedo boat destroyers\" (TBDs) were \"large, swift, and powerfully armed torpedo boats designed to destroy other torpedo boats\". Although the term \"destroyer\" had been used interchangeably with \"TBD\" and \"torpedo boat destroyer\" by navies since 1892, the term \"torpedo boat destroyer\" had been generally shortened to simply \"destroyer\" by nearly all navies by the First World War.\nBefore World War II, destroyers were light vessels with little endurance for unattended ocean operations; typically, a number of destroyers and a single destroyer tender operated together. After the war, destroyers grew in size. The American s had a displacement of 2,200 tons, while the \"Arleigh Burke\" class has a displacement of up to 9,600 tons, a difference of nearly 340%. Moreover, the advent of guided missiles allowed destroyers to take on the surface-combatant roles previously filled by battleships and cruisers. This resulted in larger and more powerful guided-missile destroyers more capable of independent operation.\nAt the start of the 21st century, destroyers are the global standard for surface-combatant ships, with only two nations (the United States and Russia) officially operating the heavier cruisers, with no battleships or true battlecruisers remaining. Modern guided-missile destroyers are equivalent in tonnage but vastly superior in firepower to cruisers of the World War II era, and are capable of carrying nuclear-tipped cruise missiles. At long, a displacement of 9,200\u00a0tons, and with an armament of more than 90 missiles, guided-missile destroyers such as the are actually larger and more heavily armed than most previous ships classified as guided-missile cruisers. The Chinese Type 055 destroyer has been described as a cruiser in some US Navy reports due to its size and armament.\nSome NATO navies, such as the Canadian, French, Spanish, Dutch, and German, use the term \"frigate\" for their destroyers, which leads to some confusion.\nOrigins.\nThe emergence and development of the destroyer was related to the invention of the self-propelled torpedo in the 1860s. A navy now had the potential to destroy a superior enemy battle fleet using steam launches to fire torpedoes. Cheap, fast boats armed with torpedoes called torpedo boats were built and became a threat to large capital ships near enemy coasts. The first seagoing vessel designed to launch the self-propelled Whitehead torpedo was the 33-ton in 1876. She was armed with two drop collars to launch these weapons; these were replaced in 1879 by a single torpedo tube in the bow. By the 1880s, the type had evolved into small ships of 50\u2013100 tons, fast enough to evade enemy picket boats.\nAt first, the threat of a torpedo-boat attack to a battle fleet was considered to exist only when at anchor, but as faster and longer-range torpedo boats and torpedoes were developed, the threat extended to cruising at sea. In response to this new threat, more heavily gunned picket boats called \"catchers\" were built, which were used to escort the battle fleet at sea. They needed significant seaworthiness and endurance to operate with the battle fleet, and as they inherently became larger, they became officially designated \"torpedo-boat destroyers\", and by the First World War were largely known as \"destroyers\" in English. The antitorpedo boat origin of this type of ship is retained in its name in other languages, including French (), Italian (), Portuguese (), Czech (), Greek (, \"\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03b9\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03c0\u03b9\u03bb\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\"), Dutch () and, up until the Second World War, Polish (, now obsolete).\nOnce destroyers became more than just catchers guarding an anchorage, they were recognized to be also ideal to take over the offensive role of torpedo boats themselves, so they were also fitted with torpedo tubes in addition to their antitorpedo-boat guns. At that time, and even into World War I, the only function of destroyers was to protect their own battle fleet from enemy torpedo attacks and to make such attacks on the battleships of the enemy. The task of escorting merchant convoys was still in the future.\nEarly designs.\nAn important development came with the construction of HMS \"Swift\" in 1884, later redesignated TB 81. This was a large (137 ton) torpedo boat with four 47\u00a0mm quick-firing guns and three torpedo tubes. At , while still not fast enough to engage enemy torpedo boats reliably, the ship at least had the armament to deal with them.\nAnother forerunner of the torpedo-boat destroyer (TBD) was the Japanese torpedo boat (\"Falcon\"), built in 1885. Designed to Japanese specifications and ordered from the Isle of Dogs, London Yarrow shipyard in 1885, she was transported in parts to Japan, where she was assembled and launched in 1887. The long vessel was armed with four 1-pounder (37\u00a0mm) quick-firing guns and six torpedo tubes, reached , and at 203\u00a0tons, was the largest torpedo boat built to date. In her trials in 1889, \"Kotaka\" demonstrated that she could exceed the role of coastal defense, and was capable of accompanying larger warships on the high seas. The Yarrow shipyards, builder of the parts for \"Kotaka\", \"considered Japan to have effectively invented the destroyer\".\nThe German aviso , launched in 1886, was designed as a \"Torpedoj\u00e4ger\" (torpedo hunter), intended to screen the fleet against attacks by torpedo boats. The ship was significantly larger than torpedo boats of the period, displacing some , with an armament of guns and Hotchkiss revolver cannon.\nTorpedo gunboat.\nThe first vessel designed for the explicit purpose of hunting and destroying torpedo boats was the torpedo gunboat. Essentially very small cruisers, torpedo gunboats were equipped with torpedo tubes and an adequate gun armament, intended for hunting down smaller enemy boats. By the end of the 1890s, torpedo gunboats were made obsolete by their more successful contemporaries, the TBDs, which were much faster.\nThe first example of this was , designed by Nathaniel Barnaby in 1885, and commissioned in response to the Russian War scare. The gunboat was armed with torpedoes and designed for hunting and destroying smaller torpedo boats. Exactly long and in beam, she displaced 550 tons. Built of steel, \"Rattlesnake\" was unarmoured with the exception of a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444-inch protective deck. She was armed with a single 4-inch/25-pounder breech-loading gun, six 3-pounder QF guns and four torpedo tubes, arranged with two fixed tubes at the bow and a set of torpedo-dropping carriages on either side. Four torpedo reloads were carried.\nA number of torpedo gunboat classes followed, including the \"Grasshopper\" class, the , the , and the \u2013 all built for the Royal Navy during the 1880s and the 1890s. In the 1880s, the Chilean Navy ordered the construction of two torpedo gunboats from the British shipyard Laird Brothers, which specialized in the construction of this type of vessel. The novelty is that one of these \"Almirante Lynch\"-class torpedo boats managed to sink the ironclad with a self-propelled torpedoes in the Battle of Caldera Bay in 1891, thus surpassing its main function of hunting torpedo boats.\nFernando Villaamil, second officer of the Ministry of the Navy of Spain, designed his own torpedo gunboat to combat the threat from the torpedo boat. He asked several British shipyards to submit proposals capable of fulfilling these specifications. In 1885, the Spanish Navy chose the design submitted by the shipyard of James and George Thomson of Clydebank. (\"Destroyer\" in Spanish) was laid down at the end of the year, launched in 1886, and commissioned in 1887. Some authors considered her as the first destroyer ever built.\nShe displaced 348 tons, and was the first warship equipped with twin triple-expansion engines generating , for a maximum speed of , which made her one of the faster ships in the world in 1888. She was armed with one Spanish-designed Hontoria breech-loading gun, four (6-pounder) Nordenfelt guns, two (3-pdr) Hotchkiss cannons and two Schwartzkopff torpedo tubes. The ship carried three torpedoes per tube. She carried a crew of 60.\nIn terms of gunnery, speed, and dimensions, the specialised design to chase torpedo boats and her high-seas capabilities, \"Destructor\" was an important precursor to the TBD.\nDevelopment of modern destroyers.\nThe first classes of ships to bear the formal designation TBD were the of two ships and of two ships of the Royal Navy.\nEarly torpedo gunboat designs lacked the range and speed to keep up with the fleet they were supposed to protect. In 1892, the Third Sea Lord, Rear Admiral John \"Jacky\" Fisher ordered the development of a new type of ships equipped with the then-novel water-tube boilers and quick-firing small-calibre guns. Six ships to the specifications circulated by the admiralty were ordered initially, comprising three different designs each produced by a different shipbuilder: and from John I. Thornycroft &amp; Company, and from Yarrows, and and from Laird, Son &amp; Company.\nThese ships all featured a turtleback (i.e. rounded) forecastle that was characteristic of early British TBDs. and were both built by Thornycroft, displaced 260 tons (287.8 tons full load), and were 185 feet in length. They were armed with one 12-pounder gun and three 6-pounder guns, with one fixed 18-in torpedo tube in the bow plus two more torpedo tubes on a revolving mount abaft the two funnels. Later, the bow torpedo tube was removed and two more 6-pounder guns added, instead. They produced 4,200\u00a0hp from a pair of Thornycroft water-tube boilers, giving them a top speed of 27 knots, giving the range and speed to travel effectively with a battle fleet. In common with subsequent early Thornycroft boats, they had sloping sterns and double rudders.\nThe French navy, an extensive user of torpedo boats, built its first TBD in 1899, with the \"torpilleur d'escadre\". The United States commissioned its first TBD, , Destroyer No. 1, in 1902, and by 1906, 16 destroyers were in service with the US Navy.\nSubsequent improvements.\nTorpedo boat destroyer designs continued to evolve around the turn of the 20th century in several key ways. The first was the introduction of the steam turbine. The spectacular unauthorized demonstration of the turbine-powered at the 1897 Spithead Navy Review, which, significantly, was of torpedo-boat size, prompted the Royal Navy to order a prototype turbine-powered destroyer, of 1899. This was the first turbine warship of any kind, and achieved a remarkable on sea trials. By 1910, the turbine had been widely adopted by all navies for their faster ships.\nThe second development was the replacement of the torpedo boat-style turtleback foredeck by a raised forecastle for the new s built in 1903, which provided better sea-keeping and more space below deck.\nThe first warship to use only fuel oil propulsion was the Royal Navy's TBD , after experiments in 1904, although the obsolescence of coal as a fuel in British warships was delayed by oil's availability. Other navies also adopted oil, for instance the USN with the of 1909.\nIn spite of all this variety, destroyers adopted a largely similar pattern. The hull was long and narrow, with a relatively shallow draft. The bow was either raised in a forecastle or covered under a turtleback; underneath this were the crew spaces, extending &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 the way along the hull. Aft of the crew spaces was as much engine space as the technology of the time would allow - several boilers and engines or turbines. Above deck, one or more quick-firing guns were mounted in the bows, in front of the bridge; several more were mounted amidships and astern. Two tube mountings (later on, multiple mountings) were generally found amidships.\nBetween 1892 and 1914, destroyers became markedly larger; initially 275\u00a0tons with a length of for the Royal Navy's first of TBDs, up to the First World War with long destroyers displacing 1,000\u00a0tons was not unusual. Construction remained focused on putting the biggest possible engines into a small hull, though, resulting in a somewhat flimsy construction. Often, hulls were built of high-tensile steel only thick.\nBy 1910, the steam-driven displacement (that is, not hydroplaning) torpedo boat had become redundant as a separate type. Germany, nevertheless, continued to build such boats until the end of World War I, although these were effectively small coastal destroyers. In fact, Germany never distinguished between the two types, giving them pennant numbers in the same series and never giving names to destroyers. Ultimately, the term \"torpedo boat\" came to be attached to a quite different vessel \u2013 the very fast-hydroplaning, motor-driven motor torpedo boat.\nEarly use and World War I.\nNavies originally built TBDrs to protect against torpedo boats, but admirals soon appreciated the flexibility of the fast, multipurpose vessels that resulted. Vice-Admiral Sir Baldwin Walker laid down destroyer duties for the Royal Navy:\nEarly destroyers were extremely cramped places to live, being \"without a doubt magnificent fighting vessels... but unable to stand bad weather\". During the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, the commander of the Imperial Japanese Navy TBD \"Akatsuki\" described \"being in command of a destroyer for a long period, especially in wartime... is not very good for the health\". Stating that he had originally been strong and healthy, he continued, \"life on a destroyer in winter, with bad food, no comforts, would sap the powers of the strongest men in the long run. A \"destroyer\" is always more uncomfortable than the others, and rain, snow, and \"sea-water\" combine to make them damp; in fact, in bad weather, there is not a dry spot where one can rest for a moment.\"\nThe Japanese destroyer-commander finished with, \"Yesterday, I looked at myself in a mirror for a long time; I was disagreeably surprised to see my face thin, full of wrinkles, and as old as though I were 50. My clothes (uniform) cover nothing but a skeleton, and my bones are full of rheumatism.\"\nIn 1898, the US Navy officially classified , a long all steel vessel displacing 165 tons, as a torpedo boat, but her commander, LT. John C. Fremont, described her as \"...a compact mass of machinery not meant to keep the sea nor to live in... as five-sevenths of the ship are taken up by machinery and fuel, whilst the remaining two-sevenths, fore and aft, are the crew's quarters; officers forward and the men placed aft. And even in those spaces are placed anchor engines, steering engines, steam pipes, etc. rendering them unbearably hot in tropical regions.\"\nEarly combat.\nThe TBD's first major use in combat came during the Japanese surprise attack on the Russian fleet anchored in Port Arthur at the opening of the Russo-Japanese War on 8 February 1904.\nThree destroyer divisions attacked the Russian fleet in port, firing a total of 18 torpedoes, but only two Russian battleships, and , and a protected cruiser, , were seriously damaged due to the proper deployment of torpedo nets. \"Tsesarevich\", the Russian flagship, had her nets deployed, with at least four enemy torpedoes \"hung up\" in them, and other warships were similarly saved from further damage by their nets.\nWhile capital-ship engagements were scarce in World War I, destroyer units engaged almost continually in raiding and patrol actions. The first shot of the war at sea was fired on 5 August 1914 by , one of the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla, in an engagement with the German auxiliary minelayer .\nDestroyers were involved in the skirmishes that prompted the Battle of Heligoland Bight, and filled a range of roles in the Battle of Gallipoli, acting as troop transports and as fire-support vessels, as well as their fleet-screening role. Over 80 British destroyers and 60 German torpedo boats took part in the Battle of Jutland, which involved pitched small-boat actions between the main fleets, and several foolhardy attacks by unsupported destroyers on capital ships. Jutland also concluded with a messy night action between the German High Seas Fleet and part of the British destroyer screen.\nThe threat evolved by World War I with the development of the submarine, or U-boat. The submarine had the potential to hide from gunfire and close underwater to fire torpedoes. Early-war destroyers had the speed and armament to intercept submarines before they submerged, either by gunfire or by ramming. Destroyers also had a shallow enough draft that they were difficult to hit with torpedoes.\nThe desire to attack submarines under water led to rapid destroyer evolution during the war. They were quickly equipped with strengthened bows for ramming, and depth charges and hydrophones for identifying submarine targets. The first submarine casualty credited to a destroyer was the German , rammed by on 29 October 1914. While \"U-19\" was only damaged, the next month, successfully sank . The first depth-charge sinking was on 4 December 1916, when was sunk by HMS \"Llewellyn\".\nThe submarine threat meant that many destroyers spent their time on antisubmarine patrol. Once Germany adopted unrestricted submarine warfare in January 1917, destroyers were called on to escort merchant convoys. US Navy destroyers were among the first American units to be dispatched upon the American entry to the war, and a squadron of Japanese destroyers even joined Allied patrols in the Mediterranean. Patrol duty was far from safe; of the 67 British destroyers lost in the war, collisions accounted for 18, while 12 were wrecked.\nAt the end of the war, the state-of-the-art was represented by the British W class.\n1918\u20131945.\nThe trend during World War I had been towards larger destroyers with heavier armaments. A number of opportunities to fire at capital ships had been missed during the war, because destroyers had expended all their torpedoes in an initial salvo. The British V and W classes of the late war had sought to address this by mounting six torpedo tubes in two triple mounts, instead of the four or two on earlier models. The V and W classes set the standard of destroyer building well into the 1920s.\nTwo Romanian destroyers and , though, had the greatest firepower of all destroyers in the world throughout the first half of the 1920s. This was largely because, between their commissioning in 1920 and 1926, they retained the armament that they had while serving in the Italian Navy as scout cruisers (\"esploratori\"). When initially ordered by Romania in 1913, the Romanian specifications envisioned three 120\u00a0mm guns, a caliber which would eventually be adopted as the standard for future Italian destroyers. Armed with three 152\u00a0mm and four 76\u00a0mm guns after being completed as scout cruisers, the two warships were officially re-rated as destroyers by the Romanian Navy. The two Romanian warships were thus the destroyers with the greatest firepower in the world throughout much of the interwar period. As of 1939, when the Second World War started, their artillery, although changed, was still close to cruiser standards, amounting to nine heavy naval guns (five of 120\u00a0mm and four of 76\u00a0mm). In addition, they retained their two twin 457\u00a0mm torpedo tubes and two machine guns, plus the capacity to carry up to 50 mines.\nThe next major innovation came with the Japanese or \"special type\", designed in 1923 and delivered in 1928. The design was initially noted for its powerful armament of six 5-inch (127\u00a0mm) guns and three triple torpedo mounts. The second batch of the class gave the guns high-angle turrets for antiaircraft warfare, and the , oxygen-fueled Long Lance Type 93 torpedo. The later of 1931 further improved the torpedo armament by storing its reload torpedoes close at hand in the superstructure, allowing reloading within 15 minutes.\nMost other nations replied with similar larger ships. The US adopted twin 5-inch (127\u00a0mm) guns, and the subsequent and es (the latter of 1934) increased the number of torpedo tubes to 12 and 16, respectively.\nIn the Mediterranean, the Italian Navy's building of very fast light cruisers of the prompted the French to produce exceptional destroyer designs. The French had long been keen on large destroyers, with their of 1922 displacing over 2,000\u00a0tons and carrying 130\u00a0mm guns; a further three similar classes were produced around 1930. The of 1935 carried five guns and nine torpedo tubes, but could achieve speeds of , which remains the record speed for a steamship and for any destroyer. The Italians' own destroyers were almost as swift; most Italian designs of the 1930s were rated at over , while carrying torpedoes and either four or six 120\u00a0mm guns.\nGermany started to build destroyers again during the 1930s as part of Hitler's rearmament program. The Germans were also fond of large destroyers, but while the initial Type 1934 displaced over 3,000\u00a0tons, their armament was equal to smaller vessels. This changed from the Type 1936 onwards, which mounted heavy guns. German destroyers also used innovative high-pressure steam machinery; while this should have helped their efficiency, it more often resulted in mechanical problems.\nOnce German and Japanese rearmament became clear, the British and American navies consciously focused on building destroyers that were smaller, but more numerous than those used by other nations. The British built a series of destroyers (the to ), which were about 1,400\u00a0tons standard displacement, and had four guns and eight torpedo tubes; the American of 1938 was similar in size, but carried five guns and ten torpedo tubes. Realizing the need for heavier gun armament, the British built the of 1936 (sometimes called \"Afridi\" after one of two lead ships). These ships displaced 1,850\u00a0tons and were armed with eight guns in four twin turrets and four torpedo tubes. These were followed by the J-class and L-class destroyers, with six guns in twin turrets and eight torpedo tubes.\nAntisubmarine sensors included sonar (or ASDIC), although training in their use was indifferent. Antisubmarine weapons changed little, and ahead-throwing weapons, a need recognized in World War I, had made no progress.\nLater combat.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, destroyers were often deployed to areas of diplomatic tension or humanitarian disaster. British and American destroyers were common on the Chinese coast and rivers, even supplying landing parties to protect colonial interests.\nBy World War II, the threat had evolved once again. Submarines were more effective, and aircraft had become important weapons of naval warfare; once again the early-war fleet destroyers were ill-equipped for combating these new targets. They were fitted with new light antiaircraft guns, radar, and forward-launched ASW weapons, in addition to their existing dual-purpose guns, depth charges, and torpedoes. Increasing size allowed improved internal arrangement of propulsion machinery with compartmentation, so ships were less likely to be sunk by a single hit. In most cases torpedo and/or dual-purpose gun armament was reduced to accommodate new anti-air and anti-submarine weapons. By this time the destroyers had become large, multi-purpose vessels, expensive targets in their own right. As a result, casualties on destroyers were among the highest. In the US Navy, particularly in World War II, destroyers became known as tin cans due to their light armor compared to battleships and cruisers.\nThe need for large numbers of antisubmarine ships led to the introduction of smaller and cheaper specialized antisubmarine warships called corvettes and frigates by the Royal Navy and destroyer escorts by the USN. A similar programme was belatedly started by the Japanese (see ). These ships had the size and displacement of the original TBDs from which the contemporary destroyer had evolved.\nPost-World War II.\nSome conventional destroyers completed in the late 1940s and 1950s were built on wartime experience. These vessels were significantly larger than wartime ships and had fully automatic main guns, unit machinery, radar, sonar, and antisubmarine weapons such as the squid mortar. Examples include the British , US , and the Soviet s.\nSome World War II\u2013vintage ships were modernized for antisubmarine warfare, and to extend their service lives, to avoid having to build (expensive) brand-new ships. Examples include the US FRAM I programme and the British Type 15 frigates converted from fleet destroyers.\nThe advent of surface-to-air missiles and surface-to-surface missiles, such as the Exocet, in the early 1960s changed naval warfare. Guided missile destroyers (DDG in the US Navy) were developed to carry these weapons and protect the fleet from air, submarine, and surface threats. Examples include the Soviet , the British , and the US .\nThe 21st century destroyers tend to display features such as large, slab sides without complicated corners and crevices to keep the radar cross-section small, vertical launch systems to carry a large number of missiles at high readiness to fire, and helicopter flight decks and hangars.\nPreserved destroyers.\nA number of countries have destroyers preserved as museum ships. These include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "8780", "revid": "14860824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8780", "title": "Debian GNU/Hurd", "text": ""}
{"id": "8781", "revid": "39319415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8781", "title": "Dorothy Parker", "text": "American poet, short story writer, critic and satirist (1893\u20131967)\nDorothy Parker (n\u00e9e Rothschild; August 22, 1893 \u2013 June 7, 1967) was an American poet, writer, critic, and satirist based in New York; she was known for her wit, wisecracks, and eye for 20th-century urban foibles.\nFrom a conflicted and unhappy childhood, Parker rose to acclaim, both for her literary works published in magazines, such as \"The New Yorker,\" and as a founding member of the Algonquin Round Table. Following the breakup of the circle, Parker traveled to Hollywood to pursue screenwriting. Her successes there, including two Academy Award nominations, were curtailed when her involvement in left-wing politics resulted in her being placed on the Hollywood blacklist.\nDismissive of her own talents, she deplored her reputation as a \"wisecracker.\" Nevertheless, both her literary output and reputation for sharp wit have endured. Some of her works have been set to music; adaptations included the operatic song cycle \"Hate Songs\" by composer Marcus Paus.\nEarly life and education.\nAlso known as Dot or Dottie, Parker was born Dorothy Rothschild in 1893 to Jacob Henry Rothschild and his wife Eliza Annie (n\u00e9e Marston) (1851\u20131898) at 732 Ocean Avenue in Long Branch, New Jersey. Her parents had a summer beach cottage there. Parker wrote in her essay, \"My Home Town,\" that her parents returned to their Manhattan apartment shortly after Labor Day so that she could be called a true New Yorker.\nParker's mother was of Scottish descent. Her father was the son of Sampson Jacob Rothschild (1818\u20131899) and Mary Greissman (b. 1824), both Prussian-born Jews. Sampson Jacob Rothschild was a merchant who immigrated to the United States around 1846, settling in Monroe County, Alabama. Dorothy\u2019s father Jacob Henry Rothschild was one of five known siblings. The others were Simon (1854\u20131908); Samuel (b. 1857); Hannah (1860\u20131911), later Mrs. William Henry Theobald; and Martin, born in Manhattan on December 12, 1865, who perished in the sinking of the \"Titanic\" in 1912.\nHer mother died in Manhattan in July 1898, a month before Parker's fifth birthday. Her father remarried in 1900 to Eleanor Frances Lewis (1851\u20131903).\nParker hated her father, who physically abused her, and her stepmother, whom she refused to call \"mother,\" \"stepmother,\" or \"Eleanor,\" instead referring to her as \"the housekeeper\". However, her biographer, Marion Meade, refers to this account as \"largely false,\" stating that the atmosphere in which Parker grew up was indulgent, affectionate, supportive and generous.\nParker grew up on the Upper West Side and attended a Roman Catholic elementary school at the Convent of the Blessed Sacrament on West 79th Street with her sister, Helen, although their father was Jewish and her stepmother was Protestant. (Mercedes de Acosta was a classmate.) Parker once joked that she was asked to leave following her characterization of the Immaculate Conception as \"spontaneous combustion\".\nHer stepmother died in 1903, when Parker was nine. Parker later attended Miss Dana's School, a finishing school in Morristown, New Jersey. She graduated from Miss Dana's School in 1911, at the age of 18, according to Authur, although Rhonda Pettit and Marion Meade state she never graduated from either school. Following her father's death in 1913, she played piano at a dancing school to earn a living while she worked on her poetry.\nShe sold her first poem to \"Vanity Fair\" magazine in 1914 and some months later was hired as an editorial assistant for \"Vogue\", another Cond\u00e9 Nast magazine. She moved to \"Vanity Fair\" as a staff writer after two years at \"Vogue.\"\nIn 1917, she met a Wall Street stockbroker, Edwin Pond Parker II\n(1893\u20131933) and they married before he left to serve in World War I with the U.S. Army 4th Division. She filed for divorce in 1928. He later remarried to Anne E. O\u2019Brien, former probation officer of the Juvenile Court, and died at the age of 39 following a dental procedure. It is disputed whether he died from an overdose of analgesic or sepsis resulting from multiple tooth extractions. Dorothy retained her married name Parker, though she remarried to Alan Campbell, screenwriter and former actor, and moved to Hollywood.\nAlgonquin Round Table years.\nParker's career took off in 1918 while she was writing theater criticism for \"Vanity Fair,\" filling in for the vacationing P. G. Wodehouse. At the magazine, she met Robert Benchley, who became a close friend, and Robert E. Sherwood. The trio began lunching at the Algonquin Hotel on a near-daily basis and became founding members of what became known as the Algonquin Round Table. The Round Table numbered among its members the newspaper columnists Franklin Pierce Adams and Alexander Woollcott. Through their publication of Parker's lunchtime remarks and short verses, particularly in Adams' column \"The Conning Tower\", Dorothy began developing a national reputation as a wit.\nParker's caustic wit as a critic initially proved popular, but she was eventually dismissed by \"Vanity Fair\" in 1920 after her criticisms too often offended powerful producers. In solidarity, Benchley resigned in protest. (Sherwood is sometimes reported to have done so as well, but in actuality he had been fired in December 1919.) She soon started working for \"Ainslee's Magazine\", which had a higher circulation. She also published pieces in \"Vanity Fair,\" which was happier to publish her than employ her, \"The Smart Set\", and \"The American Mercury\", but also in the popular \"Ladies\u2019 Home Journal\", \"Saturday Evening Post,\" and \"Life\".\nWhen Harold Ross founded \"The New Yorker\" in 1925, Parker and Benchley were part of a board of editors established by Ross to allay the concerns of his investors. Parker's first piece for the magazine was published in its second issue. Parker became famous for her short, viciously humorous poems, many highlighting ludicrous aspects of her many (largely unsuccessful) romantic affairs and others wistfully considering the appeal of suicide.\nThe next 15 years were Parker's greatest period of productivity and success. In the 1920s alone she published some 300 poems and free verses in \"Vanity Fair,\" \"Vogue,\" \"The Conning Tower\" and \"The New Yorker\" as well as \"Life\", \"McCall's\" and \"The New Republic.\" Her poem, \"Song in a Minor Key\" was published during a candid interview with New York N.E.A. writer Josephine van der Grift.\nParker published her first volume of poetry, \"Enough Rope,\" in 1926. The collection sold 47,000 copies and garnered impressive reviews. \"The Nation\" described her verse as \"caked with a salty humor, rough with splinters of disillusion, and tarred with a bright black authenticity.\" Although some critics, notably \"The New York Times\" reviewer, dismissed her work as \"flapper verse,\" the volume helped affirm Parker's reputation for sparkling wit. Parker released two more volumes of verse, \"Sunset Gun\" (1928) and \"Death and Taxes\" (1931), along with the short story collections \"Laments for the Living\" (1930) and \"After Such Pleasures\" (1933). \"Not So Deep as a Well\" (1936) collected much of the material previously published in \"Rope,\" \"Gun,\" and \"Death\" and she re-released her fiction with a few new pieces in 1939 under the title \"Here Lies\".\nShe collaborated with playwright Elmer Rice to create \"Close Harmony,\" which ran on Broadway in December 1924. The play was well received in out-of-town previews and was favorably reviewed in New York, but it closed after a run of only 24 performances. It became a successful touring production under the title \"The Lady Next Door\".\nSome of Parker's most popular work was published in \"The New Yorker\" in the form of acerbic book reviews under the byline \"Constant Reader\". Her response to the whimsy of A. A. Milne's \"The House at Pooh Corner\" was \"Tonstant Weader fwowed up.\" Her reviews appeared semi-regularly from 1927 to 1933, were widely read, and were posthumously published in a collection under the name \"Constant Reader\" in 1970.\nHer best-known short story, \"Big Blonde\", published in \"The Bookman\" magazine, was awarded the O. Henry Award as the best short story of 1929. Her short stories, though often witty, were also spare and incisive, and more bittersweet than comic; her style is often described as sardonic.\nParker eventually separated from her husband, divorcing in 1928. She had a number of affairs, her lovers including reporter-turned-playwright Charles MacArthur and the publisher Seward Collins. Her relationship with MacArthur resulted in a pregnancy. Parker is alleged to have said, \"how like me, to put all my eggs into one bastard.\u201d She had an abortion, and fell into a depression that culminated in her first attempt at suicide.\nToward the end of this period, Parker began to become more politically aware and active. What would become a lifelong commitment to activism began in 1927, when she became concerned about the pending executions of Sacco and Vanzetti. Parker traveled to Boston to protest the proceedings. She and fellow Round Tabler Ruth Hale were arrested, and Parker eventually pleaded guilty to a charge of \"loitering and sauntering\", paying a $5 fine.\nHollywood.\nIn 1932, Parker met Alan Campbell, an actor with aspirations to become a screenwriter. They married two years later in Raton, New Mexico. Campbell's mixed parentage was the reverse of Parker's: he had a German-Jewish mother and a Scottish father. She learned that he was bisexual and later proclaimed in public that he was \"queer as a billy goat\". The pair moved to Hollywood and signed ten-week contracts with Paramount Pictures, with Campbell (who was also expected to act) earning $250 per week and Parker earning $1,000 per week. They would eventually earn $2,000 and in some instances upwards of $5,000 per week as freelancers for various studios. She and Campbell worked on more than 15 films.\nIn 1933, when informed that famously taciturn former president Calvin Coolidge had died, Parker remarked, \"How could they tell?\"\nIn 1935, Parker contributed lyrics for the song \"I Wished on the Moon\", with music by Ralph Rainger. The song was introduced in \"The Big Broadcast of 1936\" by Bing Crosby.\nWith Campbell and Robert Carson, she wrote the script for the 1937 film \"A Star Is Born\", for which they were nominated for an Academy Award for Best Writing\u2014Screenplay. She wrote additional dialogue for \"The Little Foxes\" in 1941. Together with Frank Cavett, she received an Oscar nomination for the screenplay of \"Smash-Up, the Story of a Woman\" (1947), starring Susan Hayward.\nAfter the United States entered the Second World War, Parker and Alexander Woollcott collaborated to produce an anthology of her work as part of a series published by Viking Press for servicemen stationed overseas. With an introduction by W. Somerset Maugham, the volume compiled over two dozen of Parker's short stories, along with selected poems from \"Enough Rope\", \"Sunset Gun\", and \"Death and Taxes\". It was published in the United States in 1944 under the title \"The Portable Dorothy Parker\". Hers is one of three volumes in the \"Portable\" series, including volumes devoted to William Shakespeare and The Bible, that have remained in continuous print.\nDuring the 1930s and 1940s, Parker became an increasingly vocal advocate of civil liberties and civil rights and a frequent critic of authority figures. During the Great Depression, she was among numerous American intellectuals and artists who became involved in related social movements. She reported in 1937 on the Loyalist cause in Spain for the Communist magazine \"New Masses\". At the behest of Otto Katz, a covert Soviet Comintern agent and operative of German Communist Party agent Willi M\u00fcnzenberg, Parker helped to found the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League in 1936, which the FBI suspected of being a Communist Party front. The Hollywood Anti-Nazi League's membership eventually grew to some 4,000 strong. According to David Caute, its often wealthy members were \"able to contribute as much to [Communist] Party funds as the whole American working class,\" although they may not have been intending to support the Party cause.\nParker also served as chair of the Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee's fundraising arm, \"Spanish Refugee Appeal\". She organized Project Rescue Ship to transport Loyalist veterans to Mexico, headed Spanish Children's Relief, and lent her name to many other left-wing causes and organizations. Her former Round Table friends saw less and less of her, and her relationship with Robert Benchley became particularly strained (although they would reconcile). Parker met S. J. Perelman at a party in 1932 and, despite a rocky start (Perelman called it \"a scarifying ordeal\"), they remained friends for the next 35 years. They became neighbors when the Perelmans helped Parker and Campbell buy a run-down farm in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, near New Hope, a popular summer destination among many writers and artists from New York.\nParker was listed as a Communist by the publication \"Red Channels\" in 1950. The FBI compiled a 1,000-page dossier on her because of her suspected involvement in Communism during the era when Senator Joseph McCarthy was raising alarms about communists in government and Hollywood. As a result, movie studio bosses placed her on the Hollywood blacklist. Her final screenplay was \"The Fan,\" a 1949 adaptation of Oscar Wilde's \"Lady Windermere's Fan\", directed by Otto Preminger.\nHer marriage to Campbell was tempestuous, with tensions exacerbated by Parker's increasing alcohol consumption and Campbell's long-term affair with a married woman in Europe during World War II. They divorced in 1947, remarried in 1950, then separated in 1952 when Parker moved back to New York. From 1957 to 1962, she lived at the Volney Residential Hotel on Manhattan's Upper East Side and wrote book reviews for \"Esquire magazine.\" Her writing became increasingly erratic owing to her continued abuse of alcohol. She returned to Hollywood in 1961, reconciled with Campbell, and collaborated with him on a number of unproduced projects until Campbell died from a drug overdose in 1963.\nLater life and death.\nFollowing Campbell's death, Parker returned to New York City and the Volney Residential hotel. In her later years, she denigrated the Algonquin Round Table, although it had brought her such early notoriety:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; These were no giants. Think who was writing in those days\u2014Lardner, Fitzgerald, Faulkner and Hemingway. Those were the real giants. The Round Table was just a lot of people telling jokes and telling each other how good they were. Just a bunch of loudmouths showing off, saving their gags for days, waiting for a chance to spring them\u00a0... There was no truth in anything they said. It was the terrible day of the wisecrack, so there didn't have to be any truth\u00a0...\nParker occasionally participated in radio programs, including \"Information Please\" (as a guest) and \"Author, Author\" (as a regular panelist). She wrote for the \"Columbia Workshop\", and both Ilka Chase and Tallulah Bankhead used her material for radio monologues.\nParker died on June 7, 1967, of a heart attack at the age of 73. In her will, she bequeathed her estate to Martin Luther King Jr., and upon King's death, to the NAACP.\nBurial.\nFollowing her cremation, Parker's ashes were unclaimed for several years. Finally, in 1973, the crematorium sent them to her lawyer's office; by then he had retired, and the ashes remained in his colleague Paul O'Dwyer's filing cabinet for approximately 17 years. In 1988, O'Dwyer brought this situation to public attention, with the aid of celebrity columnist Liz Smith; after some discussion, the NAACP claimed Parker's remains and designed a memorial garden for them outside its Baltimore headquarters. The plaque read,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here lie the ashes of Dorothy Parker (1893\u20131967) humorist, writer, critic. Defender of human and civil rights. For her epitaph she suggested, 'Excuse my dust'. This memorial garden is dedicated to her noble spirit which celebrated the oneness of humankind and to the bonds of everlasting friendship between black and Jewish people. Dedicated by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. October 28, 1988.\nIn early 2020, the NAACP moved its headquarters to downtown Baltimore and the question about what would happen to Parker's ashes became the topic of much speculation, especially after the NAACP formally announced it would later move to Washington, D.C.\nThe NAACP restated that Parker's ashes will ultimately be where her family wishes her to be. \"It\u2019s important to us that we do this right,\u201d said the NAACP.\nRelatives called for the ashes to be moved to the family's plot in Woodlawn Cemetery, in the Bronx, where a place had been reserved for Parker by her father. On August 18, 2020, Parker's urn was exhumed. \"Two executives from the N.A.A.C.P. spoke, and a rabbi who had attended her initial burial said Kaddish.\" On August 22, 2020, Parker was re-buried privately in Woodlawn, with the possibility of a more public ceremony later. \"Her legacy means a lot,\" added representatives from the NAACP.\nHonors.\nOn August 22, 1992, the 99th anniversary of Parker's birth, the United States Postal Service issued a 29\u00a2 U.S. commemorative postage stamp in the Literary Arts series. The Algonquin Round Table, as well as the number of other literary and theatrical greats who lodged at the hotel, contributed to the Algonquin Hotel's being designated in 1987 as a New York City Historic Landmark. In 1996, the hotel was designated as a National Literary Landmark by the Friends of Libraries USA, based on the contributions of Parker and other members of the Round Table. The organization's bronze plaque is attached to the front of the hotel. Parker's birthplace at the Jersey Shore was also designated a National Literary Landmark by Friends of Libraries USA in 2005 and a bronze plaque marks the former site of her family house.\nIn 2014, Parker was elected to the New Jersey Hall of Fame.\nIn popular culture.\nParker inspired a number of fictional characters in several plays of her day. These included \"Lily Malone\" in Philip Barry's \"Hotel Universe\" (1932), \"Mary Hilliard\" (played by Ruth Gordon) in George Oppenheimer's \"Here Today\" (1932), \"Paula Wharton\" in Gordon's 1944 play \"Over Twenty-one\" (directed by George S. Kaufman), and \"Julia Glenn\" in the Kaufman\u2013Moss Hart collaboration \"Merrily We Roll Along\" (1934). Kaufman's representation of her in \"Merrily We Roll Along\" led Parker, once his Round Table compatriot, to despise him. She also was portrayed as \"Daisy Lester\" in Charles Brackett's 1934 novel \"Entirely Surrounded\". She is mentioned in the original introductory lyrics in Cole Porter's song \"Just One of Those Things\" from the 1935 Broadway musical \"Jubilee\", which have been retained in the standard interpretation of the song as part of the Great American Songbook.\nPrince released \"The Ballad of Dorothy Parker\" in 1987; it was the first song recorded in his Chanhassen, Minnesota studio home. Those closest to him at the time suggest the association between the poet and the waitress by the same name in the song is a coincidence, but Dorothy Parker died on Prince's 9th birthday and chances are this brought her to his attention prior to writing the song.\nParker is featured as a character in the novel \"The Dorothy Parker Murder Case\" by George Baxt (1984), in a series of \"Algonquin Round Table Mysteries\" by J. J. Murphy (2011\u2013 ), and in Ellen Meister's novel \"Farewell, Dorothy Parker\" (2013). She is the main character in \"Love For Miss Dottie\", a short story by Larry N Mayer, which was selected by writer Mary Gaitskill for the collection \"Best New American Voices 2009\" (Harcourt).\nShe has been portrayed on film and television by Dolores Sutton in \"F. Scott Fitzgerald in Hollywood\" (1976), Rosemary Murphy in \"Julia\" (1977), Bebe Neuwirth in \"Dash and Lilly\" (1999), and Jennifer Jason Leigh in \"Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle\" (1994). Neuwirth was nominated for an Emmy Award for her performance, and Leigh received a number of awards and nominations, including a Golden Globe nomination.\nThe Wild Colonials song, \"Vicious Circle\" from \"Life As We Know It EP\" (2007) is about Dorothy Parker. The chorus lyrics are, \"I know how Dorothy Parker felt with someone in her way.\"\nTelevision creator Amy Sherman-Palladino named her production company 'Dorothy Parker Drank Here Productions' in tribute to Parker.\nTucson actress Lesley Abrams wrote and performed the one-woman show \"Dorothy Parker's Last Call\" in 2009 in Tucson, Arizona at the Winding Road Theater Ensemble. She reprised the role at the Live Theatre Workshop in Tucson in 2014. The play was selected to be part of the Capital Fringe Festival in DC in 2010.\nIn 2016, American actress Victoria Scott donned a Halloween costume of Parker in episode 5, season 8 of \"Modern Family.\"\nIn 2018, American drag queen Miz Cracker played Parker in the celebrity-impersonation game show episode of the Season 10 of \"Rupaul's Drag Race\".\nIn the 2018 film \"Can You Ever Forgive Me?\" (based on the 2008 memoir of the same name), Melissa McCarthy plays Lee Israel, an author who for a time forged original letters in Dorothy Parker's name.\nAdaptations.\nIn the 2010s some of her poems from the early 20th century have been set to music by the composer Marcus Paus as the operatic song cycle \"Hate Songs for Mezzo-Soprano and Orchestra\" (2014); Paus's \"Hate Songs\" was included on Tora Augestad's and the Oslo Philharmonic's album \"Portraying Passion: Works by Weill/Paus/Ives\" (2018) with works by Paus, Kurt Weill and Charles Ives. It was described by musicologist Ralph P. Locke as \"one of the most engaging works\" in recent years; \"the cycle expresses Parker's favorite theme: how awful human beings are, especially the male of the species.\"\nIn 2014, lyrics taken from her book of poetry \"Not So Deep as a Well\" were, with the authorization of the NAACP, used by Canadian singer Myriam Gendron to create a folk album of the same name. Also in 2014, Chicago jazz bassist/singer/composer Katie Ernst issued her album \"Little Words\", consisting of her authorized settings of seven of Parker's poems.\nIn 2021 her book \"Men I'm Not Married To\" was adapted as an opera of the same name by composer Lisa DeSpain and librettist Rachel J. Peters. It premiered virtually as part of Operas in Place and Virtual Festival of New Operas commissioned by Baldwin Wallace Conservatory Voice Performance, Cleveland Opera Theater, and On Site Opera on February 18, 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
